





























































Hansard: April 26, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 777 
 April 26, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome back, Madam Minister, and your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, when we left off we had just started in to 
talking about the Alberta company that went under. And maybe 
to start off tonight if I could get you just to give us an overview 
of what happened to that company and the ramifications that it 
caused. Was there money lost because that company went under 
and so on? Could you just give us a broad overview of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you for the question, colleague. 
I’ll go through a bit of a story to this discussion if I may. 
 
You’re asking about subcontractors and, as I said before the 
break, we contract with the overall general contractor and then 
the responsibility for the subcontracts and the trades that come 
on board are the responsibility of that overall construction 
manager, which in this case is PCL Maxam. But PCL Maxam, 
if they were going forward and looking for a subtrade, and in 
this case you’re talking about asbestos removal, would have 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
insisting that they use the Canadian construction documentation 
committee criteria to evaluate each applicant based on their 
capacity, skill, and experience. 
 
So the pre-qualification research has to include the legal 
structure of the contractor, the financial references, the bonding 
references, the annual value of the construction work that 
they’ve done over the past five years, principal projects that 
they’ve completed over the past five years, similar or related 
projects completed, major construction projects presently 
underway and key personnel proposed for this project and a 
history of their qualifications and experience. 
 
With that in mind, and with the requirement that PCL would do 
a fair, open, tendering process for the subcontractors, there were 
six firms that were identified who would be qualified to do this 
based on that criteria. 
 
On that then, the tendering policy we have in a fair, open, 
tendering way is to then look at who would be able to complete 
the work within the lowest bid. And that was I.E.S. contracting. 
And I think the difference was well over a million dollars 
difference between their bid and the next bid. 
 
So making certain, as my officials have done in this instance, 
that all of the requirements were met, I.E.S. was the one who 
began the work. And as you know, there was some difficulty 
with the financing of the parent company, and that company 
then was no longer able with that name to complete the work. 
 
PCL then looked at whether or not, with of course the people 

working there already started, with the pre-qualification that 
they would go through extensive training on the particular job 
site, with the work that had been completed to date, it was their 
deliberation that Vision Industrial, working under the authority 
of the original bond provided by I.E.S. with full knowledge of 
the bonding company, was arranged to continue on the work 
site by PCL. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, is it standard procedure in these situations to not have 
even sub-contractors bonded when they tender on any project 
for the government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — My officials tell me that in this case, it 
would be standard procedure to make sure that the job was fully 
bonded and insured, and that that would properly protect the 
investment which the taxpayers have made in this instance. And 
then it’s my understanding that the company working on-site 
now is working under the authority or the auspices of the 
original bond provided by I.E.S., with full knowledge of the 
bonding company involved, and it’s arranged under PCL. And 
in that way, the interests of the taxpayer of the province is 
protected. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Maybe I misunderstood you, Madam 
Minister, but you said they’re working under the bond of I.E.S., 
and if I understood it right, that I.E.S. didn’t have a bond. And 
they were . . . and you also had said that they were $1 million 
cheaper. And Madam Minister, maybe I can understand why 
they were $1 million cheaper when, when it comes to finances, 
they couldn’t even do the job in the end. So could you explain 
that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I believe you are misunderstanding 
what I’m saying. I.E.S. would have to prove that they have the 
bonding and insurance in place before they could pre-qualify. 
When I read the qualification list, they have to have a bonding 
reference, they have to have financial references, they have to 
work under the legal structure of the contractor on the site, they 
have to inform people of the work that they’ve done beforehand 
in this usual way, any major construction projects they’ve been 
involved in. And we believed that PCL demonstrated to us that 
all of the pre-qualification requirements were met, and that was 
demonstrated to my officials. 
 
They were using the Canadian construction documentation 
committee criteria, in this instance and as I said, there were 
eight pre-qualifiers and six companies met those qualifications. 
I.E.S. was one of them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Madam 
Minister, is there any chance we could get you to table that 
information you’re giving us there? 
 
And I’m still having a hard time understanding, Madam 
Minister. I’ve been involved in municipal politics where we put 
out tenders and we have companies that are bonded. They have 
to supply the bond when they put their tender in or they won’t 
even be accepted. Now, you say that this I.E.S. had to have 
bonding references. I don’t understand why they would need 
bonding references if they were not bonded. Are you saying 
they were bonded? Maybe I’m mistaken. Maybe they were 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

bonded and my information is wrong. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I have to tell you that I.E.S. was fully 
bonded and Vision has been working under the authority of that 
original bond. So, yes, bonding requirements are in place and 
have been met. I can also give you . . . I’ll get for you from my 
officials the pre-qualification criteria that were set out and 
established in this case. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Okay, 
Madam Minister, that would be good if you would pass that 
onto us. The company that took over then from I.E.S. and filled 
in to do the work that they were originally designated to do — 
were they also bonded on their own or were they bonded under 
PCL? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. The initial bonding was in 
place. The letter of surety was there. The insurance was there. 
 
As I said earlier, Vision, the new company, is working under 
the authority of the original bond that was provided by I.E.S., 
and it’s done with the full knowledge of the bonding company 
arranged by PCL. All of their work therefore would be covered 
by that bonding and by the letter of surety. 
 
But this, as I said earlier, Mr. Chair, is an issue between PCL 
and that company. As long as they can assure us all of those 
things are in place and our taxpayers’ dollars are protected, and 
the work is covered in the way we suggested for the 
pre-qualification, then all of that guarantee is between PCL and 
the subcontractor. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, then in a number of cases, and I know it hasn’t always 
worked this way, but a number of cases when this situation 
happens then you would move down the list to the second 
tender. The company that you’re using now, did it tender in the 
first round — was it one of the tenders put in, in the first round? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — PCL would be the one to guarantee to 
us that the work is being done. In this instance, it’s not by a 
totally new company so it wasn’t that the workers who were on 
the site before the work began were other than I.E.S. employees 
and workers. 
 
So when there was difficulty with the parent company and the 
financial situation was changing, PCL worked with the workers 
on the work site to be able to put all of the guarantees in place. 
These workers had been trained to the specifics of that location. 
They were already working there and PCL believed it was the 
best way to meet all of the requirements that we’ve set in place 
for them for that portion of the work and to meet those time 
frames. 
 
So we had no reason to . . . other than say work with PCL who 
said the initial requirements would all be met, to do anything 
other than what is in place at present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, would it be possible for us to get a copy of the 
companies that tendered the first time around and what their 
tender would have been? 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — As I mentioned earlier, this is a 
contract between PCL and the subcontractors. We’ll work with 
PCL to ask if we’re able to release all of the details of the bids. 
As I said earlier, there were six firms that bid who met all of the 
pre-qualifications, and we can certainly get you that list. 
 
For the detailed information you’re asking, we know overall 
that the difference between the low bid and the next closest bid 
was about $1.6 million. So if they are able to release to us that 
information. I would try and endeavour to get that for you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, onto a different subject here now. And I was 
wondering . . . the current buildings that SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is in right now, 
are those buildings that they’re operating out of owned by 
SPMC at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — The SIAST locations, I understand, at 
present have four locations that are owned by SPMC and three 
that are under lease arrangements. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, then I presume we will be 
going out and for the ones that we do, releasing then, finishing 
those contracts off to some new company to fill that void when 
the people that are in SIAST now move over to the Plains? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Of the locations that are leased, we’re 
either in a position of the timing that we’re looking at, fulfilling 
the terms of the initial lease and not backfilling in those 
instances. And some of the economies of combining and 
consolidating would be that we would no longer have to enter 
into leasing arrangements with outside individuals. So that’s 
part of the reason why we wanted to consolidate in the manner 
that we’re doing. And that would release us from the 
commitments of those leasing arrangements. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, when SIAST gets fully 
moved into the old Plains building, will that totally fill up the 
Plains? Will SIAST take up every part of what we know as the 
old . . . as the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — My officials tell me, Mr. Chair, that 
once the consolidation occurs the building will be fully 
occupied by SIAST. There will be some flexibility when we’re 
working with SIAST program people to make some changes 
where their program requirements have changes that need to be 
met but there wouldn’t be additional space for anyone else to 
occupy. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, will parking spots at the Plains — the old Plains I 
keep calling it — still be saved for the nurses that were being 
. . . I presume are still being bussed back to the General and 
parking there? Will spots be saved in the parking lot for the 
nurses? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I can’t answer what the health district 
has for its long-term parking requirements. I think you’re 
talking about in the longer term. It’s my understanding that 
once the consolidation has occurred and the students are there, 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

other arrangements will be made by the health district for the 
nurses. And so that parking on that site will be for the staff and 
students of the SIAST project. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, another concern I believe that caused media attention 
at one point, and I’m just wondering if it was rectified, is the 
safety concerns with the ventilation for the workers that were 
removing the asbestos in the old hospital. Have those safety 
concerns been addressed and is that no longer a problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I believe very, very 
early on in the project, I think something was mentioned about 
negative air pressure — you need to maintain that. And there 
was some concern that people weren’t understanding, from the 
health districts, that they couldn’t go in to get some things until 
they had checked and made certain that they were meeting all of 
those requirements. That was stopped immediately. 
 
So now what we have is a full occupational health and safety 
committee on the site from the managers and from the workers 
and representation from occupational health and safety. 
 
We have the occupational health and safety unit from the 
Department of Labour that does checking, and daily monitoring 
is in place. And we have equipment established that’s very, I’m 
told, very good equipment to pick up the minutest particle and 
would be looked at on a daily basis to make certain that things 
are being maintained the way they should. And we also have an 
independent review source — I believe your member quoted 
from that at some point — a very early Bersch report. We have 
those on an ongoing basis from the independent review source. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, there is a building . . . an SPMC building — and 
maybe it’s not anymore, it could be an SPMC lease in the town 
of Kamsack — and I believe the health district in that area is 
using that building. Can you maybe explain what arrangements 
we have there. Number one, does SPMC own that building or 
was that just a lease from a private company? And now that the 
health district is in there, have they taken over that lease? Is 
SPMC still involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — It’s my belief from the information my 
officials have present this evening that that was a lease building, 
and it was the one that New Careers was in, I believe. We no 
longer have the lease on that building, and I understand that the 
health district has an independent lease on their own. We’re 
going to try and get that information to you, find out whether 
it’s the health district who has that lease and provide that to you 
if we can. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I think that’s all the questions that I have at this 
time. I want to thank the minister for her answers and thank 
your officials for helping us out here tonight. 
 
Subvote (SP01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I’d like to thank the members and the Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would like to thank 
the officials that were here this evening. As all members of the 
House would know that the services they provide, not only to 
the departments but to ourselves and to the communities around 
the province, probably touch just about everyone here, and I 
believe in a very positive way. So I think they’ll take back the 
thank you of all members of the House and I thank them for 
their support here this evening. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I would like to introduce, to my right, the chief 
executive officer of the Saskatchewan Research Council, Jim 
Hutchinson. Behind me is Lisa Wallace, director of corporate 
performance, and to her right is Crystal Smudy, the chief 
financial officer for the corporation. 
 
Subvote (SR01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to welcome the minister and your officials here this evening. 
This is a very important council . . . operation of the 
government because it provides some research and I think we 
all agree that research is very important and the only way we’re 
going to build this province is through the fruits of research. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many people are employed by the 
Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that there 
are 230 people on staff at this point. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that a 
change from previous years or is this going up or down or is it 
remaining static? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are about five 
more employees this year than there were at this time last year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And, Mr. Minister, what’s the added 
duties that these employees are performing? Why was it 
necessary to hire five new employees? 
 
(1930) 
 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the incremental 
number is as a result of employees in the analytical chemistry 
lab work that is being done by the Council. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
was there any additional money given out this year to 
Saskatchewan Research Council in special warrants that wasn’t 
planned for in the budget estimates of last season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, no. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, was there a number 
of people who left from the Saskatchewan Research Council? 
You have five more people employed but that doesn’t 
necessarily mean that there weren’t people who quit or 
transferred out, and a like number of people transferring in. 
What was the rollover in your employees in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are about 
changes in the neighbourhood of 30 to 40. Most of those were 
hourly people who would be working on that basis, so there 
would have been a change of around 30 to 40. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was there any 
need for any severance package payouts in the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there was one 
severance payout in the year in question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What would 
the amount of the severance packages be and, if possible, who 
were they directed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The severance was $88,000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it possible 
to give the individual’s name or is that . . . would that be a 
conflict or a need for privacy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would just . . . I would say I 
think it would be inappropriate with respect to the name. I have 
given the member the aggregate amount and the fact that there 
was one severance, but I don’t feel it would be appropriate in 
the Chamber or in the public to be discussing the person or the 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the 
SRC’s involvement with the prairie agriculture institute? How 
much involvement do you have? How much money would you 
have involved there, and how much participation in the results, 
in the actual research, and in the distribution of results would 
the SRC have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan 
Research Council used to manage that operation under a 
contract. That is no longer the case, and I’m also told that there 
have been no contracts with that operation in the past year . . . 
Research Council with respect to that company. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you 
contemplating reactivating your role with PAMI (Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute)? I believe that PAMI does a 
very good job for the agricultural sector, in particular in 

Saskatchewan. But for general manufacturing and equipment 
users across the board, PAMI provides a good deal of support 
and information that’s made available to people to make 
determinations on what kind of equipment would best serve 
their needs, the value in the sense of what the longevity of the 
operation of this kind of machinery would be, its acceptability 
in providing quality work. Mr. Minister, is SRC planning to 
become . . . to play any role with PAMI in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — PAMI, in itself, as the member has 
indicated, is in fact a very helpful institution in this province in 
terms of developing agriculture and equipment and techniques 
that assist Saskatchewan’s agricultural community. I could say 
to the member that if we were asked by PAMI, with respect to 
certain areas of expertise within the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, we’d be more than willing to work with them. Our 
mechanical engineers generally refer those kinds of issues to 
PAMI through IRAP (Industrial Research Assistance Program) 
but as I’ve said, if in fact PAMI felt that it would be a beneficial 
relationship to have some element of the Research Council 
work with them. Certainly we would be and remain more than 
willing to co-operate with them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe the 
SRC has been involved with the petroleum industry, and in fact 
is . . . a new announcement coming out here about three days 
ago included the SRC in some new investigations within the oil 
industry. 
 
What involvement would the SRC have in the oil industry in 
dealing with horizontal drilling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the Research 
Council has a long history of working with the oil and gas 
sector with respect to the development of our heavy oil resource 
here in the province. They were responsible for all of the lab 
work that was done in developing the first horizontal well in 
1987, and that relationship with industry has continued to this 
time. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that we . . . the Research Council 
is very excited about the new development at the university 
campus, the PTRC (Petroleum Technology Research Centre), in 
terms of furthering that kind of involvement, partnering with 
industry. We believe that technology is the future of the heavy 
oil industry of this province. 
 
Technology was very much responsible for the fact that we 
have a growing, an ever-growing oil and gas industry in this 
province. And I think if you talk to industry and if you talk to 
people within the Research Council there is a great deal of 
optimism in terms of what can happen as a result of what 
actually is a very small investment for what may be the returns. 
 
So the relationship began and the lab work was done at the 
beginning of 1987. That kind of work continues to progress and 
expand with respect to an oil, you know, enhanced oil recovery 
and developing the industry. And I want to commend the people 
within the Research Council and industry for the work that they 
have done on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. There’s 
been some very great advancements in the last few years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the development of 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

the horizontal well industry has certainly been of benefit to all 
of Saskatchewan, and mainly to the area that I represent. And 
the fact is, I think, the Research Council needs to do a little 
more work though on this technology to make it so that tight 
formations produce a little better because under my land that’s 
what it is is a tight formation and you can’t get the oil out. 
That’s why I don’t have any oil wells. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the lab work that was done on the horizontal 
wells, was this done under contract from industry or was this 
sort of an independent initiative by the SRC? What was the 
involvement of the SRC in that sense? Were they the 
originators or were they contracted to carry out the research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, just a little bit of 
history. The initial involvement was with a company by the 
name of Sceptre Resources. That was on a contract specifically 
between the Research Council and Sceptre. Since then, there 
have been a number of contracts and a number of multi-client 
agreements and projects put together. Those have been shared 
cost with industry and the Research Council. 
 
With respect to horizontal well technology, as you will know, in 
our budget we announced through the Department of Energy 
and Mines a $1.5 million, five-year project dealing with 
research and development on the site and, as well, some 
incentive for laboratory work. So the Research Council is fully 
expecting to be involved with industry in terms of lab work and 
continuing on that. 
 
And as well, industry . . . as a matter of fact, the project was just 
announced, with respect to horizontal drilling, a pilot project, an 
R&D (research and development) project, to see if we can’t 
enhance the ability to have the horizontal portion of the well 
operate in a better fashion using a new pump. So I think that it’s 
a small project; it’s not multi-millions of dollars. It’s $1.5 
million over a five-year project. 
 
The fact that we’ve had three different proposals in the last few 
days that have been approved that I think are very encouraging. 
So it tells me that again the developmental partnership with the 
Research Council and the kind of work that they will do in the 
future may even make it possible to tap the formation under 
your back forty and create a little wealth in your household. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m very 
familiar with Sceptre and have worked with them in the past. In 
fact is . . . the Gainsborough field was one of the original 
horizontal fields, and while production has dropped off, it still 
continues to produce. 
 
The work that the SRC has done on the horizontal wells, does it 
collect any royalties from any of that work, or was this because 
it was a contract basis, they simply . . . any information, new 
knowledge that was gained from that belonged to the contract 
payer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, the Research Council has no 
properties in that regard. They help facilitate the knowledge and 
work with industry. But in terms of ownership and royalties 
collected on any of the technology that’s been developed, the 
Research Council doesn’t have that as an asset base. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — The new agreement that was made with 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, Mr. Minister, in 
particular, what is that aimed at developing? I noticed that the 
SRC has a $1.5 million part to play in that. Is that an annual 
budget, 1.5 million ongoing, and ongoing for how long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the involvement of 
the Saskatchewan Research Council with the Petroleum 
Research Centre is in the neighbourhood of $7 million over a 
five-year period. That breaks down to about 700,000 of core 
funding and 700,000 of rent because they’ll be relocating to that 
new facility that was just announced in the last few days. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In particular 
what kind of projects will be carried out at the PTRC centre 
when it’s up and running? Do you have anything in mind at the 
present time, or you’re waiting until the facility is actually 
available, hoping to get tenants in there to move in any 
particular direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, what will be 
happening is the work that we are doing now, which involves 
about 25 employees, will be moved to the new location. As 
well, what we will be doing is attempting to develop technology 
and do work on techniques that will allow us to be able to make 
certainly an enhanced production capacity in some of the 
existing pools. We’ll be looking at the use of enhanced oil 
recovery methods such as CO2 injection, a program that I think 
you’re very familiar with. PanCanadian has announced with 
their partners in the Weyburn area about a billion dollar 
investment that will be started very shortly, and that will be 
enhancing the development of that pool over a very long time. 
Steam injection, in situ combustion, and all of the things that 
will have shown some promise in terms of advancing the ability 
to be able to draw more of that reservoir from those pools 
through vertical and horizontal wells. 
 
So that’s basically the work that we’ll be working on and 
expanding. And I want to say that the employees and the 
knowledge component that’s going to be, in my opinion, 
attracted to this centre is going to end up ultimately being an 
area where there is worldwide knowledge and an ability to 
export some very good technology developed right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We already do have a reputation as being very much advanced 
in terms of our techniques here in Saskatchewan in terms of 
heavy oil recovery. And I think that this investment is just 
going to do much, much more to enhance our ability to further 
our reputation internationally in that regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think the role we 
play in horizontal drilling is indeed on the leading edge of that 
particular technology around the world, and it would certainly 
have some application in other areas and other formations. The 
700 . . . plus-$700,000 that you’re proposing to spend per year, 
how much of that will be on projects and how much will be on 
the operation of the centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — As I indicated, there’s about 1.4 
million a year, 700,000 of which will go to rent. The entire 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

amount, the entire balance of the 700, the other 700,000 will go 
strictly to projects. That’s straight project money. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is SRC 
involved at all with the PanCanadian project in Weyburn, the 
CO2 injection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The Research Council has already 
been involved in terms of a lot of the design work that helped 
them put the project together, so it’s been a very important part 
in terms of PanCanadian’s understanding of CO2 and how it 
functions and how it works in that reservoir, and in no small 
way the Research Council was responsible for helping them 
design the smaller projects that were used to determine whether 
or not they would want to make the kind of investment that they 
are making in the Weyburn area. 
 
I think I would want to say that none of this happens overnight. 
This has been an understanding of heavy oil and technologies 
that have been developed at the Research Council and in the 
field that have allowed the board of directors of PanCanadian 
and their partners to commit over a billion dollars to enhanced 
oil recovery projects. So I think as you look at the growth of the 
industry, it’s not something that happened six months ago or 
eight months ago. These are developments that have happened 
over the last 10 years or so. And all of the people — 
governments, industry — I think need to take credit for 
understanding in a . . . very much a future kind of approach, a 
future looking approach to the development of heavy oil here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think you, as a member who comes from an 
oil-producing area, will have an understanding of some of the 
excitement in terms of the future development, in terms of the 
future of oil and gas in Saskatchewan, as I certainly have 
learned in the four years that I’ve been in this portfolio. There’s 
just some great opportunities, and certainly we can all look 
forward, I hope, and I believe, to some very well-paying jobs, 
some good investment opportunities for Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Within the 
work of the SRC and the CO2 projects, were any studies done 
on the in situ plants and the in situ oil recoveries that were 
taking place in the southwest, particularly in the Battrum and 
Fosterton fields? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 
officials that the Research Council was involved initially in the 
in situ combustion development and that they still do have some 
ongoing connection with that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question 
was . . . thought lines were along the idea that the burning in the 
in situ plants would create CO2 heat pressure, and particularly 
in an area at Fosterton where it was in a waterflood zone 
already, that has been water flooded, which is basically what is 
the case down at Weyburn with the CO2 into that field there that 
had previously had a water flood situation in there for recovery, 
and just wondering if any of the information gathered from the 
in situ projects would be valid or relevant in the CO2 recoveries 
in the Weyburn area. So that was sort of the line that my 
thoughts were travelling along in that particular area. 

What other areas besides the oil field and perhaps some limited 
agricultural applications the SRC may be involved in, what 
other projects is the SRC involved in? And how do people 
contact the SRC to make application to be part of a research 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it might be 
helpful if I were to perhaps go through a list of the things that 
the Research Council has been involved in in the past little 
while, to give an understanding of sort of the breadth and the 
depth of the knowledge within that corporation. 
 
I want to say that certainly the corporation is open to inquiries 
with respect to the ability to work with industry and with the 
agricultural community and other areas of our economy. And 
they can be contacted quite easily. Their offices are in the 
research park in Saskatoon, the heavy oil component is down 
here in Regina. And I’d certainly be willing to get information 
and contact people specifically in the different areas of 
expertise. If you would wish, I can certainly get that for you. 
 
Just some of the things that have been happening in the 
Research Council I think that are very exciting: we just recently 
opened a new $4 million fermentation facility. That was 
completed in March of 1999. That will be helping and serving 
the needs of the ag-biotech industry. 
 
There’s plant genetics lab that is functioning and operating. 
That is partially funded through the Agri-Food Innovation 
Fund. 
 
They deal in animal genetics. Research Council’s parentage test 
lab for beef, dairy, other livestock is moving from blood testing 
to DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) testing. There’s a lot of things 
that they do with respect to animals. 
 
You and I have talked about petroleum, their involvement in 
petroleum. They’re also doing some work with respect to 
natural gas vehicles on the environmental side to try and 
convert that. 
 
We’ve also got a building efficiency program. There’s the ice 
rinks efficiency program that you will know about. They’re 
working . . . the prairie adaptation network. 
 
I could go on through a list of many things, but I’m not sure you 
want to hear them all. But I’m certainly more than willing to 
send you a condensed version of what they’ve been doing. And 
I think you’ll agree with me that they are a very, very 
worthwhile corporation and do a lot to enhance Saskatchewan’s 
economy — have in the past; will in the future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, you can 
just send the list over. That would be adequate. 
 
Do individuals become involved with the SRC and does the 
SRC provide grants or assistance to do research? I’m thinking 
more along the Agriculture Development Fund line of research 
but does the SRC become involved in something similar? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the Research 
Council doesn’t offer grants directly. But through the IRAP 
programming, working with NRC (National Research Council), 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

the Research Council can help to access . . . help small business 
access and facilitate that kind of assistance, but it’s done 
through the IRAP program. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
the new PTRC is up and running, you’re talking about moving 
from the current SRC location over to there. What’s going to 
happen to the old location? Will it still carry on under SRC with 
some new projects being carried on there or what’s going to 
happen with those old facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The whole heavy-oil operations 
will move into the new facility. SPMC will be the owners of the 
old building and they will deal with it in, you know, whatever 
fashion they see fit. I can’t speak for the Property Management 
Corporation. They may have some ideas in terms of backfilling 
at this point but I can’t tell you what they are. 
 
We leased . . . the Research Council leased from Sask Property 
Management Corporation, but they’ll be moving into the new 
facility on the university campus which will mean Property 
Management Corporation will either have or will be looking for 
a tenant for that area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The lease that you currently hold with 
SPMC, will that be running out at the time . . . expiring at the 
time of your move or will your lease be carrying on that you 
have to pay for rent in that location while you’re not using it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that it’s an 
open-ended lease but we have given Property Management 
Corporation a year and a half notice and so they will have 
ample opportunity and are comfortable that they’ll be able to 
find a new tenant in the time period that we speak of. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
SRC, as I stated earlier, is a very worthwhile enterprise in this 
province, and I think it needs to be encouraged. And 
Saskatchewan benefits greatly from the research that’s carried 
out there. So I would encourage you to carry on — be 
penny-wise though because we’re watching to see just how you 
do actually spend your money. But I would like to congratulate 
you on your successes and wish you well in the future and to 
thank the minister and the officials for coming in today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say a 
closing word of thanks to Mr. Hutchinson and his staff at the 
Research Council. In the short period of time that I’ve come to 
know them — I have to agree with the member opposite — 
they have been a big positive, a very positive impact in terms of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. I have no doubt that we’re getting a 
very good value for the money that we spend and have spent in 
the past in developing research capacity at SRC. 
 
So I just want to thank Mr. Hutchinson and his staff for the 
work that they’ve done in the past year. 
 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is the deputy minister of Energy and 
Mines, Ray Clayton. To my left is Bruce Wilson, who is the 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas. Immediately 
behind me is Donald Koop, who is the assistant deputy minister 
responsible for finance and administration. To Donald’s right is 
Dan McFadyen, the assistant deputy minister, resource policy 
and economics. And to Mr. Clayton’s right is George Patterson, 
who is the executive director of exploration and geological 
services. 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Welcome to the minister and his officials this 
evening. I think this is an interesting area for most people in the 
province because I think when we realize that most people 
throughout Canada consider us just a wheat province, to have 
some of these other resources here is something we find 
exciting and take a great amount of pride in. 
 
Can you tell us how many new oil wells were drilled in 
Saskatchewan in 1998? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 
officials there were 1,068 wells drilled in 1998. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. And that would bring us up to a total 
of how many wells in total, in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There are just a tad over 17,000 
producing wells in the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — With the drop in production, was the pain 
spread fairly evenly throughout the province where oil plays a 
major role? Or were some producing areas hurt more than 
others, and which ones would those have been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am told that the 
heavy oil took the biggest bite last year, which would be the 
Lloydminster, Kindersley area. But I want to say that there 
wasn’t a significant drop in terms of production. I think the 
industry is maturing, has matured, and the ups and down cycles 
are, I think, much less dramatic than they may have been a few 
years back. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Could you go into some detail when you 
mention that the ups and downs aren’t quite as extensive and as 
dramatic as they used to be. What exactly are you referring to 
when you say that the system has matured and that those things 
aren’t quite as dramatic as they at one time were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The industry is certainly price 
dependent and price-sensitive. But I think the technology that’s 
been developed — horizontal drilling, enhanced oil recovery — 
puts some wells that may have been with just straight vertical 
drilling very much a marginal well. 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

With the new technology, there’s a larger percentage of oil 
that’s recovered from the same pool and the investment, 
although the initial investment may be more to develop heavy 
oil and to enhance the oil recovery techniques, over the longer 
haul it does make it a cheaper well to operate. So the 
technology has been very much responsible for minimizing 
some of the ups and downs and the peaks and valleys. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I thank you for that answer. I think it’s 
something that we look forward to in Saskatchewan having 
those things even out as much as we can so that we’re not hit to 
the same extent as we have been in the past. 
 
What about gas wells compared to 1997? The difference in the 
last year or so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, certainly the strong 
prices for natural gas which were reflected, I might add, in 
SaskEnergy’s rates as they buy on the markets were very much 
responsible for 1998 being about double in terms of what was 
there in 1997. In 1998, there were 626 wells compared to just a 
little over 300 in 1997. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Do you have a forecast for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that I’d 
want to forecast now. We’ll want to watch the markets very 
closely through this year, and as we put together our budget in 
— if we come back, which we probably will after an election, if 
it’s held in June or in the fall — as we put our budget together, 
we’ll be making those estimates based on the market prices at 
that time and what the market analysts are saying we should 
predict into the next fiscal year. But I think at this point, it 
would be very difficult to make estimates because it’s been 
such a volatile market. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, I rather have to admit I agree 
with you on the hesitancy that you might express about the 
coming year and your own being here. 
 
How many people were employed in the oil and gas sector in 
Saskatchewan in ’98 compared to the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, my officials were 
trying to put together an aggregate figure of both oil and gas 
and the activity. Both direct and indirect jobs in 1998 would 
have been responsible for about 17,000 jobs. In 1997 that figure 
would have been in the neighbourhood of 18,000 direct and 
indirect, so there’s about a thousand difference. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The price of a barrel of oil has been rising for 
the past few months. Do you have any estimates on how this 
will affect new drillings for ’99? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, although I guess this 
will change with company to company, and based on barrel 
analysis of the markets, but I think overall it’s fair to say that 
the industry generally is looking for two to three months of 
stability before they would be willing to commit a large amount 
of capital to enhancing the program; because if a drop comes 
and we’re looking at $12 oil again — very difficult to find the 
cash to make the investment. 
 

Most of these companies are operating on a cash flow which I 
think is . . . although it’s difficult for us, wanting to see the 
activity in the drilling and the activity that comes with that, the 
fact that they’ve taken a very prudent approach to the 
development tells us that we should have some very healthy 
companies even though we’ve had this little downswing. 
 
But I guess the point is we should probably know about 
mid-summer if the price holds at 17, $18 a barrel I think you’ll 
see some increased activity later on in the year. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And as you mentioned, it’s always good to 
have some healthy companies out there sort of waiting for the 
things to turn around to get at it. 
 
Does the Saskatchewan government have any plans to 
encourage increased investment in Saskatchewan in the oil and 
gas sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that’s been part of 
our planning process for a long, long time, since 1991, which is 
evidenced by the changes that we’ve made to the royalty and 
taxation structures and it’s an ongoing situation. I think when I 
first came to this portfolio, my perception would have been that 
one would want to sit down, look at the royalties, the taxation, 
go in and fix them and — bang! — you’re done; you’ve got 
everything fixed. But I’m becoming more and more of the view 
that the volatility of the industry, the fact that you’re competing 
globally in terms of investment dollars means that one has to 
continue to look at those on an ongoing basis and identify areas 
where you can improve your competitiveness and where you 
can attract investment. 
 
And so I think the same can be said of the oil and gas sector to 
any other of the industries and any of the other resources that 
we have in the province. I think it’s become very much an 
ongoing, monitoring, understanding, and working with industry 
. . . to know what their circumstances are, what the changes are, 
and what the impact is on them because ultimately if that 
investment isn’t brought to the province, the 17, 18,000 people 
who work in this industry are not going to be employed. 
 
So we really do have a responsibility to keep on top of the 
changes to make sure we’re competitive. And that should be, 
certainly from my perspective, done on an ongoing basis, and I 
think you would probably be one of the members in this House 
that would agree with me on that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You mentioned royalties in that response. 
What was the take by the province for oil and gas royalties in 
’98? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The figures, Mr. Chairman, for 
fiscal year ’98-99 — and these were in the 1999 budget — for 
oil royalties, production taxes, bonus bids: 290.6 million; gas 
royalties, 62 million, just over 62 million for a total of $352.7 
million. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Moving over into two other areas 
of the industry in your portfolio, and that’s uranium and potash. 
Regarding uranium mining in the North, what is the output in 
uranium . . . was for the past year? And how does that compare 
to previous years? 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I can, I’d like to 
. . . I’ll just give the member, I’ll give you the total production 
three years running. I’ll give you for 1997, ’98, and ’99. In 
millions of pounds ’97 was 31.2 million; ’98 was 28.4 million; 
and 1999, 22.1 million is the projection. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What do you foresee as expansion in the 
future in the uranium industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am certainly 
no expert, but what I have learned in terms of an understanding 
of the industry is that we’ve come through a very low cycle in 
terms of the price — eight and a half, nine dollars a pound. I 
think it’s fair to say that the market will be much more stable in 
the upcoming, in the upcoming short-term in that there appears 
to be some market stability created by agreement with Russia, 
the United States, and the uranium-producing companies. And 
so I think, and hopefully, that will create some upward 
movement in the price. 
 
I’m very optimistic in terms of the long-term future of uranium 
as we look at the concerns with respect to global warming and 
the Kyoto Agreement. All of those things I think will make 
development of uranium-produced electricity over the longer 
haul a much more attractive investment that perhaps it would 
have been in the past. 
 
As you will know there’s a lot of environmental concerns with 
respect to uranium production. I think it can be . . . I believe 
very firmly it can be a very safe industry. It needs to be policed 
and controlled as other industries are, but I just think that all of 
the signs would point to a very healthy mining industry here in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve got very rich resources, richer than any 
other ore bodies in the world. We’re a big part of the world 
production and I think we can look to a very stable industry in 
the future. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I appreciate your enthusiasm that 
you have for that industry, and I share the positive attitude that 
you have for the possibilities that are out there in the uranium 
industry, and I hope that we continue to work in that direction. 
 
Earlier on today, I believe, we dealt with some changes in tax 
structure to promote growth in the potash sector in this 
province. The question is: are you doing anything else to 
promote the potash industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the changes to 
the potash royalty and taxation and this Bill that assists us in 
doing that are probably one of the most positive things that this 
government could have done in terms of the development and 
the strength and the health of the industry. We are about 35 per 
cent of market share around the world. We have large client 
bases in Asia. China’s our biggest offshore market, and as that 
population grows, I think the relationship that we’ve built with 
the potash industries and through their marketing arm, 
Canpotex, and with the Chinese government and the Chinese 
people, would tell me that as their needs will continue to grow 
our markets can continue to grow. 
 
So I think working with Canpotex; working with potash 

companies, we’re going to be ensuring that we here have first of 
all up to date mines, efficient mines. And I think the investment 
that IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation 
(Canada) Ltd.) announced right after we did the royalties, $481 
million, is indicative of their trust in the future of developing 
that resource here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think the combination of royalties, building a good positive 
relationship with industry, continuing to work with our markets 
and the people who purchase our potash, are all things that will 
ensure that we will remain number one in the world in terms of 
potash production. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, good evening, Mr. Minister, and good 
evening to your officials. Mr. Minister, I just have one question 
and I guess it’s more a comment and I certainly would 
appreciate your reply at the end of it. And it revolves around 
some concerns of Saskatchewan landowners — concerns they 
brought forward at mid-April National Energy Board hearings, 
concerns surrounding the safety of our natural gas pipeline that 
will be running from the western border of Saskatchewan, south 
of Lloydminster and exiting the province in the southeast 
corner. 
 
And as I mentioned it was . . . The concerns seemed to be 
mainly centred around the pipeline safety in light of rising . . . a 
rising number of incidents. And so from what I can understand 
these people want some assurance that this government is going 
to do something to assure that scheduled safety audits are 
carried out because according to Canada’s Auditor General, the 
report that he put forward of pipeline incidents per 1,000 
kilometres, it says here, is up by 73 per cent in the last five 
years. 
 
And the Auditor General’s report also called into question the 
National Energy Board’s resources for checking up on pipeline 
operations. And the board says that due to resource constraints 
40 per cent of scheduled safety audits were not carried out in 
1997 and 1998. So my question to you is simply, what is your 
government going to do to assure these landowners who have 
these fears that scheduled safety audits will be carried out, you 
know, carried out and precisely on time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the National Energy Board, as the member will know, 
is responsible for cross-provincial types of developments. When 
a pipeline crosses the Alberta-Saskatchewan border, it becomes 
the jurisdiction of the federal government and the National 
Energy Board to regulate and to monitor the safety of those 
particular initiatives. 
 
We, I can say, as a department, carry on due diligence in terms 
of the operations of the pipelines that are operating provincially. 
We have certainly maintenance schedules, companies have 
maintenance schedules, and we work very closely with industry 
to attempt to ensure the safety of these pipelines. 
 
Some of these pipelines, as you will know, have been built, you 
know, 30 years ago. And certainly they require very close 
diligence. Stress corrosion, cracking is I guess a new 
phenomenon that’s been discovered. We are working with, and 
SaskEnergy — I’m not responsible for that department — but I 
know that they are working with industry in terms of 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

monitoring, developing ways, developing technology, and they 
call them pigs. They run them down the lines to do x-rays and 
determine areas where there might be problems. They are 
looking at ground formation that can create, or it would be 
assumed or presumed that they may be, creating the stress 
corrosion problems or a corrosion problem. 
 
So SaskEnergy I know works very closely with our department 
and with industry in terms of ensuring that we have all of the 
technological advanced . . . technologically advanced 
knowledge that we can have. 
 
But in terms of the Alliance pipeline that you are referring to, 
which is coming through Saskatchewan, that’ll be an 
investment of in the neighbourhood of $700 million. IPSCO is 
supplying, here in Regina, the vast majority of the pipe and 
certainly for the Saskatchewan component. IPSCO is well 
known as a very high quality producer of pipe so I think that 
gives me some comfort. But we will continue to work in the 
province and with the federal government in terms of 
monitoring safety. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope that does provide 
these concerned citizens with some degree of assurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, if there happens to be an incident where there is a 
pipeline spill, is there any liability by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to compensate the landowners for damage to 
their lands? I mean there were people here who are organic 
farmers that have brought this issue forward, and I’m 
wondering whether or not the province of Saskatchewan is 
liable for any spills and if that has been discussed with these 
people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the only liability 
that any arm of government would have would be through 
TransGas or SaskEnergy being the owners of the pipe. In terms 
of the Department of Energy and Mines and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, outside of that Crown entity we don’t own any 
gas lines. So any difficulties in terms of pollution would be the 
responsibility of the owner of that asset. 
 
So it would be, in the case of the pipeline you’re talking about, 
it would be Alliance that’d be responsible. They, by the way, 
are also responsible for — as the line comes through — for the 
cleanup after they’ve been through, putting back topsoil. 
 
And for the most part, from what I’ve seen, the pipeline 
companies are very responsible. They understand that a poor 
job reflects on their whole industry. And if they can leave and a 
landowner can be satisfied that the land is returned to as close 
to the state as it was before the intrusion, they clearly 
understand that that is a very necessary part of them doing 
business. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, have you 
spoken with Alliance Pipeline to ask them whether or not they 
have provisions for compensation should there be a spill from 
their pipeline, basically in order to again facilitate the questions 
that might come forward regarding this issue if it should 
happen. And those questions may come forward to the 
provincial government. So have you spoken with Alliance to 
see whether or not they have seen to it that people will be 

provided compensation in that event? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say that . . . I 
mean we dialogue with the industry — the department and I do 
— with the industry on an ongoing basis. And in terms of an 
explanation to them of their responsibilities, that doesn’t need 
to be drummed into their heads. They know full well what their 
responsibilities are and they know their liabilities and they 
know if there’s damage, they pay. 
 
We have a regulatory system and I can . . . if you’d like more 
information, I’m certainly willing to have the department send 
to you the process whereby what action would be taken in a 
certain circumstance. As an example, if a pipeline broke shortly 
after it was in operation, what circumstances would come into 
force. We have the responsibility as a department to ensure 
more than taxation and royalties, we have responsibility to work 
to ensure that it is done in an environmentally sustainable way, 
and we work very closely with SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management), with the Department 
of Environment and Resource Management. 
 
But if you would like more information, more detail in terms of 
process, I’d be more than willing to send that over to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and officials, I’d like to welcome you here this 
evening. 
 
From my past experience in the oil patch, if there was a leak in 
a pipeline just shortly after construction, the construction 
company would be in deep trouble. And that company would 
have a serious difficulty in finding further employment in the 
industry. So I think people in general in that industry take safety 
very greatly to heart and try to act accordingly. 
 
In the past there were a great deal of number of difficulties with 
the oil industry, but that has changed over the last 20, 30 years. 
It’s no longer the same operations as it was in the 1940s and 
early ’50s. And the oil industry has improved its operation 
significantly since that time. But people are still remembering 
those days and are still concerned, and that’s why I think it’s 
important that they receive the reassurances that are necessary, 
that the government participate in those reassurances, and that 
industry be a part of those. 
 
Not everybody though is dealing with pipelines, Mr. Minister. 
We had an issue here a couple of years ago that has died down a 
little bit now, so I’d like to revive it a little bit, and that’s the 
Condie power line. Your portfolio is Energy and Mines, so it 
would fall within that area although perhaps the Deputy 
Premier, as the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) minister would like to lay claim to this, but we 
will ask you the question, Mr. Minister. 
 
What kind of compensation was paid to the landowners along 
that route? Was it necessary to go to arbitration to put that line 
through there? And as I asked, what kind of compensation was 
paid to those landowners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that is not . . . and 
the member is right; that’s not part of Energy and Mines 
estimates. That is an issue that would be more appropriately 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

dealt with by the Minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
I can only go from memory. I will attempt to answer this for 
you. It was a considerable amount, over market value, in terms 
of compensation, and that was the rule as that line was put 
through. Don’t quote me on this, but I think it was something in 
the neighbourhood of 110 per cent to 120 per cent of what the 
appraised value of the land was. But as I say, I think the Deputy 
Premier would be the more appropriate minister to ask for 
details because I don’t have them here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — One question on that, not related to 
values but . . . on the . . . you didn’t answer whether it was 
expropriated and perhaps you can answer that and what lands 
were taken, in the sense was it a narrow strip 16 feet wide or 
some such measurement, or were you taking land by the 
quarter, paying for it, or what kind of a mechanism was in place 
that way? Was it just a narrow corridor or was it a larger . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to be 
helpful here and I’m going from memory again, and sometimes 
my memory isn’t as good as I’d like it to be, but I think it was 
just a narrow corridor that was being dealt with. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We discussed 
earlier in SRC, the PanCanadian project. The government has 
some involvement in that project. What is the government’s 
role in that and what is the progress of that particular project? I 
believe with the oil prices being down that there was some 
royalty incentives in place for the company within a certain 
period of time from the start of the project for the royalty 
rebates to run for. Has the company activated those royalty 
rebates and how is the project going? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the 
question from the member because there has been a lot of 
interest in terms of that project. I can say that we as a 
department had a responsibility, and working with the 
Department of Finance to ensure — and the Minister of Finance 
is here so I had to say that — to ensure that we had an 
appropriate fiscal regime that would give a reasonable rate of 
return to PanCanadian and its partners as well as a reasonable 
rate of return for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The main area that was dealt with was with respect to enhanced 
oil recovery royalties, and the timing was that those royalties 
would take effect 18 months prior to the start-up, and that 
remains unchanged. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What’s the projected start-up date then 
for the project? Has it started today, therefore the royalty 
holiday or special royalties have kicked in already? If so, how 
long do they run for? And if it hasn’t started yet, when do you 
foresee it starting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it would appear that 
the project has been somewhat delayed because of negotiations 
with Dakota Gasification. I am understanding that those things 
have been ironed out. The start-up date will now be, as I 
understand it, in late 2000. And with respect to the royalties, the 

agreement that we had was 18 months prior to start-up and 
certainly we’ll be looking at that 18-month period. That hasn’t 
changed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So what happens . . . Let me lay this out, 
see if I have it correctly. The start-up date will be sometime in 
late 2000, so then you take from that date and go back to 
mid-1998 for the royalties holiday to kick in. Or is it 18 months 
from the start-up date onwards so it would run until the middle 
of 2001 or 2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Under the agreement it’s 18 months 
prior to the start-up date and those rates would continue as long 
as they’re injecting CO2 into that pool. So as long as they 
continue to use CO2 after the start-up date for injection 
purposes, that royalty rate would continue. And hopefully that 
will be a long time because the longer that process takes, the 
more oil they’re going to be recovering from what would have 
been a depleting pool which would have returned zero for the 
government and zero for the investors. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — This new royalty rate, Mr. Minister, is it 
a fixed amount of reduction from the ordinary royalty rate or is 
it a percentage change? I don’t know what the royalty rate on 
old oil would be there but is it a percentage drop or is it a fixed 
amount of drop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — My officials describe it to me as 
being a mini-income-tax system that we put in place. Prior to 
payout, they pay a flat 1 per cent. After payout I’m told that 
they pay, and would pay, 20 per cent of operating income. So 
it’s got basically two components. It’s based on income, which 
is the system that we felt was reasonable and PanCanadian felt 
was fair for them. We were able to reach their threshold in 
terms of their corporate requirement for return on their 
investment. 
 
And on the other hand, when we looked at the amount of 
revenue that would ultimately come into the public coffers, 
although there was a little dip in the in years — and that we 
expect — we will, over the longer haul, generate many more 
millions of dollars of revenue because we’re generating oil that 
otherwise wouldn’t have been there. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could tell me what the royalty rate is on old oil and what 
the royalty rate is on new oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just looking at 
the graphs and as these are described to me, I’m always 
mystified somewhat because there’s non-heavy old oil, there’s 
non-heavy new oil, there’s non-heavy third year, there’s 
southwest designated new, there’s southwest designated third 
year. You’re familiar with some of these. And it’s all price 
dependent so, I mean, it varies depending on what the price of 
oil is. 
 
So there are some very complex sets of royalties and it all 
depends on the kind of oil that we’re producing. And it almost 
seems that every pool in this province has different 
characteristics and qualifies under different royalty systems. 
And in gas there’s old gas, new gas, third . . . (inaudible) . . . 
gas — it’s all over the wall. 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

What I’m going to attempt to do is get a one-month example for 
you — if that would be appropriate — that will sort of describe 
what would happen under the different scenarios for a given 
month. And I’ll send those graphs over to you. Okay? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, that sounds very good, Mr. 
Minister. I’d appreciate that. 
 
As I was explaining to one of your colleagues here while you 
were getting the information from you staff that what you really 
want in Saskatchewan is green oil. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to drilling of oil wells in this 
province, I wonder if you could give us some indication as to 
what types of wells have been drilled in the last year and the 
changes that would have occurred there? Were there more 
horizontals being drilled, more conventional, deep wells, 
shallow wells? What’s happening in those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think as I get older 
this printing gets smaller. So I might have to use it from here. 
 
But I can give you the 1997 total, and this includes horizontal, 
development, in field, deep — the whole works — 1997 was a 
total of 3,608; 1998 was a total of 1,068. 
 
The one you might be interested in is the . . . with respect to 
deep rights reversion and what is happened there in 1997, if I’m 
crossing this appropriately, there was 75 deeper wells drilled. In 
1998 there were 79 drilled. So this was the result of deep rights 
reversion and looking in the lower formations. Horizontal in 
1997 was 39 and because of the decrease in crude, as you will 
know, the horizontal drilling took a pretty severe whack, and 
there were nine drilled. So it’s quite a decrease. 
 
In terms of, let’s see, horizontal . . . Okay and in terms of the 
horizontal, 596 in ’97; and 242 in ’98. So I’ve given you the 
aggregate amounts, and you can see what’s happened with the 
deep play and in terms of the horizontal drilling. A very 
expensive drilling as you will know, and it’s pretty hard to find 
cash flow for that kind of activity right now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, 
when you said nine horizontal wells, I thought there was that 
many almost right around my farm — not on, mind you, but 
near. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government holds a certain amount of land 
which it holds mineral rights on in conjunction with other 
partners. Particularly the lands that were previously Scurry 
Rainbow lands that reverted back to the government. What’s 
the procedure on leasing those lands out, and has the 
government leased any of them out where they have other 
leaseholders in with the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m getting a little 
bit of an education here, a little history lesson as well. With 
respect to Scurry Rainbow, what they have done is separated 
the rights. Just as an example, if the Crown portion was 80 and 
the company portion was 20, they will deal with their own, and 
the Crown will deal with its own. So they’ve been separated, 
and that’s how they managed. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — When it comes to leasing out those 
properties though, would the government lease out their 80 per 
cent, and then the company that was purchasing the lease or 
doing the leasing would have to go to the landowners or 
whoever holds the rest of the mineral title to make a separate 
negotiation with them? Or would it be all done sort of in 
conjunction, negotiate with both parties at one time until an 
agreement is arrived at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the first scenario would be the 
one. They would have to negotiate with the Crown and with the 
company on a separate basis. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you. I was kind of 
concerned whether or not the landowner or the mineral-right 
holder would have to settle for the same rates as the 
government, which perhaps may be beneficial or not depending 
on how well the government negotiates that, and since I’m not 
. . . haven’t been privy to that yet, I’m not sure what the 
government’s track record is on those kind of agreements. 
 
When the government would lease that out, that would be part 
of the land, sale process would it, and the companies would 
then tender on those lands? I recognize that there are certain 
large sums of money that change hands on that. What kind of a 
royalty though would the Crown retain on those lands as a 
percentage of production? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the royalties and the 
incentives . . . you know, and I guess it depends on the tier of 
oil we’re talking to, you know, those all vary; but they would be 
the same whether we own 80 per cent of the whole package or 
whether we own 60. We would take that portion, but the 
royalties would remain the same, and incentives as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So whether the Crown owned the 
mineral rights on the 80 per cent, you would get the same kind 
of return as on the lands that the Crown would hold a hundred 
per cent. So there would be no difference in that case. When an 
individual holds the mineral leases though, they negotiate a 
royalty retention on behalf of the landholder. So that doesn’t 
happen in the case of the government when they’re in 
negotiations to lease land to the oil companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And I was wondering if I was doing 
better or worse than the government was and I can’t find out. 
 
On some of the lands that are being transferred today with TLE 
(Treaty Land Entitlement) settlements and specific land claims, 
what happens with the mineral rights on those properties — 
does the Crown retain the right to collect royalties from those 
lands or is that right given up along with the titles to the lands 
and minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, when we transfer 
the . . . we transfer the ownership to the federal government, we 
give up the rights to the surface, and to the minerals. That’s all 
transferred to the federal government. They then deal with it in 
whatever fashion they deal with it through the agreements. 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. At one time 
those mineral rights did indeed belong to the province, and 
people purchased them, so that’s why I was concerned. Or the 
province controlled those mineral rights; that’s why I was 
wondering just what happened to them in those TLE transfers. 
 
Does the same thing happen in the specific land claims where a 
band may purchase land with the monies given to them for that 
purposes? Do those lands automatically become subject to 
federal regulation, or do they remain part of provincial 
regulations if they’re not brought into the reserve structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told under 
specific land claims we sell the rights to them, and under TLE if 
they’re disposed we will sell. They will then be administered by 
Indian Oil and Gas Canada after that process is taken place. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister, my 
colleague had talked to you a little about the uranium industry, 
and the uranium industry is very important to Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m wondering though if your department has given any 
consideration to expanding the role that uranium plays in 
Saskatchewan and moving us into the secondary processing 
stage of the industry or into the disposal stage of the industry. I 
know that . . . I believe it was about two years ago Atomic 
Energy Canada was around doing some hearings on possible 
disposal sites in northern Saskatchewan. That seems to have 
quieted down and disappeared now. I’m just wondering what is 
happening in that area. Is your department involved in any way 
in those kind of discussions if they are ongoing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 
member opposite that, with respect to disposal — and I’ll deal 
with that first — I think that before that would be acceptable to 
the people of Saskatchewan, there would have to be a very clear 
understanding of technology that would ensure that that would 
be a reasonably safe situation. As you will know right now, that 
material is in storage, mostly in areas where it is being used. 
And I think that before that would be a decision made to bring 
disposal material and to use Saskatchewan as a disposal ground, 
we would want to and need to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan are comfortable with that decision. I don’t 
believe that we’re in that position right now, and I think that 
that would take a lot of dialogue and a lot of understanding and 
a lot of assurance that the technology in terms of disposal would 
work and work for the long haul. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So the department then is not carrying 
on any discussions at the present time. What about the 
secondary processing that may or may not be available to 
Saskatchewan? We mine and ship a large percentage of the 
world’s supply of uranium, and yet we don’t carry on any 
secondary manufacturing in this province with the uranium 
industry and the fact is most of the secondary benefits both 
either from the processing itself or from the manufacturing 
based on that processing is carried on in other places in Canada 
or indeed around the world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in respect to 
secondary manufacturing, I am told that there is still a very 
large capacity in terms of the ability of this manufacturing 
process to handle all that is there and more if necessary, and 

that industry has indicated that they’re not interested in capital 
investment in secondary manufacturing until the capacity that 
now exists is totalled out. That isn’t the case, so my guess 
would be that that is not going to be an issue that’s going to 
have to be dealt with in the near future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. One last 
area in the province’s energy and resource sectors is hardrock 
mining. What’s happening in that area? It fell on hard times 
similar to that which the oil patch fell on. The gold mine at 
Contact Lake closed, I believe. What’s happening in the 
hardrock mining area and what are the prospects in the coming 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well as the member will know, in 
this spring budget we made some fairly significant changes to 
the royalty and taxation structure of base metals and gold. And 
part of the reason that that was done was, first of all, because 
they hadn’t been looked at for many, many years and it was 
time . . . it was due. We wanted to review to see if those 
royalties and taxations were pertinent in today’s marketplace. 
 
Ultimately we made the decision that we would look at a 
reduction for new mining and new opportunities. So I think that 
will do an awful lot in terms of Saskatchewan’s image, not only 
in Canada but around the world, in that we want to be an 
investment-friendly environment. And I think those changes 
will do very much to have that happen. 
 
The exploration dollars in Canada have been shrinking in the 
past. And as you will know, it takes a considerable period of 
time to get a base metal mine, a hardrock mine, on stream. 
When you look at the exploration stage and in through the 
development stage and then into the production stage, it’s a 
long, long time. So we in Canada, and I would want to say that 
we in Saskatchewan in particular, have got a long way to go in 
terms of developing our base metal industry. 
 
I think it’s one of the areas . . . I think it’s fair to say that we 
really as a province, and I say this not to reflect on anything that 
anyone within the Department of Energy and Mines has done, 
but I think it’s just been an area of policy that successive 
governments have not developed. We haven’t looked at it and 
we haven’t looked at the opportunities and we really haven’t 
been serious about attracting the investment. But I think that’s 
changed. My department is very much focused on that. 
 
We’re now attending prospectors’ and developers’ conferences 
to share the Saskatchewan geology, to share the expertise that’s 
been developed here within the department, and to talk to 
investors about coming to Saskatchewan to develop the geology 
that we think is host to some very good and productive 
opportunities for investment. So just to condense it, I guess . . . 
I don’t think we had done our job here in this province in the 
last 34 years. Should have done more, could have done more, 
but we’re moving towards doing that now. And I think that 
even though the commodities, the base metals, as you will 
know, the prices are in the tank, they’ve been in the tank for a 
considerable period of time — hard to attract investment, fair to 
say that Bre-X gave Canada a bit of a black eye — you will 
know that. So it’s going to take a while for us to turn those 
kinds of things around. 
 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

I want to say that Mr. Patterson and his area of the department 
is working very closely with the industry. We want to create a 
very positive investment image and climate here and that’s part 
of what we were able to achieve in this year’s budget with the 
reduction in the base metal and gold royalties for new 
production. 
 
I must say, by the way, and maybe I shouldn’t single out Mr. 
McMillan, but I notice Neil McMillan and his comments in the 
Saskatoon Star Phoenix as a result of the changes spoke very 
positively of what it will do with respect to the industry. And if 
there’s anyone in Saskatchewan who knows hardrock mining 
and who knows that industry, it would be him. So I very much 
appreciated the comments that he made with respect to the 
changes we initiated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed the 
base metal industries have been sort of the orphan of the 
resource sector in Saskatchewan. A good percentage of the 
investment that was taking place around the world in base 
metals was taking place by Canadian companies, though, 
outside of Canada and in particularly in South America and 
Asia. And we need to indeed do something to bring them home 
so that they invest here. 
 
The terms investor-friendly, though, coming from a member of 
the NDP government, just sort of seems to be diametrically 
opposed. And I’m glad that your government has finally 
recognized that you indeed do have to be investor-friendly if 
you want to develop this industry and the resource industries in 
general, Mr. Minister. So I think it is indeed worthwhile that we 
take a very serious look at what we need to do to reinvigorate 
an industry that is beneficial to Saskatchewan and particularly 
beneficial to northern Saskatchewan starting right from the US 
border, Saskatoon and north. 
 
I think there is a lot of opportunities there for us and it’s 
certainly time that we took advantage of what God gave us in 
the terms of minerals and went ahead and used them to the best 
possible advantage to the people of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Minister, I think we need to carry on in that direction, not just in 
the base metals but in industry as a whole throughout 
Saskatchewan, to be an investor-friendly location and if you can 
pass that message on to some of your colleagues, it would be of 
benefit to all of us. 
 
So I’d like to thank you for coming in this evening. I’d like to 
thank your officials for spending their time with us this evening 
and providing us with the answers. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I want 
to thank the members opposite for their very thoughtful 
questions and for their comments. I know that they are 
interested in the development of investment opportunities and 
profit opportunities here in the province, as we are. And I think 
that together working with industry this government, both 
members of the government side and the opposition, can do a 
lot to enhance the attitude towards Saskatchewan as being a 
great place to invest, which I think it is. 
 
I just want to close by thanking my officials for their help, their 
support tonight, and in the past years. Oh I think I may be a 
little premature, so I’ll take my place. 

Mr. Hillson: — I note, Mr. Chairman, that the minister said the 
opposition questions were very thoughtful before I stood up. 
 
I do however want to ask the minister about a less happy sector 
of the mining industry, and that is the pending closure of Cluff 
Lake mine. And I’d like to ask him if he is working with the 
federal government to ensure the proper closure of that mine, 
and also what programs are in place to ensure the transition of 
the employees of the Cluff Lake mine. 
 
(2100) 
 
I was there this summer, and I was very impressed that that 
mine appears to have done an extremely good job of hiring 
northern labour at the mine, and this is something we always 
want to see. But on the other hand seeing that it is northern 
labour as opposed to labour which has simply been flown in 
from the South, it must mean that with the closure of Cluff Lake 
suitable placements for those people will be difficult to find. 
And I’m just wondering what programs the government does 
have in place, what plans there are to ensure the placement of 
those people who will lose their employment as a result of the 
closure of Cluff Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me deal 
with two issues, first of all with respect to the closure of the 
mine. 
 
AECB (Atomic Energy Control Board) and SERM are the two 
regulatory bodies that will deal with the process in ensuring that 
the proper techniques are used in terms of closing the mine on 
the environmental side. And I have no doubt that given SERM’s 
diligence, knowing that department as I do, they very much 
have the environment in their forethought as they move towards 
decommissioning this mine. 
 
With respect to the employees, you know . . . it’s a difficult 
thing, I know, for the employees. And I can’t speak for all of 
the miners but certainly what I hear from them is they 
understand the nature of their industry. They understand that 
every ore body has a depletion time, a time where a mine will 
not be economical and won’t be viable to operate. 
 
I want to also say that I know industry, and from industry’s 
perspective they understand this as well. And do they have the 
concerns of their employees at heart? Mr. Chairman, I can tell 
you conversations that I’ve had with the principals. In terms of 
management, they are doing everything that they can to assist in 
a transition to perhaps a new mining opportunity within that 
portfolio up there. It may not be that all of the mine, the people 
working at this mine can be accommodated. 
 
It may be that some of the contracts that supply . . . contractors 
that supply services to the mine may not be able to deal with all 
of their employees but I guess that unfortunately is the nature of 
the mining business, the mining industry. Mines open, do their 
job, and they close. So for the most part, people in that industry 
I think understand that and are willing to move and 
accommodate those circumstances. 
 
But I want to say that from a corporation’s perspective, they 
have been very open to our concerns about ongoing 
employment for the employees in that industry up there. I can’t 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

say that my department has a program in place for the 
transition, monetary or otherwise. We don’t have a program. 
That’s not the mandate of the Department of Energy and Mines 
but I think it’s something that is certainly of a concern to us as 
government as a whole. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to know if the minister 
can tell us the projections of the industry or of the department 
as to the medium- and long-range projection of uranium prices. 
Is it anticipated that uranium prices will remain soft for the 
foreseeable future or do we see any firming up for uranium in 
the next few years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, you know I think 
it’s fair to say that both my department and industry are hopeful 
that the prices will be firming up. I was discussing this earlier 
with a member from the official opposition in that $8.50, $8.75 
a pound uranium is certainly not nirvana for those who have 
invested hundreds of millions of dollars in the industry. 
 
But I think that it’s also fair to say that the arrangements that 
have been made with the Russians in terms of I guess supply 
management, and the Americans, that the prices will be firming 
up. I don’t believe and my department doesn’t feel that earlier 
projections of perhaps 30 or 35 or $40 a pound will be achieved 
in the near future. But certainly I think the arrangements that 
have been made with the Russians will create an upward . . . 
some upward pressure. And I think that’s already been 
evidenced in the price of uranium. Uranium is what at . . . about 
10.95 a pound right now so there has been some upward 
pressure, and hopefully you know for the health of the industry 
that will continue. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Can the minister answer the same 
question in regard to potash? What are the department’s and the 
industry’s projections as to where we are headed with potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, you know the 
history, I guess, and the recent past of potash prices has really 
been one of stability even in spite of the competition in the 
marketplace with our largest offshore client which is China. 
Russia has been attempting to move into that market and there’s 
been a bit of a differential between the Canpotex price and what 
the Russians are offering. 
 
But what can’t be offered from other jurisdictions is what we 
have been able to achieve by developing the industry here in 
Saskatchewan over the years and that’s stability. And the other 
component that I think gives us a step up and an advantage and 
the ability to continue to be very dominant in the world markets 
is the quality of our potash. 
 
So if you look at quality and the ability to supply on time when 
required, we’re in a pretty good position and so we can 
command a reasonable price for Saskatchewan potash. I think 
the trick for us is over the longer haul to ensure that this 
industry, in Saskatchewan, remains competitive in terms you 
know of mines that are competitive because they’re efficient. 
We’ve got a great workforce that work within the mining 
sector. We’ve got a good marketing tool, the industry does, 
through Canpotex. We’ve changed our royalty and taxation 
structure which Bill will be . . . is before the legislature, part of 
that right now, which will make Saskatchewan more 

competitive in the global market place. 
 
So I think the secret, although the prices are stable and they’re 
fairly strong, the secret for us is to ensure that we remain the 
dominant player in the world marketplace, which is what I can 
tell you I am committed to doing and this government is 
committed to doing to ensure that we maintain our dominance 
in the world markets. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I realize that this province did 
not sign on to the Kyoto Agreement, but nonetheless it seems to 
me that there are international developments that we will not be 
forever able to ignore even if the projections and the objectives 
of Kyoto turn out to be unrealistic and unobtainable in the short 
term. 
 
So I want to ask the minister what are Saskatchewan’s plans in 
terms of Kyoto; and also if we can continue on long term to use 
coal-fired generators as a major means of power production in 
this province or is that something that we will have to consider 
alternatives for in the medium to long term; and where you 
think we are in terms of coal-fired generators as our source of 
power production in Saskatchewan; and if Saskatchewan will 
be in fact signing onto Kyoto. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the member asks 
some very thoughtful and I guess some very important and 
pertinent questions with respect to the position that the federal 
government has taken in terms of the Kyoto Agreement. I’ve 
said publicly, and I will say it again tonight, that if we were 
have to act in isolation — Saskatchewan from other provinces 
and the rest of our nation — that would be for us a very, very 
daunting challenge given the nature of our economy. 
 
We’re an energy-producing province. We have a large 
agricultural base which is a large consumer of energy 
historically. We’ve generated 70 per cent or close to that figure 
of our electrical energy by coal-fired power plants. And so 
we’ve got a circumstance here: as our economy continues to 
grow, so do our emissions. This is not a declining economy; it’s 
a growing economy so it would only stand to reason the energy 
consumption level would continue to increase unless we have 
some methods of mitigating that. 
 
I want to say that we are now, as a province, very much 
involved with the federal government in developing a plan. I 
can report to you tonight that when the Kyoto Agreement was 
signed, there was no plan, and there is no plan now other than 
we’re in the stages and I think we have made some progress in 
terms of formulating the plan. 
 
What we are taking to the table are initiatives, and we are 
asking initiatives that are not specific to Saskatchewan but 
certainly have a major impact on Saskatchewan, and that is the 
ability to use credits and sinks with respect to agricultural 
practices — carbon sinks with respect to agricultural practices 
and forestry because those are two very, very large areas where 
we believe we can effect some positive impact and be part of a 
Canadian solution. So that’s basically where we’re at. 
 
We will be meeting.— I’m assuming; I’m not sure yet, the 
federal minister hasn’t indicated yet — but we meet fairly 
regularly and I’m assuming we’ll be meeting in fall. 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

Industry has been doing a lot of work in terms of early action. 
SaskPower has been doing a lot of work in terms of their 
initiatives. The oil and gas sector, frankly, have been very, very 
much in the forefront in terms of early action prior to any kind 
of a plan being announced by the federal government. 
 
Our officials are working very diligently. They’re at some very 
important tables. They’re working on economic modelling and 
other initiatives so Saskatchewan is playing a very, very major 
role in terms of Kyoto. 
 
We’re working co-operatively with the federal government, but 
I want to say again we are very, very concerned with respect to 
the environment as every jurisdiction in Canada should be; 
every jurisdiction in the world should be. And we want to do 
our share and we will do our share and we will do our part, but 
we will not agree to initiatives that will put Saskatchewan at an 
economic disadvantage to our neighbouring provinces, to other 
areas of Canada or to other areas of North America, because 
that I think would be irresponsible of us as a province not to 
protect the jobs and the industries here in this province. But 
we’ll do our share. We’re working very co-operatively with the 
federal government but what the end result of this is going to be 
we can’t really say yet; it’s a little premature. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate that the 
environmental issues and our co-operating with the Kyoto 
Agreement may well be the subject of sensitive negotiations 
that the minister cannot divulge or perhaps anticipate right now. 
But in the case of coal-fired generators though, then can I ask 
— leave aside the environmental issue which the minister says 
the province is dealing with; there’s also the economic issue, 
economically; and from a standpoint of a surety of supply — is 
lignite-fired generators, is that a way for us to go on, continue 
supplying Saskatchewan with power? I think you gave the 
figure of 70 per cent of our power continues to be coal-fired by 
lignite. Is that a method of generating power for the province 
that will be economic and viable in the long term? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can answer that and 
I think with a great deal of conviction. In terms of the North 
American scheme of energy production, our coal-fired plants in 
the southern part of this province are very, very efficient. This 
is not a comparison that would be made nor should be made in 
terms of efficiency and efficiency of production. It’s not a 
comparison and not a realistic comparison to compare 
Manitoba’s hydroelectricity energy with Saskatchewan’s 
coal-fired energy. It needs to be compared in a much broader 
context. 
 
And so I could safely say that my department and this 
government is very much of the opinion that those plants are 
competitive. They are now and I think in a totally deregulated 
marketplace they would be. So I have all measure of faith that 
those plants will continue to operate through their lifespan. 
 
They’re new plants. There’s been millions of dollars, many 
hundreds of millions of dollars invested there. We got an 
efficient workforce who know those plants well, run them well. 
And so I have no reason to believe that in a broader context, in 
a deregulated marketplace, that SaskPower and in particular the 

coal-fired plants would do very, very well. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. If I may turn to the issue of heavy 
oil, it’s my understanding that the economic viability of heavy 
oil depends not so much on the base price as such, but rather the 
gap between number one Texas crude and heavy oil. In other 
words, what is required then to do the upgrading so that heavy 
oil is marketable? And I’d like to know what the projections of 
the department and the industry are as to whether that gap will 
continue to be great enough to allow the economic upgrading of 
our heavy oil reserves so that that industry will continue to be 
strengthened and expanded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me deal with this 
in two areas. Certainly the differential has an impact on part of 
the industry and that’s the upgrading industry. And that 
component, it affects very, very directly as to whether 
upgrading is viable or whether it’s non-viable. 
 
But the ultimate . . . the economics of oil are the cost of drilling, 
the capital cost of investing, in putting that well into place, the 
costs of operations; part of that is electricity. So I guess the 
absolute value is as important to heavy oil as it is to light sweet 
crude. But in terms of upgrading, the differential is what makes 
the difference between economic viability and non-viability in 
that area. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I was given the figure of a $4 
differential is required. Is that a figure that the department 
would concur in, that you require a $4 differential for upgrading 
to be economic? And what is the present differential? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the 
differential, firstly, let me say that the variation and the 
fluctuations have been very, very dramatic. I’m told by my 
officials, just looking at the history of the differential . . . in 
early 1998, the differential was around $10. In early 1999, the 
differential was around $3 CDN (Canadian) or about 25 per 
cent of what it was a year before. 
 
In terms of the economics of an upgrader, I don’t know that I 
would want to use a rule of thumb because I think the different 
circumstances in different upgrading facilities would require 
different margins. I think that it’s fair to say that NewGrade will 
have a different circumstance than Husky. And what might 
work for Husky may not work for NewGrade or the other way 
around. 
 
So I think what makes upgrading work is very much the 
economies of the production facility, the efficiency of the 
plants, the amount of capital investment required to do the 
upgrading. I mean so there’s many, many variables. I couldn’t 
give you a rule of thumb but certainly the differential is 
important to all of them; but what’s even more important is the 
base cost per barrel. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you to the minister and his officials. 
And I guess now that I’ve warmed you up, I will turn you over 
to the tender mercies of my colleague from Melville. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a couple 
of questions going back to petroleum exploration, your 
exploration for oil and gas. Are you at liberty at this point to tell 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

us where there may be some major projects that are undergoing 
some exploration, pinpoint some areas in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think maybe, 
maybe I can just share a little bit of excitement that I have 
inside of me in a couple of areas of the province and some new, 
I think, exciting opportunities have been created for investment 
and for some of the companies who have taken the opportunity 
to purchase land in these areas and involved themselves in the 
deeper plays. 
 
The Montmartre area just to the south and the east of Regina 
here is, I think, as exciting as all get out. And south of there, 
Ceylon, where companies are investing larger amounts of 
dollars to drill deeper and are finding success. And I think that 
for me is really exciting in that it’s in a non-traditional oil and 
gas area in Saskatchewan as we know it. 
 
So technology is driving the investment because the 
opportunities are seen to be there and when they actually start 
the investment in Montmartre — Tri-Link Resources has been a 
fairly successful player, and I’ll mention just that one company 
among others — but I think it’s just exciting as heck. 
 
And you know what I find as exciting? I met recently with . . . 
and it’s creating challenges too because I’ve met with some of 
the municipal governments who are totally unfamiliar with that 
kind of activity taking place in their area so it’s creating some 
challenges because they don’t understand the industry and 
shouldn’t because they’ve never had to deal with it. And what 
we’ve been able to do is involve some of the traditional 
producing municipalities in working with the non-traditional 
municipalities in conjunction with my department, with Energy 
and Mines and municipal government and the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers. 
 
We’ve got them sitting down at a table saying, hey, these are 
new things happening here. What does this mean to me? This is 
intrusive. I don’t like the way this is happening. What’s going 
to end up as a result of your activities here? And so it’s a whole 
learning curve for a whole bunch of people but I think that’s 
probably as exciting as anything I see in the oil and gas play. 
It’s new and it’s there and it’s creating investment and it’s 
creating jobs in new areas and taxes for municipalities and 
freehold landowners, and I think that’s good. 
 
Mr. Osika: — No question about that, that is good. I’m glad to 
hear, Mr. Chairman, that some of the new areas where this is 
happening, that they are brought in, that local government is 
brought in and there is some explanation given to people in the 
community so they can also participate in the sense of 
excitement as well. 
 
I just wanted to go back to your resource regulatory program, 
and particularly with cleanups on abandoned sites. Does your 
department, if in fact there are some farmlands where a 
producer may feel that there hasn’t been adequate cleanup 
taking place after a well has been shut down, where would that 
individual then go with a concern or some assistance to follow 
up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There I think I’ve got it straight, 
okay. There’s a body in the province that’s been set up to deal 

with these kinds of issues — the surface rights arbitration fund 
or the Surface Rights Arbitration Board —and if there is a 
dispute between a landowner and a company, they can apply to 
the Surface Rights Arbitration Board to come in and see if they 
can find a solution. 
 
In the event that it’s an abandoned well, an orphaned well as 
they call it, where the company no longer exists, that then 
becomes the responsibility of the Department of Energy and 
Mines, and the landowner would want to contact our 
department. And we have the resources, the technical abilities 
to do the assessment then, you know, and work with the 
landowner in terms of getting a fix to the solution. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you for that answer. Mr. Chairman, to the 
minister, there have been some concerns brought regarding 
these types of situations in the south-east corner of the province. 
So I appreciate your assurance that there is a body that these 
people can go to and ask for some assistance. 
 
A lot of the companies that are operating in the province here 
now with respect to oil and gas, are any of those companies . . . 
do they have in fact a head office here, or are they subsidiaries 
from companies from other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it became very 
apparent to me after a short period time in this portfolio that if I 
wanted to deal with the majors, I had to go to Calgary. You 
know, the one major that we do have and have had here is 
Wascana Energy which was as a result of a Crown corporation, 
Saskoil, that was headquartered here in Saskatchewan many 
years back. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that Calgary, over the years, because 
of the nature of that oil and gas industry in Calgary and the fact 
that they were able to exploit and develop their resource much 
earlier than we . . . they have light, sweet crude, and we’ve had 
heavy oil. So we’ve had a different circumstance, and they’ve 
been major players in that sector which has attracted many head 
offices and support to the head office. So they built a core of 
critical mass. 
 
I think what we have been attempting to do here in 
Saskatchewan is to do what is doable. And that is to grow this 
industry to a point where the service sector that supports oil and 
gas development whether it be rigs or servicing wells — 
whatever, I mean just name all of the industry that comes as a 
result of that activity — will take place here. 
 
I want to say as well we have a number of junior oil and gas 
companies located here in Saskatchewan who play a very 
important role in terms of development. 
 
But I think we need to be, I think — as a province and as people 
of this province — very watchful and mindful that there are 
going to be opportunities for growth and for development by 
support industry. So that is an area that I think we really can 
gain in and the other component of that I guess is in research 
and development and what we can do. 
 
(2130) 
 
The Petroleum Research Centre here on the university campus 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

in Regina, there’s no doubt in my mind in a short, short period 
of time we have . . . the expertise that is there. The Dean of 
Engineering is a very well recognized person in this field. He is 
going to be able to attract other professors with similar 
reputations to his. We’re going to be training people here in 
Saskatchewan with new technology and new ways of 
developing that technology, and I think over a short period of 
time we’re going to be exporting that expertise. And I think 
that’s a role that many of the oil and gas companies see us as 
playing and they’re very supportive of it. And the fact that 
they’ve been able to . . . we’ve attracted some very major 
players in the oil and gas sector to sit on as board of directors 
and partners with us in that. 
 
Those are the areas that I think we can really grow in and I 
think those are the areas where you can see and you can identify 
opportunities and we just got to go out there and make sure they 
happen and make sure we capture all of those opportunities and 
we’re doing that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the 
minister. I hope that his excitement that he’s feeling and 
expressing about the Montmartre area may perhaps seep 
through north . . . and to the north side of the valley as well 
because we’d like to see some excitement and some activity in 
that area as well. 
 
I want to thank the minister and his staff. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . members joined in the discussion. And I want to 
thank my officials for their help tonight and their work 
throughout the year and I want to thank members of the third 
party for their thoughtful questions. 
 
Subvote (EM01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EM02), (EM05), (EM04), (EM03), (EM06) agreed 
to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvotes (EM02), (EM05), (EM03), (EM06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left 
is our president, Ron Styles. Immediately behind him is Dave 
Schiman, manager of financial planning. And seated directly 

behind me is Wayne Dybvig, vice-president, water resource 
management. 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, not yet. I’d 
like to welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 
And since it’s raining out perhaps it’s a good day to be talking 
to Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us the number of 
employees in your department, whether or not that’s a change 
from previous years, and if so, in what direction and for what 
reasons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The full-time equivalent we have is 
247.7. That’s up just ever so slightly from years past. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Ever so slightly, Mr. Minister. Does that 
mean point seven? That’s slightly . . . or the minister is the new 
employee at the department. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us of any new projects, 
significant projects, that Sask Water undertook in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There were a number of small projects, 
but the two major projects that were started in ’98 and will be 
completed in ’99 are the Lumsden dike reconstruction, and also 
the Buffalo Pound outlet is being completely replaced. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What would 
the value of those two projects be and what is the date of 
completion on those two particular projects? As well, what 
were the environmental impact studies? Were there any done on 
those two particular projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The first project, the Lumsden project is 
approximately $500,000. The Buffalo Pound is substantially 
larger at 1.6 million. And they are screened by the Department 
of Environment, our provincial Department of Environment, 
and also by the federal government through the . . . or I should 
say, by virtue of the navigable waters Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Were there public hearings dealing with 
these two particular projects and when is the completion dates 
for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Both projects are slated for completion 
in 1999. While there is no requirement for public consultation, 
we advertised and also there was consultation with, as far as we 
are aware, with the RMs (rural municipality) and some of the 
public . . . some of the community and the public, primarily 
through the RM. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m surprised 
that you got away so easily on public hearings when you talked 
about navigable waters. 
 
I remember a small project that occurred in my area, the 
Rafferty-Alameda project, that needed intensive scrutiny by 
Environment Canada because it dealt with navigable waters. 
And I’m surprised that you managed to do these projects so 
quietly, without any intervention by Environment Canada into 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

those particular areas. And I’m surprised that the Minister of 
Environment wasn’t bringing forward some concerns about 
these projects because he was quite involved at the time on the 
small bit of water that I think it was one of your ministers said 
you could stop it with a briefcase. And yet it was classified as 
navigable waters and therefore had to have intensive public 
hearings across southern Saskatchewan and Manitoba because 
of where the water flowed to. So perhaps the minister is more 
effective than some ministers in the past have been in keeping 
the issues quiet and under wraps so that there is no scrutiny of 
those particular projects. 
 
What were the results of the discussions with Environment 
Canada or with the federal government on the navigable 
waters? What environmental statements did they come up or 
require from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, first of all, both the — this sort of 
goes back to your first question — both projects were 
reconstruction, so they weren’t new projects So that’s probably 
part of why the requirements may not have been for a full 
impact study. And also the size of the projects, they’re not 
anywhere near the size that you referred to. 
 
But some of the requirements from the federal government, 
under the navigable waters Act, they would simply be looking 
for hazards, navigation hazards on the water. Fisheries, both 
Department of Environment provincially and federally . . . That 
would be reviewed. And lastly Department of Environment 
provincially here would be interested in the wildlife impact as it 
pertains to these projects. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This spring at 
both the Alameda and Rafferty reservoirs, there is a significant 
amount of water in there. I wonder if you could give us the 
latest report on what is happening on those reservoirs and what 
levels that they’re operating at now and what levels they’ll be 
operating at this summer. 
 
I know that in the past, various members of your government 
have said that there would be no water in there in even longer 
than the foreseeable future. I remember attending a number of 
meetings around southeast Saskatchewan and Manitoba where, 
in 10-year projection blocks, the department at that time was 
stating that there would never, ever be enough water in those 
reservoirs to fill them. 
 
I wonder if you could give us some indication now of the levels 
of the water and the amount of water that has been passing 
through those reservoirs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay. For the Rafferty, it presently is at 
0.8 metres above full supply level. We want to draw it down to 
full supply level through the spring. Currently the outflow is at 
40 cubic metres per second. 
 
For Alameda, it is presently 1.5 metres below full supply level, 
and we would want to get that up to roughly 1 metre below full 
supply level. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So in actual 

fact, Rafferty is over full based on the full operating level. Isn’t 
that amazing? Isn’t that amazing? I believe it was the Deputy 
Premier who said that that dam will never, ever fill up with 
water, ever in his lifetime. And I do believe that the Deputy 
Premier is still alive because I saw him in the House. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps it’s your good doings that have 
allowed this dam to fill up because it certainly had nothing to 
do with your government, because they did everything they 
could to prevent those dams from proceeding. 
 
In fact, downstream from the Rafferty Dam this spring there 
was flooding because there was so much water coming into 
Rafferty that water had to be released from Rafferty and from 
Boundary Dam to keep the dams in place. And yet can you 
imagine what that flooding would have been if those dams 
hadn’t been there? And that flooding would have taken place 
right straight through the Souris, down through Minot, and back 
up into Manitoba. 
 
There’s a large amount of water in there, Mr. Minister, and I 
think that it was through good foresight and planning that that 
flood protection is in place and that the water supplies are there 
for the power stations at Boundary and at Shand, Mr. Minister. 
 
So those have turned out to be valuable contributions even 
though the member from Regina Victoria still doesn’t agree 
with them. But nevertheless, Mr. Minister, he doesn’t live along 
the Souris River and get flooded every year. But the people that 
are there are thankful that those dams are there because they 
have provided the necessary protection to the people living 
along the Souris River. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the member from Regina Victoria says 
they’re going to name them after my former leader. I’m sure he 
would appreciate having a reservoir named after him, 
particularly one in which there is a large supply of water and 
excellent fishing. The fact is we’ve been inviting the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley to come down and do some fishing 
at Alameda, which has excellent fishing opportunities there. But 
for some reason, he seems reluctant to do so. Perhaps it’s a 
situation of denial. He can’t admit that there’s actually water in 
that reservoir. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us in feet — so that the 
general public can understand — just how deep the water is in 
those reservoirs, how deep the water is at the deepest point in 
Rafferty and how deep the water is, in feet, at the deepest point 
in the Alameda reservoir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, just on a point you made just 
at the beginning. In actual fact, the flooding, the water that was 
let out of Rafferty this year actually represented virtually the 
natural flow levels had there been no dam there at all so you 
would have experienced almost the same flooding experience 
whether the dam would have been there or not this year. 
 
With respect to Rafferty, at the deepest spot it’s 42 feet by the 
dam, and Alameda would be approximately 100 feet right 
beside the dam. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You know 
100 feet of water in southern Saskatchewan is certainly 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

something to be marvelled at and welcomed. And there is a lot 
of recreational opportunities that will be created around these 
reservoirs, that is if the department co-operates and we’re able 
to maintain decent water supplies in those areas. 
 
I think now that the agreements with the Tetzlaff brothers have 
stabilized, and that the dams can now be operated as proper 
reservoirs and dealing with them as any other reservoir would 
be dealt with, will allow an opportunity to start some 
development in those areas and hopefully the department will 
see fit to allow that kind of development to take place. 
 
One of the situations though that’s been an irritant, particularly 
in the Alameda area dealing with Sask Water, has been grazing 
rights. In negotiations with Sask Water, in conjunction with 
SERM, as to what kind of grazing should take place and what 
kind of intensity. Mr. Minister, I’ve had a number of complaints 
from constituents that the requirements set out by Sask Water to 
have 10 head of cattle per quarter section once every three years 
is really not realistic in operating a cattle herd when you have to 
find locations for your animals for two out of the three years. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, have you given any consideration to 
amending that requirement to be more realistic and allow for a 
long-term sustainable usage of that land rather than a usage of 
10 head per quarter once every three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, the policies are 
designed in conjunction with the Department of the 
Environment and the Department of Agriculture. Primarily our 
concern is around sustainability of the grassland. We have been 
— excuse me — we have been consulting with the folks out 
there and we actually have two pilots going right now where 
we’ve allowed . . . because of a concern for fires, we’ve actually 
allowed some additional grazing just to keep the grass down 
and we’ll be monitoring that to see how that works. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
other concerns that was expressed to me was by leaving the 
lands — you might say fallow even though they are in grasses 
— unused for grazing for two out of three years that you could 
develop a potential monoculture in that area where you have 
only one particular type of grass that’s growing rather than the 
variety that is there currently. And that was a concern to some 
of the landowners in the area that if the land wasn’t grazed, if 
you didn’t get that hoof action stirring up the soil and reseeding 
the plants, that you could end up with a monoculture. 
 
So I think that there need to be some consideration given to 
amending the operations there to provide more constant use 
which would reflect the natural state prior to the arrival of the 
white man, and that the buffalo herds would move through there 
and keep the grasses grazed and the hoof action would stir up 
the soil and reseed a number of the plants. So I think it’s 
important that that kind of understanding take place and be 
included in the thought processes for the uses of this land. 
 
One of the other subjects that I wanted to broach this evening is 
one that I’m sure that you are looking forward to and that is 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). I wonder if you could explain to us just what Sask 
Water’s investment in the potato industry is through SPUDCO? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Our involvement in the potato industry 
is around the provision of agronomic services. We participate in 
some limited crop sharing and certainly we are involved in the 
development and operation of storage facilities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll get back 
into that area here after a bit, but I wonder if you could tell us 
how many private potato growers there are in Saskatchewan 
today and if that number has changed since SPUDCO came into 
the industry? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, we don’t deal with any 
dryland producers so we’re not sure of numbers there at all. 
With respect to the Lake Diefenbaker Development Area, there 
was in ’96 about 2,000 acres and three . . . There were three 
farmers that represented 2,000 acres of production. In 1998 
there were approximately 8,500 acres and six farmers. Now 
recognize that that’s not . . . that’s roughly the irrigated acres, 
that’s not necessarily the ones that Sask Water, through 
SPUDCO, has any relationship to at all. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Can you tell us what financial input 
Sask Water or SPUDCO has in the proposed flaking 
dehydration plant at Lucky Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Absolutely no involvement at all. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I guess if you have no involvement 
you wouldn’t know what the current status of that project is, or 
perhaps you do because of just working in the area. Is that 
project going ahead or what’s happened with it to the best of 
your knowledge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’re only referencing articles that 
appeared in the local paper out in that area that suggested that 
the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation has put the flaking 
plant on hold for the time being. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well doesn’t 
SPUDCO have some involvement with the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Our relationship with them is that they 
rent storage space from us. And in the second instance — this 
was a matter of an order-in-council which you are probably 
aware of — we sold to Lake Diefenbaker the Lucky Lake 
storage facility. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, Mr. Minister. I have here an 
agreement. It says, to the Honourable Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. It’s an order-in-council basically with Sask Water 
involvements and the Lucky Lake Potato Storage company and 
the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. And it outlines some 
financial arrangements. Also it deals with the sale and 
purchases of property and debentures. 
 
According to this, the southwest quarter of section 25, township 
23, range 9 west of the third meridian, shown as parcel B in the 
plan, including minerals, was . . . I’m just checking to see 
whether it was bought or sold — and the buildings located on 
that must have been sold, I believe. Yes, sold to the Lake 



April 26, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

Diefenbaker Potato Corporation by Sask Water for a price not 
exceeding 6 million. 
 
What was the price of this sale, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The sale price was the actual cost of 
construction which was $5.81 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Did Sask 
Water originally pay for the cost of this construction or was it 
the Lucky Lake potato terminal that paid for those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, Sask Water paid for it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Was the work on this particular 
construction tendered out, and if so, who was the contractor on 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We actually don’t remember that 
between us. We don’t have the name of the general contractor 
with us but we’ll certainly supply that for you. It was developed 
in a partnership with Con-Force construction and largely due to 
their unique expertise and the new technology that they 
incorporated into the facilities, Con-Force was the contractor 
that was used. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could give us an indication of when these buildings were 
built and whether or not you had an appraisal done on them 
before they were sold. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, there wasn’t an appraisal 
done. Our interest was in recovering the actual cost so we sold 
it at the cost of construction which was, I think I said, 5.81 
million — yes, 5.81. The two facilities — phase 1 was built in 
1997 at a cost of 2.661 and phase 2 was completed in 1998 at a 
cost of 3.12 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Was phase 1 and phase 2 similar? Were 
they identical buildings or was there some reason why the 
difference in the price between 2.6 and 3.1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Our belief is that the increased cost on 
phase 2 is simply because of the increased construction costs, 
just inflationary factors. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t then the 
value of the first project have been of similar value to the 
second project so that both buildings at the time of sale should 
have been worth at least 6.2 million rather than 5.8? I think if an 
appraisal had of been done you may have been able to have 
done better on that than simply turning them over at the cost of 
the construction. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I look further on in this OC (order in 
council), I find that Sask Water has provided financial 
assistance to the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation and the 
Lucky Lake Farm & Water Limited Partnership of a value of 
not to exceed 2.5 million. Was that the amount of money that 
was transferred from the Saskatchewan taxpayers to the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation or the Lucky Lake Farm & 
Water Limited.? And what did Sask Water take as security for 
these monies? 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We essentially provided the financing, I 
guess would be the best way to say it. Three million of that was 
done through a long-term debenture, and 2.81 was a mortgage 
receivable. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Could you give me those numbers 
again, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Three million was by virtue of a 
long-term debenture, and 2.81 million was by way of a 
mortgage receivable. So we secured the . . . that was our 
security on the facility. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 
sale at 6 million or 5.81, was that money collected by Sask 
Water or is that money still outstanding? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I just want to repeat. We 
essentially provided the financing and LDPC (Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation) will or is required then to 
make at a rate, I should say at a rate of 10 per cent, equal 
monthly payments of principal and interest back to Sask Water. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I 
understand why you didn’t want to raise the price up on the 
value of the buildings and the property because you were 
putting up all the money to pay for them. So you lent these 
corporations, Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, the full 
amount of the money that they turned around and paid you for 
those buildings. So it was just going to cost you more money in 
lending if you charged them more money for that property. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the financial due diligence on these 
corporations to ensure that the monies that you have lent them, 
the 3 million debentures and the 2.81 in mortgage, are secure 
and are going to be paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Our interest in protecting the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan was to take the mortgage on the buildings and 
also of course the debentures that I mentioned earlier, and also 
on other assets as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of a return . . . now you’re 
saying 10 per cent on debentures. What about . . . what’s the 
return on the mortgage and what kind of rents are being paid on 
those buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There is 10 per cent on both the 
debenture and the mortgage, and of course we don’t charge rent 
on the buildings. They own the buildings now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What other 
involvement does Sask Water have with any of the 
organizations out there: be it Lucky Lake potato terminal, Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, Lucky Lake Farm & Water 
Limited. . . . I’m not sure who all else might be operating out 
there. I believe there is a corporation, some river’s name from 
Idaho that’s also operating out in that area. 
 
What involvement does Sask Water have with any of these 
corporations and, based on what’s happening presently in the 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1999 

potato industry and particularly with the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation, how viable are those operations and what is 
their long-term projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The only other arrangements we have is 
we lease storage . . . some other storage facilities, I should say, 
to Lake Diefenbaker along with storage being provided to five 
other farmers out in the Lucky Lake area. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 
motion with respect to the order of business on Tuesday, April 
27, 1999. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Order of Business in the Assembly 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(3), the order of business on 
Tuesday, April 27, 1999, shall be to proceed to government 
orders following private Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:25 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


