





























































Hansard: December 06, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 December 6, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 
Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have received a 
communication from the private secretary to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the first 
session of the twenty-fourth legislature at 10 a.m. today, the 6th 
day of December 1999. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
10:01 a.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I am commanded by His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 
declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 
until later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have 
elected a Speaker according to law. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:04 a.m. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that only one candidate has declared his intention 
to stand for election of Speaker. 
 
Therefore, pursuant to rule 26(3), it is my duty to announce that 
Mr. Ron Osika, the hon. member for Melville, is declared 
elected as your Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly I wish 
to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 
the high honour the Assembly has conferred upon me. While I 
leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker's Chair, I 
leave behind all political partisan feelings in order that I may 
discharge with impartiality to all and to the best of my ability 
the various and important duties pertaining to the high office of 
Speaker. 
 
It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of the Assembly and secure for each member the right 
to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 
preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of all 
hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 
facilitate the transaction of the public business in an orderly 
manner and; above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in the 
decisions you entrust to me. 
 
I recall in 1996, my . . . the pleasure I had, my first duty in this 
House as an elected member was to congratulate the Speaker — 
the previous Speaker — to this high office. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish to express 
grateful thanks again and humble acknowledgement of the high 
honour that’s been conferred upon me. And while I leave the 
Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I do leave behind all 
political partisan feelings in order that I may discharge with 
impartiality to all and to the best of my ability the various and 
important duties pertaining to the high office of Speaker. It will 
be my aim and my duty to uphold the principles and traditions 
of this Assembly and secure the right for all members to express 

his or her opinions within the limits necessary to preserve 
decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 
honourable members, the political groups, and the Assembly 
itself. 
 
As we look forward to the new millennium with hope and 
confidence, it is extremely important that we reflect on our 
heritage. We need the courage of our mothers and our 
grandmothers, and we need the faith of our fathers and our 
grandfathers, because it was their courage and faith that built 
this great province that we enjoy today. 
 
We live in an area of Canada that grows enough wheat to feed 
the hungry of the world for a year. There is enough potash 
between this rich soil to supply the needs of that industry for the 
next 400 years. This province is blessed with resources in 
mining that are truly the envy of the entire world. But I . . . just 
let me ask you one simple question. What good is all that 
wealth unless we enjoy a free society? A society in which my 
grandchildren will receive the finest in health care. A society in 
which your children will have the opportunity to appreciate an 
education system that will allow them to compete in a global 
economy. 
 
This morning you honoured me with the position of Speaker of 
the twenty-fourth legislature of Saskatchewan. I accept that 
position with humility and determination. I want the people of 
Saskatchewan to know, and the members of this Assembly to 
recognize, that I respect the past traditions and proceedings of 
this legislature. I am determined to preside over the Assembly 
with the dignity and impartial command that allows debate with 
respect to intellect. 
 
Years ago, while still in my teens, I fulfilled a youthful dream 
in a colourful graduation ceremony. That day, many years ago, I 
promised to “maintiens le droit” as a member of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police. During a 25-year career, I wore that 
uniform with special respect for the institution and the 
endowment that order so richly deserved. 
 
Today I feel a very special privilege to serve as a Speaker of an 
institution with a history that demands respect from every 
member. I share your pride in this heritage of this Assembly. 
This Assembly is known across Canada, and I dare say beyond, 
as a form for intense debate. I have witnessed that intense 
debate and I have participated in. 
 
This morning I pledge my commitment to free debate with 
proper respect for the decorum necessary to conduct 
proceedings in a manner that will continue to honour this 
Assembly. 
 
Reason, passion, and humour in a debate will always be 
acceptable. What will not be acceptable and should not be 
acceptable is a personal attack on another member of this 
Assembly. If we lose respect for one another by the way we 
conduct our affairs in this Assembly, we will contribute to the 
loss of respect for this venerable institution from the very 
people we serve. 
 
I ask for your co-operation as we begin this new session. I want 
to also reassure the Assembly again that I will be fair but firm 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1999 

in protecting the rights and privileges of all members of this 
Assembly. And I conclude by extending a sincere invitation to 
all members to visit me at any time to discuss issues or 
concerns. 
 
The Speaker is the servant of the Assembly and it is my sincere 
desire to work with each and every one of you in the best 
interests of this venerable institution and ultimately the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: —  Mr. Speaker, members of the House, 
it is my pleasure, my honour, to speak today on behalf of the 
government members of this Assembly. On their behalf, on our 
behalf, I want to congratulate you, sir, on your installation to 
this important high office as Speaker of the House and the 
legislature. 
 
I want to begin with a quotation. It was once said that the 
Speaker’s role is, and here I begin the quote. Quote: “. . . a 
daunting task. A task that must be approached with wisdom, 
fairness and dedication.” 
 
I wonder if Mr. Speaker recognizes those accurate and heartfelt 
words. He should, with respect, because they were spoken by 
him — by you, sir — at the beginning of the last session of this 
House upon the installation of his predecessor, the member 
from Moose Jaw North. 
 
And I may say, I think on behalf of all of us, that you promised 
at that time to respect the office and indeed at all times 
comported yourself throughout an often lively session in a 
manner than honoured that promise. In doing so, Mr. Speaker, 
you set an example for all of us; an example by which we might 
govern ourselves during your tenure in the Speaker’s Chair. 
 
Yours, of course, is not an easy role to play. The Speaker of the 
British House of Commons, the Rt. Hon. Betty Boothroyd, has 
observed that being Speaker is, and I quote: “a cross between 
train spotting and bungee jumping.” Elsewhere it has been 
observed that the Speaker’s role is, and here’s another 
quotation: “somewhere between traffic cop and circus 
ringmaster.” It’s true that this Chamber, when it gets energetic, 
as you put it, is sometimes not so much Broad and College as it 
is Barnum and Bailey. 
 
Your challenge, sir, as you have pointed out, is to let the 
peoples’ voices and hearts be heard in full measure and with the 
minimum of restraint but maintaining all the while our rules and 
procedures and a measure of decorum. It’s not an easy task. 
 
Fortunately, I believe that your background in this House, your 
character and personality of which we all know, your 
background in your previous experiences has given you the 
tools that will allow you to rise to the many challenges that you 
will face ahead in the days ahead. As a long-time member of the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, as you’ve said, you know the 
value of patience, strength, fairness, impartiality, and integrity. 
And as a distinguished member of this legislature, you have the 
respect for its traditions and its rules and for the ideals of 
democracy that are the very foundation on which we function 
here. 

And finally, I know that you’ll be willing and able to draw upon 
the resources and experience embodied in Mr. Speaker’s 
dedicated staff and staff of the legislature — the Clerk; the 
Deputy Clerk; Clerk Assistant; the staff of the office; the 
Legislative Law Clerk; the Sergeant-at-Arms; the staffs of the 
Legislative Library and Hansard; and of course, needless to 
say, Mr. Speaker, from time to time, the advice of the good 
members of this House as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have every confidence in you and express 
every good wish that you should enjoy your tenure. I know I 
speak for all members of the House in saying so. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, good luck, and God speed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now is the 
time the official opposition is supposed to pass along our 
congratulations on the election of the new Speaker. 
Unfortunately we cannot congratulate this Speaker on his 
election because there was no election. Instead there was an 
auction. The member from Melville put himself on the auction 
block to be sold to the highest bidder. The sale price was the 
Speaker’s Chair. 
 
The Speaker is the highest office in this legislature. The 
Speaker’s Chair is supposed to be the most respected position in 
this legislature, but instead the Premier has chosen to cheapen 
and demean the office of Speaker by using it as a bargaining 
chip in the political fire sale of the Liberal MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) 
 
You know, the Speaker tries to portray himself as some sort of 
great parliamentarian. But his actions over the past few weeks 
have shown that he is anything but. The Premier was bound and 
determined to buy back the majority that voters took away from 
him on September 16. And if he had to damage the very 
integrity of this institution by putting the Speaker’s Chair on the 
auction block, then so be it. There was no price too high for the 
Premier to pay in order to buy back his majority. 
 
Just look at how he has perverted the rule governing the 
election of Speaker. The rules governing the election of Speaker 
were adopted by this legislature on April 11, 1991, with the full 
support of the NDP (New Democratic Party) including the 
member from Riversdale. 
 
I would like to read a few excerpts from the report of the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures that implemented 
this important rule change. The committee report said and I 
quote: 
 

The Speaker is a servant of the whole House, . . . 
 
Not a servant of the government nor of the opposition. 
 
The committee concluded that to perform this role, the 
Speaker must enjoy the full trust and confidence of the 
House. 
 
The impression of a Speaker’s independence is sometimes 
tarnished by a government’s influence in the selection 



December 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

process. 
 
In difficult situations . . . particularly when political stakes 
are high . . . 

 
It is vitally important that the Speaker have the trust and 
support of all members. 
 
When the manner in which a Speaker came to occupy the 
Chair comes into question . . . 
 
This of course makes the Speaker’s job doubly difficult, 
. . . 
 
And does nothing for Member’s respect for the position. 

 
The committee was clearly stating that in order for the Speaker 
to be respected by all members, he must be elected by all 
members. This Speaker was not elected by the members. The 
opposition members had no say in this matter. In fact, most of 
the members on the government side of the House had no say in 
this matter. 
 
This Speaker was put in the Chair as part of a backroom deal 
cut between two members — the Premier and the Liberal 
leader. A deal designed to buy the Liberals to overturn the 
election results and to give the Premier back the majority that 
voters took away from him. This clearly is a perversion of the 
process. 
 
Now I’ve heard the Premier say: if the Saskatchewan Party is so 
concerned, why didn’t they run a candidate, then we would 
have had an election. It’s a little like listening to Don King 
defend one of his fights. Simply put, the fix was in. 
 
The Premier needed the member from Melville in the Speaker’s 
Chair in order to complete his takeover of the Liberals. He 
decried that no one on that side was . . . decried that no one on 
that side was allowed to run against him or vote against him. 
That’s hardly the kind of fair and open process outlined in the 
rules adopted in 1991. 
 
And it’s interesting to read the words of the current Deputy 
Premier, who spoke in favour of this rule change back in 1991. 
The Deputy Premier said: 
 

The election of Speaker must follow three important 
principles: democracy, openness, and accountability. 
 

Mr. Deputy Premier, it’s little more than a little ironic that you 
are the same member who brokered the backroom deal that put 
the member from Melville in the Speaker’s Chair. Democracy, 
openness, and accountability — you have failed on every count. 
 
Democracy — there was no democracy. There was no election. 
The Speaker was appointed as part of a political payoff. 
Openness — there was nothing open about it. The Speaker’s 
appointment was part of a backroom deal cooked up behind 
closed doors, and some might even say in the dead of the night. 
Accountability — the Speaker is supposed to be accountable to 
all members of the House, but a Speaker appointed by the 
government side of the House is only accountable to the 
government side of the House. 

You know, following the 1995 election, we saw how the system 
is supposed to work. We had two candidates for Speaker — 
both from the same party; both seeking the support of all 
members of this House. We had a fair and democratic election. 
And when it was over the new Speaker took the Chair with the 
confidence of all of the members of the House. That Speaker 
was elected and he was respected. The member from Moose 
Jaw Palliser not only was democratically elected to the role of 
Speaker, but also served this Assembly in a manner befitting the 
role of a fully elected Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — He received and maintained the respect 
of all members. The Speaker of the twenty-third legislature for 
the province of Saskatchewan worked hard to enhance the role 
of Speaker both within this Assembly and across the province. 
He worked diligently to explain and to provide an 
understanding of our political process to school children by 
visiting schools in every constituency. These visits also 
included the elected member no matter which side of the House 
they sat on. 
 
For his hard work on behalf of all of us with school children, 
for his fairness and his respect for this great institution, for his 
respect for and to all members of this Assembly, we salute him 
— the member for Moose Jaw Palliser, the Speaker of the 
twenty-third legislature of Saskatchewan. We salute him and 
thank him for making the role of Speaker a non-partisan and 
respected position during his tenure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I do, however, lament the loss of one 
half of the crew of the pirates of the Saskatchewan legislature 
and their daily parade into this Assembly. Over the past decade, 
legislatures all over this country took a huge step forward by 
going to an elected Speaker. Today, the Saskatchewan 
legislature took a huge step backwards. 
 
The first Speaker of the 21st century was appointed by the 
government; a procedure more in keeping with the 19th 
century. It is a sad day for this Assembly. We know have a 
process that is tainted, a premier who is prepared to 
compromise even the highest office of this Assembly in order to 
cling to power. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I regret to say that we 
strongly object to the Premier’s appointment of the new 
Speaker, and we strongly object to the tainted process by which 
this Speaker has assumed office. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — This House will now recess until 2 p.m. this 
day when the Lieutenant Governor will be here to read the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 
 


