





























































Hansard: December 07, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 13 
 December 7, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, 
pursuant to the rule 27, it is your duty at this time to elect a 
Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the Whole. The 
procedure to be used in this election is the same as those used to 
elect a Speaker. I now ask the Clerk to initiate the proceeding. 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that only one candidate has declared his intention 
to stand for the election as Deputy Speaker. That member is the 
member for Regina Coronation Park, Mr. Kim Trew. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 27(4) and 26(3), it is my 
pleasure to announce that Mr. Kim Trew, the hon. member for 
Regina Coronation Park, is elected as Deputy Speaker and 
Chair of the Committee of the Whole. Congratulations. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 
I would ask, by leave of the Assembly, to move the following 
motion, seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone, the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

By leave of the Assembly, that Mr. Peter Prebble, member 
for the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone, be appointed 
to preside as Deputy Chair of Committees of this 
Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Referral of Annual Reports to the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Before orders of the day, by leave, I would move 
several motions that are regular motions and I’d ask leave to do 
that. 
 
The first being a motion moved and seconded by the Premier, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that the annual reports and 
financial statements of various Crown corporations, related 
agencies, as were tabled during the 23rd legislature and not 
reported upon by the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations during the legislature, be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 

I so move. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the motion was to be made 
by leave so we need to vote on the determination of leave first 
before we vote on the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member from Cannington for 
bringing that to my attention and I would now ask the Assembly 
if leave is granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest: 
 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor, as tabled 
during the twenty-third legislature and not reported by the 
Standing Committee of Public Accounts and as tabled in 
the present session, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts. 
 

I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled during the twenty-third legislature and not 
reported upon by the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts, as submitted to the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly pursuant to The Financial Administration Act, 
1993, and as tabled in the present session be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
I so move. 

 
Leave granted. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Annual Report to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Victoria: 

 
That, by leave of the Assembly, that the annual report of 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Communications. 
 

I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 
move a motion to establish the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move and I would 
ask, seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly, the opposition 
Deputy Leader: 
 

That not withstanding an order of reference dated 
December 6, 1999 made pursuant to rule 94(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, members Boyd, Bjornerud, Harpauer, 
Harper, Lingenfelter, Melenchuk, Serby, Wartman, 
Weekes be appointed forthwith the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture; and that the said committee be severally 
empowered to examine and inquire into such matters and 
things as may be referred to it by this Assembly and to 
report from time to time their observations thereon with 
powers to send for persons, papers, records, and to 
examine witnesses under oath. And further at this present 
time that the committee do specifically receive and report 
on representations from interested parties and individuals 
with respect to the farm income crisis now facing western 
Canadian farmers; and to this purpose the said committee 
be authorized to conduct its proceedings in the Legislative 
Chamber except when the Assembly is sitting, and that the 
committee proceedings be televised by the Legislative 
Assembly on Saskatchewan’s Legislative Network. 

 
And further that the Legislative Assembly do also broadcast 
the audio of the proceedings on Internet via the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan web site. 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House 
now recess until 1:30 p.m. today. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Page 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Before routine proceedings, my 
colleagues, I wonder if I might beg your indulgence in 
introducing an addition to one . . . to the staff of pages that are 
here to serve us. I would like to introduce Rebecca Fiissel. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today on a 
very eventful day in agriculture we are joined by a number of 
folks from the agriculture community too numerous to mention 
to you individually, but there are folks representing farm groups 
from all over the province. On behalf of the official opposition, 
I would like to welcome them to the Assembly here this 
afternoon and look forward to their presentations and remarks 
later in the day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with 
my colleague and friend from Kindersley in welcoming at least 
some of the farm delegation who will be with us today, and 
later today; and also thank them, and I might add, other 
members of the legislature including our coalition members and 
members of the opposition who have been actually very helpful 
in putting forward a solid front in the approach to Ottawa. 
 
So I just want to thank the individuals who are here today and I 
very, very much look forward to the comments and issues that 
you will raise here today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the Assembly through 
you two guests who are very special to me, my son, Alan 
MacKinnon and his girlfriend, Jen Holden. They’re both 
university students and Alan is taking a lot of classes in 
agriculture and thought he would come to listen to the debates 
today. 
 
So I ask you to welcome and I ask them to stand in the 
Speaker’s gallery — Alan and Jen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce you 
and through you to the Assembly, my husband, Larry Harpauer, 
and through the program of take a child to work for a day, my 
daughter, Shannon Harpauer, and an additional student, Tessa 
Williams. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the 
Assembly, Mr. Allan Kerpan, our MP (Member of Parliament) 
from Blackstrap, and welcome him to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, Joe McMaster, who I’ll ask to stand. And Joe is 
originally from Plenty but he’s moved into Saskatoon and is 
attending the University of Saskatchewan, studying political 
science. 
 
So today will be hopefully a useful exercise. I think actually a 
very good day to come with what’s going to happen here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d like all members of the Assembly to welcome Joe to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’d like to introduce a former sitting member of 
this Saskatchewan legislature, Mr. Gerald Muirhead, right there 
behind the bar. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you my father, someone who I’ve known all of my life, and I 
hope the relationship will continue for many years to come. 
And also to remind him that no heckling is permitted while I’m 
speaking later on. So I’d like the House to welcome him here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to recognize in the gallery, Gord Gunoff and other 
members of IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers) and John MacLeod, building trades, and welcome you 
here on an important day to listen to rural concerns in the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this House, two farm 
families from my constituency, Mr. and Mrs. John Schreiner, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Dave Weins. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Family Farm Crisis 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise on behalf 
of the official opposition to speak for the Saskatchewan farmers. 
My colleagues and I have received numerous letters from the farm 
families and I would like to share with the Assembly some of the 
sentiments that have been expressed to us. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Everything that my mom and dad ever made went back into 
their 12-quarter farm. They never splurged on anything and 
definitely don’t have any luxuries. They never took my sister 
and I on a holiday because they couldn’t afford it. I always 
thought my sister and I were deprived because we didn’t 
have lots of clothes and we didn’t have our own brand new 
vehicles when we turned 16. I have to sit back and watch 
everything that my dad achieved in his 37 years of farming 
go down the drain. Their retirement is going down the 
drain because everything always went back into the farm 
so they could keep up and make the payments. Years of 
hard work and tears are down the drain. 
 
Even if my mom and dad survive another year on the farm, 
it won’t be the same. The hurt of knowing this cannot even 
be said. It won’t be passed down to any more family ever 
again. And that’s not because I don’t want to continue in 
my father’s footsteps, it’s because we can’t make a living. 
 
The government is slapping farmers in the face. Could I 
charge the government with abuse? They would slap me in 
the face and laugh at how pitiful I am, and continue on 
with turning Canada into their goal of becoming the next 
Third World country. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gold Ribbon Campaign 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1905, the year we 
became a province, the Saskatchewan farm pioneer named 
Mabel Wilson Hawthorne wrote the following in her diary: 
 

How did we overcome the insurmountable barriers in 
making a home which called forth every ounce of human 
strength we had to give? How did we do it? Baking, 
gardening, milking, pickling, and canning, doing our own 
sewing for our families didn’t leave much time for 
dreaming. And yet the dreams were there. Engrossed in our 
homes, we accepted all that went with it, but always 
dreaming of better days to come. 

 
Today, Mr. Speaker, nearly a century later, the Saskatchewan 
Women’s Agricultural Network, SWAN, is launching a gold 
ribbon campaign asking each of us to wear a gold ribbon as a 
symbol of hope and in support of our farm families and rural 
communities. 
 
A symbol of hope for farm families today who just like Mabel 
Hawthorne are looking forward to better days to come. The 
gold ribbon campaign is in recognition of the fact that farm 
families are under great stress. 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, we are here today to listen, to give 
encouragement, and most importantly, to act in support of our 
farm families. I, and all members, wear the gold ribbon with 
pride and with conviction. 
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Crisis 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I, too, rise 
today on behalf of the farmers and their families of 
Saskatchewan. And would like to share one of their stories, and 
I quote: 
 

It is difficult to explain the toll and the effect that the farm 
crisis has had on my husband, myself, and my family. Who 
would have ever guessed that the year 1998 would be so 
disruptive for our family. As usual, the crop was put in this 
spring, despite the fact there was basically no moisture. 
 
My husband had to have his gall bladder removed and so 
he had scheduled his surgery sandwiched between seeding 
and springtime. My husband has never been hospitalized 
before in his life. The stress mounted daily as he awaited 
his surgery and as he awaited the growth of the crop. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, only a wife knows and understands the pride 
that men have that does not allow them to speak of their 
innermost concerns and fears. This is what the government does 
not see. It does not see farmers losing their pride and 
self-respect. It does not see the wives who try to improve their 
husband’s frame of mind only to have their husband turn 
against them. And the government cannot see the innermost 
turmoil of a farmer. Nor does the government want to see the 
despair in the eyes of the farmer. 
 
The beginning of 1999 of course brought no relief — take 
extensions on loans, buy a little at a time, hope for AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance). I don’t think so; 
hope is long-gone, not even a subject to be brought up on the 
farm these days. 
 
This is the real farm crisis — the loss of hope, continued 
discouragement and deep depression and a disregard for 
government figures who are clueless as to the plight of the 
farmers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Distress Letter 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In all the discussions 
on the current farm situation as we talk about subsidies and 
international markets and so on, it’s quite easy to forget the 
human face behind the crisis. We are, after all, talking about 
human lives, human aspirations, human destinies. 
 
We should not forget this simple fact, humbling fact. To help 
keep our focus where it belongs — on the people involved — I 

want to read to you a portion of a letter received by Carol 
Skelton, and I quote: 
 

When Mr. Vanclief said losing his farm was the best thing 
that happened to him because his number one goal in life 
was to become the Minister of Agriculture, it doesn’t 
answer the question: what of the people whose number one 
goal in life is to become farmers? Apparently that doesn’t 
count any more. 

 
Those gifts from our fairy godmother only count when it 
happened to him. Our Christmas gift to each other this 
year, Mr. Speaker, is to pool the resources and try to make 
our truck payment. 
 

A voice, Mr. Speaker, of many voices to keep in mind during 
our deliberations. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Crisis 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to also 
rise and share the story of one Saskatchewan farm family with the 
Assembly, and I quote: 
 

Our family is in a farm crisis. We are durum farmers in 
southwest Saskatchewan who farm two sections of land. My 
husband and I were both raised on farms and we chose to 
raise our family on the farm. We were not gifted with the 
family farm and realize only too well the stress of trying to 
make a farm work financially. 

 
We have applied for AIDA but have heard nothing. If one 
listens to the rumour mill, I do not think we should expect 
any amount of support from them. We cashed in on all the 
RRSPs that we had to make last year’s payments. What 
more are we expected to do? We do not want a hand-out. 
We want a fair value for the product we grow. We need the 
government to see our family as worthwhile contributors to 
our Canadian society. 

 
I need the government to understand that I am working as 
hard as I can to support my family in our chosen lifestyle 
of farming. Times are very financially tough for us right 
now. The big banks do not care about us but our 
government should. We farmers are talking about survival; 
not acquiring the newest truck, not travelling to Hawaii for 
the winter, not building the biggest, newest home. 

 
Please listen to us. Please understand our situation and help 
us through it. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Daughter’s Letter 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I join my colleagues from the 
House in reading from a farm letter . . . (inaudible) . . . This one 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

is from a 17-year-old farm daughter who displays a calmness 
and a wisdom that many might envy. 
 
She writes about who she calls the “average” farmer and what 
the reaction must have been when average farmers across the 
prairies flicked on their TVs to be told by the Prime Minister 
that they really have no problems. She writes: “Can you 
visualize the scene as the bomb was dropped?” 
 

My name (she says) is Nicole Stenerson. I live on a farm. I 
never claim to be a farmer because I know I will never stay 
on the farm or take over the family farm. For now, I just 
live there. The average farmer I spoke of is my father. I 
can’t imagine the frustration my father feels and the 
betrayal he felt at that moment when our Prime Minister 
said that we didn’t need any help. 

 
She closes by saying: 
 

Although I empathize with my father, I will never totally 
understand the spirit that ties farmers to the land. It’s a love 
you have to be born with. I don’t believe it’s a tie you can 
develop. Our federal government is breaking those ties, 
and watching the effects is heartbreaking. 

 
And we can add, Mr. Speaker, listening to Nicole’s letter is also 
heartbreaking. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
directed to the Premier. Mr. Premier, later today this Assembly 
will hold a special emergency debate on the current farm crisis, 
an idea first proposed by the Saskatchewan Party just one week 
after the election. Of course you were too busy back then, 
buying off the Liberals, to pay much attention to the farm crisis. 
 
Nevertheless the Saskatchewan Party is pleased that this debate 
is finally taking place, and we support the farm groups’ call for 
a billion dollars of emergency assistance for our farm families. 
 
However there is a lot more that your government should and 
could be doing. None of these were addressed in the Throne 
Speech, so we’re asking you about them today. 
 
Mr. Premier, your recent mid-term financial report showed a 
$250 million windfall from increased oil revenues. What plans 
does your government have to provide immediate assistance to 
farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to hear 
the Leader of the Opposition reiterate again his support in what 
has been a non-partisan, non-political, and really quite a 
remarkable show of unity by Saskatchewan farm people and 
Saskatchewan people generally on this crisis which takes place. 

And today we’ll hear from the various constituent elements and 
hope that this will add further weight to the arguments that we 
are advancing. 
 
In the course of the session, and the course of the weeks ahead, 
the government will be announcing some specific matters as to 
what the Saskatchewan government can or cannot do. But I 
would remind the Leader of the Official Opposition — which 
I’m sure that he will accept — this problem really is a problem 
that can only be addressed at the national level given the fact 
that there are huge subsidies by the Americans and the 
Europeans. And the Saskatchewan government or Manitoba 
government or for that matter Alberta government, cannot do 
the solutions. The solutions have to be done federally, 
internationally, and we’ll do our best as we can provincially as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier perhaps forgets 
that for eight years the NDP (New Democratic Party) turned its 
back on rural Saskatchewan. That’s why on September 16, 
Saskatchewan turned its back on the NDP. 
 
But we wonder, we wonder, Mr. Speaker, did the NDP get the 
message? Judging from yesterday’s Speech from the Throne, 
the answer is no. The Throne Speech contained absolutely no 
direct help for Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Premier, today the Saskatchewan Party is releasing the 
results of a poll — and I know you have great respect for our 
polls — showing that 69 per cent of Saskatchewan . . . 69 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people think the province must also come 
up with new money to help farm families. That’s people polled 
in both rural and urban Saskatchewan; people who recognize 
the impact that the crisis is having on all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, what further steps — beyond what we know and 
agree that the federal government has to do — what further 
steps does your government intend to take to address the farm 
crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we need to 
have the benefit of the polls of the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party. Everybody knows, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very serious 
crisis and I don’t think we need to have the numbers indicated 
by the Leader of the Opposition in this regard. 
 
But I would draw the attention of the Leader of the Official 
Opposition to page five of the Speech from the Throne where 
amongst other matters the government outlined in broad general 
terms negotiating with the federal government to withdraw 
from AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), 
something which the Leader of the Opposition supports; reduce 
high input costs facing farm businesses, presumably something 
the Leader of the Opposition supports; reduce the cost of crop 
insurance and enhance producer coverage, something which I’m 
assuming that the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party agrees, 
supports; farm input costs monitoring program; and I could go 
on. 
 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

It’s stated in the Speech from the Throne — a very good Speech 
from the Throne — it is a brand new day and we intend to 
pursue these and other areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing very, 
very little new from the Premier. But one thing that he did say 
in his Speech from the Throne, he’s talked about the 
government would be monitoring farm input costs. Now most 
farmers that I know — and I happen to be one myself — do a 
pretty good job of monitoring their own farm input costs. What 
they really need is someone to start lowering their input costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — They need somebody, Mr. Speaker, who 
will lower education tax, property tax, fuel tax, Saskatchewan 
Power bills, SaskEnergy bills. Your government directly 
controls these costs, and your government has raised these costs 
time and time again over the last eight years. 
 
Mr. Premier, instead of monitoring input costs, when are you 
going to start lowering these input costs that you directly 
control? How much provincial funding are you going to 
dedicate to lower government controlled farm input costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the government of 
Saskatchewan has taken the view over the last eight years of our 
administration, and with the one sad period of expectation in the 
1980s, throughout the history of the province of Saskatchewan, 
that our Crown corporations are owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan — farmers, business people, working men and 
women — and that the Crown corporations have an obligation 
to provide as efficiently and at as low cost as possible the 
services of those Crown corporations, and do so in accordance 
with commercial standards which were acceptable both at home 
and abroad. 
 
I think by every measurement, every objective measurement, 
that goal has been obtained and achieved by the Crown 
corporations and we’ll continue on that line. And unlike the 
Saskatchewan Party, we will not support the privatization and 
the sell-off of the Crowns to the large corporation friends that 
you have, and then just watch the prices go up for farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
Saskatchewan Party does agree that the federal government has 
the major role to play in addressing the current farm crisis. 
However, your government also has a role to play. After all 
let’s remember, the NDP government is equally responsible for 
creating this problem in the first place when you ripped up 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) back in 1992 and 
never replaced it with anything. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to take responsibility for your 
government’s attack on farm families and when are we going to 
see a long-term safety net program for this province? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I do really 
sincerely hope — and I still think that we can do this in a 
non-partisan and political way — but I do want to draw to the 
attention of the Leader of the so-called Saskatchewan Party 
what took place by way of a statement in The Western 
Producer. The Western Producer is dated November 16, 1995 
and the headline which I have in front of me here says, in The 
Western Producer, “Reformer likes decentralization” by Elwin 
Hermanson. And it is stated as follows, is written by the Leader 
of the Opposition, quote: 
 

Don Mazankowski’s GRIP, guaranteed revenue insurance 
plan program, has been a disaster. 

 
And then when the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was a 
member of the House of Commons, this is what he had to say 
about the Crow rate, which added $325 million every year extra 
burden to the farmers of Saskatchewan. He said this on March 
30, 1995, page 11267, quote: 
 

For years farmers have been saying they do not mind doing 
their share and losing the rail subsidy . . . 

 
is the quotation referred to the Crow rate. That’s your position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I sense that the Premier quit mid-sentence. 
And I would appreciate it if he would take quotes from the House 
of Commons in context. Nevertheless we’ll debate that another 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to look across the floor and see the 
new NDP-Liberal partnership. Now on one hand we have the 
party that ripped up GRIP, and it’s joined at the hip by the party 
that invented AIDA. It’s no wonder farm families aren’t exactly 
jumping for joy. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan farm families need a billion dollars 
of cash assistance from Ottawa, but they also need a sustainable 
long-term safety net program so that we’re not in the same 
jackpot again year after year after year. You’ve had several 
months, in fact you could even argue several years to work on a 
replacement for GRIP. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Throne Speech says you are working on a 
safety net program. Will you table your proposal for a 
long-term safety net program today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Leader 
of the Opposition will agree with me in this regard, at least I 
hope he does. I think that there are two main farm programs on 
the national level — I mean federal/provincial — which have 
some potential for being of assistance. Obviously one is (NISA) 
Net Income Stabilization Account and the other one is crop 
insurance which needs to be improved and enhanced. We’ve 
talked about . . . 
 
At the same time, it’s in the Speech from the Throne as the 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

Deputy Premier has pointed out for me as well. As well, the 
Minister of Agriculture has been in deliberation even before the 
provincial election with federal/provincial governments on the 
question of whether or not we can devise an acceptable third 
line of defence or a permanent farm safety program as you have 
indicated. I think that this is an idea which needs to be explored 
very much but we face the federal government whose view is 
that NISA and crop insurance should be the basic programs and 
may need to be enhanced and/or changed, that’s good enough. 
In addition to that, we should look at your suggestions as well 
and we are going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, when you are being pushed 
over a cliff, exploration isn’t exactly necessary. What you need 
is a net under there to catch you and right now people are going 
over the cliff. 
 
We’ve had a major farm crisis for over a year now and still, I 
understand, Mr. Premier, that there is no plan in place now. 
What are you waiting for? 
 
Mr. Premier, having a plan or not having a plan is exactly how 
we wound up with AIDA. The NDP Minister of Agriculture 
wouldn’t take part in the talks. He refused. He refused to go to 
the table; instead he stayed home. Of course this was such a 
brilliant idea that the people of Watrous decided he should stay 
home for good. 
 
Mr. Premier, the federal government is talking about simply 
extending some version of AIDA. AIDA is a complete failure. 
When are you going to present a counter-proposal that works 
for Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that we need to 
have not only immediate assistance — the 1.3 billion for 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan, I think is accepted by everybody 
in this House — we also need concurrently additional programs 
which will be there forever, if I can put it that way, such as 
NISA, or crop insurance, or some form of a third line of 
defence program, those which are being worked on and there’s 
no need about that either. 
 
But I do remind the Leader of the Opposition that it was he who 
was arguing strenuously and regularly that we should rush into 
signing AIDA. I recall that very specifically. His argument was: 
don’t delay, sign into AIDA because it was a great idea. And 
then when we signed into AIDA, after the farmers got them, 
hey it was the wrong thing to do; you shouldn’t be signing into 
AIDA. This is an example of what happens when you are 
dominated totally by political consideration rather than 
consideration for the real hurt and pain of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
remind the Premier that it’s been the Saskatchewan Party that’s 
been the initiator of solutions to the problem. We’ve been 
waiting for a response from the government. 

I’m just going to ask a very short and simple question: do you 
have the foggiest notion about what to do about our safety net 
situation? Do you have the foggiest idea what to put in place to 
replace GRIP? Do you have anything at all, anything, the 
slightest sliver of hope, in the form of a program that you can 
table in the legislature today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1400) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, not only does the 
government have, as it has stated in the Speech from the Throne 
yesterday, a rather detailed Speech from the Throne, what we 
can do provincially and what we have to do on a 
federal-provincial basis . . . on a federal-provincial basis. That 
has been set out. 
 
And I’ll go one step further to the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, we actually have in mind those things that we do not 
want to do. And what we do not want to do and what we never 
wanted to do was to eliminate the Crow rate subsidy, which is 
what that leader argued for in the House of Commons and to 
which he added $350 million a year to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Aid Programs 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Agriculture, a 
member of the so-called NDP-Liberal coalition which looks 
pretty NDP to me over there. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, last week you represented the 
Government of Saskatchewan at the WTO (World Trade 
Organization) talks in Seattle. Unfortunately, judging from the 
television reports, Seattle didn’t amount to much more than 
smoke and mirrors, which you would know all about. But 
before . . . But we must understand that while your sidekick 
from North Battleford was out in search of the perfect 
Starbucks coffee, you and Vanclief, I understand, had a little 
talk about agriculture policy. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan farmers are wondering how 
your chat with the federal Agriculture minister went? Can you 
assure the farm leaders in our gallery today, and the farm people 
of Saskatchewan today, that you have a commitment from Lyle 
Vanclief that all of the 1998 AIDA money still outstanding will 
be paid to Saskatchewan farm families before Christmas as he 
committed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it’s 
a great pleasure to stand in this House again as part of a 
coalition government that may look, may look quite NDP, but I 
want to say the members opposite look pretty Conservative to 
me as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — They look like a lot of 
Conservatives to me. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members 
opposite and to the member from Kindersley that the, the issue 
here, Mr. Speaker, is not one I think of whether . . . the Leader 
of the Opposition, when he was in the House of Commons, said 
for years farmers have been saying they do not mind doing their 
fair share and losing the Crow subsidy, he was talking about. I 
don’t know which farmers you were talking to, which farmers 
you were talking to, but it certainly wasn’t the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They wanted the subsidies in place on transportation, and you 
were a big part of getting rid of them. What the farmers should 
expect from you is an apology for getting rid of the agricultural 
subsidies that we’re now trying to fight to get back for the 
farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, the AIDA program is a failure, and 
if you care to talk with your coalition partner, the NDP member 
over here, we’ll have an idea that people all over Saskatchewan 
agree with that. Even Vanclief, Lyle Vanclief, says the AIDA 
program is a nightmare. John Harvard, the federal Liberal Chair 
of the House of Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture 
says AIDA is an absolute failure. 
 
Another Ontario Liberal MP says he’s ashamed of the Liberal 
AIDA program. But even you now have admitted that the 
AIDA program is a bust. 
 
But before we can move to a new program for 1999, farmers 
need to be paid out for 1998. The latest information out of the 
AIDA office in Ottawa indicates that almost 5,000 farmers still 
have not had their AIDA applications approved or looked at, 
processed for 1998. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, what specific 
measures has your government taken to ensure the farm 
families of Saskatchewan will have an AIDA cheque in the mail 
to them before Christmas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member in particular because I think he’s a little confused when 
he speaks about AIDA. Anyone who will remember being in 
this House earlier this year will remember when the then 
minister of Agriculture was reviewing the terms of AIDA 
carefully, that member said, sign up and sign now. He pushed 
hard — yes he did — he pushed hard and the Leader of the 
Opposition said, get on with it, sign up to AIDA right away. 
That’s what they said. Well the member shakes his head but 
he’s not telling the truth when he shakes his head because he 
pushed, he pushed the government to sign AIDA quickly. And 
then when it didn’t work . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all members please 
to co-operate and choose your words judiciously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say when the 
Leader of the Opposition inadvertently misled the people to 
believe that they should sign up, they should sign up, he was 

doing a disservice — a disservice to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. And then when it doesn’t work, what does he 
say? You shouldn’t have signed up. Get out of it as quick as 
you can. Now which of those two policies is the Conservative 
Sask Party policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 
inadvertently says to the people of Saskatchewan they had no 
role in the AIDA program when indeed Upshall was down there 
negotiating, trying to put the program together for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. And what did we get? Now we got the 
disaster that we have called AIDA. And even you have admitted 
it is a disaster in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s move on to the federal government’s 
commitment for another $170 million in the AIDA program to 
address negative margins for 1998. Why has not a single farmer 
in Saskatchewan had a negative margin application processed? 
It’s a question that we have been asked many times on this side 
of the House and it’s a question we have asked the AIDA 
officials in Ottawa. And they tell us it’s because you in the 
province of Saskatchewan have not signed off on the ’98 
program for AIDA and that’s why no negative margin 
applications have been processed. 
 
Is that true, Mr. Minister? Are the negative margin applications 
being held up because your government has not signed off on 
the ’98 program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’ve had a hard time following the 
member. First of all, they pushed us to get into AIDA. The 
Leader of the Opposition pushed hard. Then he pushes us to get 
out. Now I think the member from Kindersley’s saying, be in it 
a little bit. 
 
Which of those three policies then is the one we should follow? 
Is it that we should be in, as your leader said earlier in the year? 
Is it that we should get out? Or are you now saying we should 
stay in a little bit? 
 
But I want to quote from the World Spectator Moosomin, 
Monday, March 23, 1998, when the Leader of the Opposition 
party said, it says: “Elwin Hermanson said: ‘I don’t believe in 
making special deals for farmers,’” continuing his policy of 
getting rid of subsidies to farmers. 
 
The reason we’re in this position is because you, sir, and your 
colleagues in the Reform Party supported the Liberal 
government in getting rid of farm policy and subsidies, the 
Crow rate. You know that. And you deserve to apologize to the 
farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — . . . a few weeks ago the government opposition 
farm leaders agreed the province should pull out of the 1999 
funding for the AIDA program and use it to top up NISA 
accounts. Would you share with the Assembly this afternoon 
the progress you have made in negotiating the NISA top-up 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

with the federal government, and how soon the farmers of 
Saskatchewan can expect to access those funds in their NISA 
accounts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to report to the members of 
the Assembly that we have had discussions with the federal 
government. We haven’t got an official opinion but it’s our 
understanding that they will allow the provincial portion of the 
1999 AIDA, that approximately 100, $107 million, to come out 
to be used as a top-up to NISA. And as the Leader of the 
Opposition in the interviews that were done after the last 
coalition meeting explained, he indicated it would probably take 
till early February to get the payments made, and that’s 
probably not far off. 
 
But I just want to say when it comes to support for farmers in 
this province, you and I and all taxpayers should know that they 
do support farmers as compared . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, as compared to any other province. 
 
Well you may not believe that the taxpayers in this province 
support farmers, but compared to Alberta we pay per capita 
double what taxpayers in Alberta pay towards supporting our 
farm families. 
 
This is an issue that needs to go to Ottawa and the members 
opposite know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s leave 
the polygraphic statements behind and let’s get back to the 
truth. I want to ask a question of the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party fully supports the call for 
$1 billion of assistance from Ottawa. However we have just 
outlined all of the things that your government could be doing: 
developing a long-term safety net, lowering property taxes, 
lowering fuel taxes, lowering utility rates. We could mention 
that you could do something about saving short-line railways, 
you could do more about fixing provincial roads and highways. 
These are things that you should be doing to help struggling 
farm families. 
 
When are you going to start to address these issues? When are 
you going to get the message that the voters sent you on 
September 16? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think that I’ve already 
indicated to the Leader of the Opposition the outline in the 
Speech from the Throne which . . . well again, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a bit confusing. Yesterday they said this Speech from the 
Throne contained everything that they wanted and . . . 
(inaudible) . . . but today they say, oh no it’s not our Speech 
from the Throne and it contains nothing whatsoever. 
 
Now we are looking at every option that we can to provide 

provincial assistance but I repeat again — and if the Leader of 
the Opposition is sincere and I believe he is sincere — that this 
is a national/international situation. The solution has to be 
found at Ottawa, and it has to be found on the basis of a unified 
voice for all the farmers and farm families and communities of 
this province. 
 
That means politically, and I want to thank and congratulate the 
Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Liberal Party, for 
being a part of . . . together with the farm organizations, being a 
part of this process. That is where the solution lies. The solution 
does not lie when individual’s items — as important as they 
may be — the solution will never be found there. It will only be 
found when this House and this province continues to speak 
loudly with a unified voice for the family farms of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

World Trade Talks in Seattle 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make 
a ministerial statement on the world trade talks in Seattle last 
week. As we all know the permanent solution to the farm crisis 
is an end to international export subsidies. An end to export 
subsidies would allow our Saskatchewan producers to compete 
on a level playing field. 
 
We know that our producers are as productive and as efficient 
as any in the world and given an open and fair market, they can 
compete with producers from any country in the world. 
 
With that in mind, the Saskatchewan delegation, including the 
Deputy Premier, went to Seattle last week in the hope that the 
new round of talks would put the issue of export subsidies 
clearly on the agenda. Notwithstanding the demonstrations and 
tear gas, we were encouraged in the first days of the conference. 
Caucus meetings of the Canadian delegation went well. Drafts 
of an agricultural communiqué which we were shown made 
reference to the need for early substantial reductions in export 
subsidies and eventual complete elimination. 
 
We knew from the outset that the European Union was 
unenthusiastic, but we were led to believe that in the face of a 
common front by Canada, the U.S. and members of the Cairns 
group, the European Union would reluctantly agree. The 
Governor of Idaho pointed out that without trade with his state, 
every Idahoan would be required to eat 67 potatoes per day. I 
pointed out then that in Saskatchewan if we were not trading, 
every resident of this province would have to eat 58 loaves of 
bread per day washed down with 60 bottles of beer and an 
unidentified quantity of canola oil. 
 
As hon. members know, in the end the meetings ended with no 
final agreement. Indeed, there was a conclusion that there 
would be a cooling-off period and no new meetings for at least 
three months. 
 
The reasons for the failure of the trade talks are not easy to 
summarize. But certainly the clearest issue was the European 
Union is still determined to encourage food production as a 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

matter, they say, of public policy and culture which they call 
multi-functionalism. Also, as our trade ambassador Sergio 
Marchi pointed out, the agenda was too broad and the time was 
very short and made shorter by virtue of the fact the talks could 
not commence the first day. 
 
(1415) 
 
The collapse of the trade talks does not mean that negotiations 
for freer trade are off but they are certainly delayed. The fact 
that there will be no early reduction in international export 
subsidies underlines the importance of our developing a 
made-in-Canada solution to deal with the present farm crisis. 
We need to see what we can do here at home. 
 
The possibility that the US (United States) will now maintain 
and possibly even increase subsidy levels to compete with the 
Europeans, also puts further pressure on our producers and on 
our governments. All of this underscores the importance of the 
emergency debate to occur in this House today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the ministerial 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s no 
question that the farmers of Saskatchewan can compete with the 
farmers all over the world if we’re competing on a level playing 
field. As the people in Saskatchewan know, and indeed it’s a 
Saskatchewan crisis not just a farm crisis, they also understand 
that we are not on that level playing field. 
 
And that’s what we’re trying to address and that’s what the 
WTO talks were all about. And they were extremely important 
talks. And it was disappointing to see that people wanted to try 
and disrupt those talks in Seattle rather than trying to level the 
playing field in trade negotiations in a number of areas, 
including the extremely important area of safety nets and 
long-term safety nets, and solutions for agriculture, and subsidy 
levels of various countries. 
 
And while the minister was out looking for a cup of coffee for 
the Minister of Agriculture, at least the Minister of Agriculture 
was trying to do something productive and had opportunity to 
speak with the federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief. 
And we were pleased to hear that he made some progress, or at 
least that’s what the impression left by the news reports were — 
that progress was perhaps made. And we’ll be looking forward 
to the minister’s comments later today with regard to the type of 
progress that he made, because we simply can’t compete. 
 
It’s not a case of how many farmers we are going to lose, it’s 
how soon we’re going to lose them all in Saskatchewan under 
the current situation that we are faced with. We need to move 
quickly to address this situation, no question about it. And there 
are things that the federal government obviously has to take 
responsibility for, in terms of trade negotiations, in terms of 
levelling the playing field. 

But we also must recognize in Saskatchewan, and the 
government must recognize here in this province, that you 
indeed have a role to play. GRIP was there; GRIP is gone. 
GRIP wasn’t perfect, yes, and everybody says that GRIP wasn’t 
perfect, but I submit to you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, that 
there are many farmers today who would be saying, I’d just as 
soon have it back today rather than be faced with the conditions 
we are faced with now. 
 
So before you start pointing your finger over here, start looking 
at your own programs and the development of your own 
programs and what we can expect from you, more than the 
types of platitudes that we got in the Throne Speech, saying we 
will pursue a long-term safety-net program and the Premier gets 
up and says, that’s our plan — we are going to pursue a 
long-term safety net program. Well you’ve been pursuing it 
since 1992 and we still have nothing. 
 
So the debate that ensues — will ensue — this afternoon is 
extremely important and we will be looking forward to the 
comments and submissions of the agricultural community, the 
representatives of agriculture community, and look forward to 
the discussion from the minister at the conclusion of those 
remarks. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 
You cannot say indirectly in this Assembly, by tradition, what 
you cannot say directly. 
 
I would ask that you review the tapes of question period dealing 
with the Deputy Premier’s response to the Leader of the 
Official Opposition and his comments dealing with the lack of 
truthfulness. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the point of order raised by the 
hon. member from Cannington and I will review the tapes and 
bring back a response to your point of order. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as I rise before this hallowed 
Assembly to give my very first speech as an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I can’t begin 
to tell you how nervous I am. But also how honoured I am that the 
Premier has chosen me to deliver the motion of acceptance of His 
Honour’s excellent speech which we were privileged to hear here 
yesterday. 
 
I am comforted though by the feeling that you, Mr. Speaker, must 
be almost as nervous as I. We are both new and, for the moment, 
in unfamiliar jobs. But we are both determined to do the best we 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

can for the people who elected us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — It seems appropriate therefore, that my first 
words be to you, Mr. Speaker, the newest Speaker to guide us 
through this parliamentary maze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Chamber you follow a line of distinguished 
Speakers, most recently my colleague from Moose Jaw North. 
And we are all confident that soon you will put your own 
signature on this position that quite literally links us to 
parliaments around the world and through the ages. 
 
Congratulations and good luck, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Next I’d like to congratulate all members, new 
and returning, on their election this past September. I look 
forward to working with you all and to having what I’m sure 
will be some very lively discussions as we go about the 
people’s business. We have different backgrounds, varying 
ideologies, contrary ideas on significant issues, but I am 
confident that each of us has at heart the best interest of the 
people we serve. 
 
As a new member, I have much to learn. But this debate is a 
very good beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow for choosing me as their MLA. The people of Moose 
Jaw are particular in their choices, choices they exercise with 
diligence and thought. I want to assure them that I will 
represent them to the very best of my ability. 
 
I realize that there is a great responsibility that comes with 
elected office and I appreciate in more ways than one that I 
have been given a very rare opportunity. With this in mind, I 
pray that together we can serve the people and leave the world, 
at least our little corner of it, a better place than we found it. 
 
I am very proud to stand before you representing the historic 
constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow, named for the beautiful 
Wakamow Valley, one of the most important archaeological 
sites in the area, if not the province. 
 
The original inhabitants to the area knew the valley as a home 
and a resting place. It is a beautiful, peaceful place — a 
sanctuary. It is definitely an historic tradition, a bridge to the 
past we Moose Javians are very proud of. 
 
The Wakamow Valley is home to various flora and fauna, and 
in this year of the older person, elders both of aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal descent would appreciate that the Wakamow 
Valley has become home to a new monument dedicated to this 
the year of the older person. 
 
The monument is new but is crafted from natural local material 
including two old cottonwood trees which had to be cut down in 
order to build the River Park bridge. It is also very appropriate 
that this monument should be adjacent to a children’s 
playground showing the bridge that exists between the 

generations. 
 
Moose Jaw has significant historical value and tradition, but we 
are a progressive city — a city on the move. Moose Jaw is the 
newest tourist mecca of the Prairies. 
 
Moose Javians can proudly boast that their city possesses a 
world-class spa, an historic downtown core including our 
infamous tunnels, the biggest craft store in the province, and 
our fabulous murals which can now be toured by trolley car. 
And I’m told that the trolley car is my predecessor’s favourite 
new attraction in the friendly city. 
 
Just recently the minister of Liquor and Gaming cut the ribbon 
for Moose Jaw’s new liquor store in the recently refurbished 
CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) station. Our new station liquor 
store is a wonderful addition to our historic downtown, and 
according to my assistant, Bob, is equal to any in the province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly acknowledge a number 
of my predecessors — previous Moose Jaw MLAs who have 
influenced and inspired me. More will soon be said here about 
William G. Davies, who passed away recently. Bill Davies 
served the people of Moose Jaw and Saskatchewan from 1956 
to 1971. He is most vividly remembered as the minister of 
Health during the medicare struggle of 1962. We should 
treasure his accomplishments and those of his colleagues in the 
Woodrow Lloyd government of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — I must also, Mr. Speaker, acknowledge Gordon 
Snyder who served as the minister of Labour while representing 
Moose Jaw and who was very instrumental in the introducing of 
the first occupational health and safety Act in North America; 
also John Skoberg who ably represented the people of Moose 
Jaw for years. All of these men shared a desire to help ordinary 
working men and women enjoy better lives. 
 
All three were active trade unionists all of their lives. I am 
proud to say that I share their vision and their desire to help 
working people. I am very proud to be a trade unionist, and a 
proud member of the United Food and Commercial Workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — I also want to say how proud I am to be 
following in the footsteps of the Hon. Lorne Calvert. I worked 
for him; I voted for him; I learned from him. And when I grow 
up I would like to be just like him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I direct my remarks to the Throne Speech, I 
would like to imitate Rev. Calvert and quote from his book. In 
the book of Psalms, no. 37 we’re instructed to, “turn from evil 
and do good, for the Lord loves justice.” We are told to do good 
— right action, not just right thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a member of this government 
and of the New Democratic Party because I believe we have 
done good work for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
From 1944 till 1999, the list of positive accomplishments is 
worthy of praise by any standard anyone can use. From 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

hospitalization to the child action plan, from public insurance to 
public accountability, the list of accomplishments of the 
CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party) governments in the last half of this century 
has been remarkable. 
 
As we turn the corner on the ages, we can feel confident 
entering the new one because we have done not a bad job of 
ringing out the old. 
 
I am happy to join this government at the beginning of its third 
term because I’m confident we will continue to work towards 
justice for all Saskatchewan people. The Throne Speech 
outlines some of the steps we will take to improve the lives of 
families, of students, of rural residents, and of seniors. It is a 
solid blueprint — workable, practical and imaginative. 
 
I’m pleased to be part of this coalition government because, as 
His Honour said, we are on a new voyage of discovery which 
will take us into a new century, but more importantly, into a 
new way of doing things in the spirit of co-operation and 
openness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be frank. At the beginning of 
this new voyage, you and I and the parties we represent have 
differences. We have a lot of good, tough political rhetoric to 
put aside. We have some mutual suspicions to overcome. But 
the people have told us that the old style of politics is for the old 
times. They want something new. They want us to co-operate. 
 
So as I said, I pledge to do my part to make this coalition not 
just work but work well. This coalition government will do 
good things. 
 
As something of an aside, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that 
I am glad to see a coalition of progressive thought of 
centre-to-left parties. We have heard a great deal in this country 
lately about potential right-wing coalitions. We hear Reformers 
and Tories talking about a united alternative. We see 
Saskatchewan Reform MPs with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the proponents of 19th century thought are 
trying to get together, it is logical that those of us looking ahead 
should join forces as we are doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there is room at our table for all 
forward-thinking people. As a New Democratic Party 
government, we have done good things. As a coalition 
government, we are poised to do even better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the special circumstances of this 
session, I will limit my discussion of the Throne Speech to just 
a few initiatives. I want first to talk about health care. 
 
Every day the Saskatchewan health system serves more than 
35,000 of our residents. Every day 15,000 residents see a family 
doctor. Every day 4,300 individuals receive emergency or 

scheduled hospital care, 200 use emergency road ambulance, 
6,200 residents benefit from home care; nursing homes care 
daily for 9,200 residents. 
 
The volume of high-demand surgeries has increased 
dramatically since 1991. Around 1,900 hip and knee surgeries 
are performed every year. Over 10,500 cataract operations are 
performed; angioplasties are over 900 a year. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but my point is obvious. The health 
system is serving the people it is designed to minister to and it 
is providing that service better and more efficiently. But a 
successful operation is not news. The timely setting of a child’s 
broken arm in the emergency ward is of no interest to anyone 
but the child and parents. 
 
No, we want to hear about health crisis. We want the story 
about someone who had their surgery rescheduled, maybe even 
twice. Frustration makes news, Mr. Speaker, not the everyday, 
ordinary successes of our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Our health system is designed and operated by 
humans. Humans, by definition, make mistakes. Any system we 
create is going to have its growing pains and we all know that. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, our health system devours a huge 
amount of money. The system could take even more than $1.9 
billion invested in health this year. Money is finite; our capacity 
to spend is limitless. Health care is in constant need of 
upgrading and our health system is always in need of 
improvement. Our resources in material and personnel will 
always need to be expanded. This is not new, Mr. Speaker. 
Medicare in Saskatchewan is under great stress today as 
yesterday. 
 
This Throne Speech announced some important measures to 
remove some of that stress, and as an MLA in Moose Jaw, I am 
pleased with the measures to strengthen regional hospitals and 
I’m gratified that more measures will be taken to ensure that the 
bulk of health dollars goes into front-line services and less to 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, no one should be completely 
happy with a health system that lets even one person be denied 
essential treatment for too long. No one should rest easy as long 
as our health care workers are run off their feet. Anything less 
than perfection is unacceptable. We are constantly catching up 
and never quite making it. That’s a reality of ever changing 
health care in today’s world. 
 
I hear in the Throne Speech a promise to make our health 
system even better. That promise gives me a great deal of 
pleasure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I’d like to say a few brief words about taxes, 
and I’m sure there are other members in the House that will 
have their own comments. It’s a great puzzlement to me that 
members of the opposition party talk about tax cuts as if they 
invented the concept. Someone showed me a recent column by 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

the member from Moosomin in which he said, “The 
government is still not willing to put forward a plan for tax 
relief in this province.” 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, that puzzles me. This year we reduced 
the sales tax and the personal income tax. The year before that 
we introduced tax credits for research and development, 
petroleum research, and film employment. The year before that, 
a 2 per cent reduction in sales tax and a cut in personal income 
tax. Also in the March 1999 budget we announced a personal 
income tax review committee, which has just released its report. 
 
As His Honour said, we will study the report and present a tax 
reform plan in our next budget. They say, where is your plan? I 
say, where have you been? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, for the most part, mine is an 
urban constituency. But as in any Saskatchewan city that simply 
means the houses of those connected to agriculture are closer 
together than in the country. There are a number of farmers and 
retired farming families living in Wakamow, as well as many 
who are the children or grandchildren of farmers. Not many of 
us, Mr. Speaker, are more than a generation or two removed 
from the land. 
 
As a Saskatchewan writer, E.A. McCourt once said, no matter 
in what part of the world you meet him and no matter how long 
he has been gone, the first question a Saskatchewan native will 
ask is how are the crops? 
 
On this special day in the legislature, devoted to the agriculture 
crisis, I must acknowledge this fact. Moose Jaw is a railway 
town historically, but it is also a farm service centre providing 
goods and services to area farmers. These service centres in turn 
provide jobs in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when our rural economy is in crisis we all feel the 
effects. I am pleased that this Throne Speech addresses this 
crisis and draws our attention to the need for a very focused 
action. There is much to discuss in the first Throne Speech of 
this last legislature of this century, much to debate, and much to 
praise. 
 
I am pleased with the announcement about stay-at-home 
caregivers, and I’m happy that steps will be taken to make 
post-secondary education more accessible for all families. 
 
As a person with a union background I am happy that The 
Labour Standards Act will be reviewed and updated. So many 
initiatives, so little time. As I said, I am interested to hear what 
all members have to say about this new voyage of discovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my first moments in this legislature, I like what 
I have heard. I like the fact that the new government is not 
afraid of challenges, and I am pleased that it has the 
imagination to bring new approaches to old problems which 
still plague us. I am proud to join a party of honourable men 
and women who believe that there isn’t a higher duty than 
doing good because they too love justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech announced an historic new 

beginning, the beginning of a real voyage of discovery. Because 
I agree with the message of the speech and because I am an 
eager passenger on this voyage of discovery, I am delighted to 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: 
 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable John L. Wiebe, Lieutenant 
Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 

 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of this present session. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s also an honour for 
me too to rise today to second the motion placed before this 
House by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. And I thank 
the Premier for this honour. 
 
It is a little humbling to rise for the second time in this House to 
take such part in such an important procedure. As a child of 
Saskatchewan, I’ve often thought about this place — about the 
incredible discussions that have taken place in this very room 
and the many great accomplishments and achievements that 
have come out of those discussions. 
 
As a child of Saskatchewan of course, I can imagine the late 
Tommy Douglas rising in this House to either censure someone 
with his sharp wit, or inspire them with his golden tongue. I can 
imagine this room echoing both with the high moments and the 
low of the great medicare debate when Woodrow Lloyd 
displayed the level of political courage and determination that 
should stand as an example to all of us. 
 
And I can easily imagine the great leaders of Saskatchewan, on 
both sides of the House, coming together in this room to help 
this province meet the challenges it has faced throughout our 
history. 
 
So in rising to enter this debate today, I do so with a great sense 
of awe and a great deal of respect and admiration for all those 
who’ve gone before and all those that are here with us today. 
And that’s why it’s a touch ironic, but fitting nonetheless, that 
the first speeches of the first session of the last Saskatchewan 
legislature of the 20th century are being given by rookie MLAs. 
Appropriate because this is a province that is proud of its past, 
but one which recognizes the importance of the new, looking 
forward to the future. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my colleague, the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, for her fine speech and for setting a course of 
reason and compassion for the discussion that will inevitably 
follow. 
 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate you 
upon your elevation to the Speaker’s chair. Yours may be one 
of the toughest jobs in this Chamber, but I know that beginning 
today, you’re held in high regard by all members of this House 
and that we will come to rely heavily upon your reason, your 
wisdom, and your patience in the very months ahead. 
 
And I think it’s entirely appropriate for me at this time to thank 
the people of Saskatoon Sutherland for the trust that they’ve 
placed in me and the honour they’ve bestowed upon me. 
 
They’re good people, Mr. Speaker. My constituency is home of 
the very mix of Saskatchewan people who make serving this 
province a pleasure — working people, the university 
community, families, young professionals, and retired people. 
People who have built this province and made our communities 
wonderful places in which to live, and people with hopes and 
aspirations for their futures. People who want us to do a good 
job in this House because they want to build a strong future 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a privilege to be chosen by those people to serve them, Mr. 
Speaker. I hope to live up to that honour. I also hope to live up 
to the excellent record and service and compassion and 
intelligence of the previous member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
— The Reverend Mark Koenker. 
 
Mark believed very strongly that social action and work in the 
community are a natural extension of his strong, spiritual 
beliefs. I hope in the years ahead that I too can demonstrate the 
same commitment that Mark demonstrated for 13 years in 
Saskatoon Sutherland and in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow has 
said: 
 

There’s much in this Throne Speech to discuss, but what I 
like the most about this speech is it is so clearly based on 
the traditions and values of the people of this province. It is 
a Throne Speech which reflects Saskatchewan, our history 
and our future. 

 
You know, it’s said that a person learns their values at the knees 
of their parents. And I hope that it is the same case with me 
because I’m certainly proud to share the same values and 
commitment to action as my parents, Angus and Glenna 
Addley. 
 
But I think that as a province we too collectively learn our 
values from those who have gone before us, those who’ve laid 
the foundation on which we now stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our provincial motto is “from many peoples, 
strength” and I believe that the sentiment that is captured in that 
motto has inspired the greatest achievements of our province. 
 
F. Scott Fitzgerald once said: “Genius is the ability to put into 
effect what is in one’s mind.” 
 
Some examples of Saskatchewan genius include — “from many 
peoples, strength” came the co-operation and credit union 

movements which provided opportunities for our early farmers, 
our merchants, and consumers that were denied to them by 
larger institutions based beyond our borders. 
 
(1445) 
 
“From many peoples, strength” came the will to create medicare 
— a gift Saskatchewan gave to this country; one which we must 
constantly nurture. 
 
“From many peoples, strength” came the industry, the learning, 
the culture, the commerce, and the sense of community which 
makes life in this province so complete and the envy of so many 
around the world. 
 
Yes, Saskatchewan has been fortunate enough to have seen 
many remarkable individuals in public and private life who’ve 
inspired us to achieve, but it is “from many peoples, strength” 
that we have built the foundation upon which we are able to 
stand today. What a tremendous and appropriate motto for this 
province — “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what pleases me most about this Throne Speech 
we heard His Honour deliver yesterday is that so much of the 
spirit of that motto, provincial motto, is in it. It recognizes that 
there are some unique challenges ahead — it seems that people 
in Saskatchewan are always facing unique challenges — but it 
also discusses the way that we can work together to meet those 
challenges. 
 
This is the same approach that has been taken by the 
government, led by our current Premier, over the past eight 
years. And it explains why we’ve been able to succeed in 
dealing with quite . . . some quite formidable challenges. 
 
This Throne Speech is an expression of our collective minds, 
and let’s continue to demonstrate in the time ahead the 
Saskatchewan genius to put into effect, as Fitzgerald said: “the 
vision that is in our minds.” 
 
I’m sure I don’t need to remind members of the House the state 
of the province’s finances just eight years ago, and I don’t 
intend to belabour the point except to say that it was through 
sound leadership and commitment and strength of each person 
in this province that we were able to overcome that crisis and 
make a renewal of this province possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And, Mr. Speaker, we’re at that point. Because 
of strong leadership and a population with a strong commitment 
to this province, we’ve been able to restore our province, 
diversify our economy, and lay a broader, healthier foundation 
on which to build our future and create new opportunities. 
We’ve lived up to this province’s motto: “from many peoples, 
strength.” And as a result our province is now stronger in so 
many ways. 
 
The recent mid-year financial report released by the Minster of 
Finance spells out in black and white just what we’ve 
accomplished. Retail sales are up 2.2 per cent August over 
August. Gas and oil drilling are both up substantially over the 
previous year. Housing starts are up by 9.4 per cent. Provincial 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

revenues are up because of higher activity, not because of 
higher taxes. 
 
Fifty-four hundred more people were working in Saskatchewan 
this October than a year ago, with full employment increasing 
by 9,700. And Saskatchewan enjoys the second lowest jobless 
rate — unemployment rate — in Canada. These are good 
numbers; indicative of a province that has certainly harnessed 
many peoples’ strengths. 
 
But while we take satisfaction from these numbers, we cannot 
forget that our agricultural community, our farmers, and those 
who provide the services they need, are facing the most serious 
crisis in 60 years. So while we can take some satisfaction in our 
accomplishments, we must be mindful that we face another 
grave challenge, and that is the challenge posed by an 
international trade subsidy war that is being fought by the 
Europeans and the Americans, but which is claiming Canadian 
farmers as its first victims. 
 
We are here to address that crisis and I’m sure every member of 
this House from city or country will want to use our time here 
constructively, to find solutions rather than to strike political 
poses. It’s in the greatest . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — It’s in the greatest of this province’s traditions 
that we come together and help out those who need it and I’m 
certain that this House will rise to the occasion and work 
together to that end and we will live up to the spirit of this 
province’s motto. 
 
Yesterday, His Honour talked about some of the ways we will 
continue to revitalize and strengthen Saskatchewan’s economy 
for the future. One way is tax reduction, something that this 
government has been doing for several budgets as the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow said. But as the Throne Speech 
mentioned, there will be an income tax reduction plan in our 
budget later this spring. This will help us build a system that is 
fair, simple, and easy to understand, one that helps us stay 
competitive while maintaining a balanced budget. 
 
Another measure that His Honour spoke of is the new 
Partnership for Prosperity which will bring all sectors of the 
economy together to build jobs and growth, building strength 
on strength. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will improve the economy by improving 
the educational possibilities of those who run it. We will act to 
make post-secondary education more accessible for all. It’s a 
simple fact, Mr. Speaker, that in today’s world, grade 12 is no 
longer an acceptable mid-end point for those who seek 
permanent well-paying jobs. Now and into the next century, it’s 
the launching pad. We will make post-secondary education in 
the future as accessible as high school is today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Three ways to build the economy, three ways to 
build a stronger, more secure future for this province. And also 
as mentioned in the Throne Speech yesterday, we will work 
with the First Nations and Metis people, so they too can 

continue their renaissance and their determined progress 
towards full partnership in the economy and in this society. 
 
And by taking these steps now to build the economy, we will 
provide the means to improve our health care system, to provide 
the cultural and recreational amenities that make our society 
desirable and to provide the hand-up for those individuals and 
families who are unable to provide for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this legislative session carries on, we may 
occasionally become partisan and display behaviour that is not 
in the noblest of parliamentary traditions, but we have begun 
this last session of the Saskatchewan legislature in this century 
with a Throne Speech that endeavours to bring out the best in 
us. A Throne Speech which asks us to look at the challenges 
that face this province today and the challenges that we will 
face in the future, and to deal with those challenges in a way 
that reflects those values that make this province distinct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me not just as a rookie MLA, 
but as a child of Saskatchewan to second the motion made by 
the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. It’s an honour to rise 
in this House and to speak to a Throne Speech which so ably 
carries on the traditions of this Chamber and this province. 
 
It is a Throne Speech with a vision, yet it is realistic. It has both 
feet on the ground but its eyes are on the province’s vast 
horizons — “from many peoples, strength.” A great province 
has been built “from many peoples strength,” and “from many 
peoples, strength”, we will build a strong future. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move that we adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m on my 
feet to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity which I 
hope and believe will be seconded by the official Leader of the 
Opposition under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Could the Hon. Premier just briefly touch on 
the contents of the motion? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Provincial Agriculture Crisis 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
emergency debate that I would be introducing is in regard to the 
agricultural crisis now facing our farm families and our 
province. I think that it’s of urgent need that we discuss this 
issue and urge the federal government to provide an agricultural 
trade equalization payment of $1 billion to our Saskatchewan 
farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion reads, and I will formally move it at 
the conclusion of my remarks, seconded by the leader of the 
opposition, as follows: 
 

That this Assembly strongly urges the Government of 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

Canada to immediately provide an agricultural trade 
equalization payment of $1 billion to Saskatchewan farm 
families to address the agricultural crisis now facing our 
farms, our rural communities, our urban communities, and 
our province. 

 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, you’ve heard the request for 
leave to move a motion without notice under rule 46. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by first 
of all thanking all the members of the House — the Leader of 
the Official Opposition and his caucus and of course from the 
government side, the coalition government — for allowing 
under Rule 46 something which I think truly fits the meaning of 
Rule 46, and to continue the spirit of our spirited fight for 
justice for the Saskatchewan and western Canadian farmer. 
 
I want to begin also by saying, Mr. Speaker, that for some of us, 
two years ago, we gathered in this House in December to debate 
a matter of what was of some importance to Canada, the 
Calgary Declaration. At that time, we also put aside our partisan 
differences and, personally speaking, I was very proud that we 
were able to speak with one single impassioned voice about 
something which is very important and passionate to all of us 
— Canada. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the days once again draw short, it’s 
December 1999, and once again we prepare to dawn the mantle 
of winter in Saskatchewan. And, once again, we gather in this 
legislature to put aside our partisan differences and to speak 
again with an impassioned single voice for Canada. 
 
I say, for Canada, Mr. Speaker, because this crisis in farm 
income is truly a national issue that affects all Canadians. The 
philosopher and religious scholar, Ernest Renan, once said the 
following, quote: “A nation is a body of people who have done 
great things together”. 
 
“A body of people who have done great things together”. By 
that standard I would argue that Canada is a great nation. We 
have done great things together. We have fought in two world 
wars and other conflicts, and we are still peacekeepers today. 
We created medicare and pension plans and social security and 
individual liberties. And we established in the process by doing 
great things together a society that I argue still remains a model 
for the world by adhering to the defining Canadian principles of 
fairness and co-operation. 
 
Now we are gathered here today to call upon our neighbours 
across this nation for fairness and co-operation. I know that it’s 
convenient for some of our neighbours in other parts of our 
country to say that the farm income crisis is merely somehow a 
Saskatchewan issue or a Manitoba issue or a prairie issue 
affecting only the farmers who till the soil. Mr. Speaker, they 
are gravely and greatly mistaken. This crisis in agriculture does 
affect our farmers to be sure. Of course it does. But it also 
affects Canadians from Vancouver Island on our Pacific coast, 
to Bonavista in Newfoundland in the Atlantic, to our great 
Canadian Arctic. 
 

It affects grain handlers in our Canadian ports. It affects traders 
and commodities merchants in our financial centres. It affects 
automakers and manufacturers in our industrial centres, and 
most importantly of all, every Canadian who buys a loaf of 
bread or a bottle of vegetable oil made from the high quality 
food that our farmers grow. A Canadian issue — not to mention 
the pain, the suffering, the struggle of our families here at 
home, Mr. Speaker — a Canadian issue. 
 
And I might go one step further. It is a Canadian issue because 
the problem is directly attributable to the effects of international 
trade which by law, and by convention, and by moral 
responsibility — I’d even argue by economic duty — lies as the 
direct responsibility of the federal government. 
 
As is well known, today Saskatchewan producers face an 
income shortfall of $1 billion largely through no fault of their 
own. The governments of the European Union and the United 
States are giving their producers massive subsidies — again, as 
is well known — nearly 60 cents out of the dollar in Europe; 
nearly 40 cents in the United States of America. And in so 
doing, they have created massive distortions in the market price 
of grains and in the supply of grains. 
 
Wheat farmers in the European Union receive about six times 
as much financial assistance—six times as much financial 
assistance — as Saskatchewan farmers. In America, the figure 
is about four times as much assistance — four times as our 
Canadian farmers. 
 
In the result our family farms, our producers, quite naturally 
and understandably, are coping with returns on grain production 
at levels that we have not seen, they have not seen, since the 
1930s, the dirty thirties, as they were rightly called. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not that, as has been mentioned in question 
period, that our farmers here on the prairies are looking for a 
handout. Nothing could be farther from the truth. We are not 
seeking a handout. Yes, competition in the global economy has 
driven, has motivated, our farmers to become more efficient. 
And they’ve had to sharpen their pencils and to trim costs and 
upgrade their technology, and to diversify. And they have done 
so. 
 
(1500) 
 
In the end, they have been obliged and have succeeded to be the 
best in the world — the best in the world — at what they do. 
They have not been shrinking from that challenge; they have 
embraced that challenge and they have largely met it. I repeat: 
our farmers are the best, most productive farmers in the world. 
But yet they still face an uphill battle. 
 
The artificially low prices created by unfair and trade-distorting 
subsidies mean that our farmers simply cannot win. No matter 
how hard they work, no matter how many costs they trim, no 
matter how good they really are, no matter how much they 
diversify, they cannot win. And that’s not fair. 
 
And as Canadians we wouldn’t stand for it if it occurred in the 
auto industry, or paper or pulp, or steel, or any other 
fundamental basic industry. And what could be more important 
to the salvation and the maintenance of the nation than the 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

provision of food, efficiently priced, of top quality, and a 
country committed to the notion of food self-sufficiency? 
 
Our federal government, I argue again, is responsible at the 
international level and at the national level, but speaking 
internationally for the moment, to work to change those rules in 
such a way that they help our farmers. And the rules are 
obviously slanted against them. To avoid that responsibility or 
to somehow neglect it is to put our farmers obviously at the 
mercy of the export policies of the Americans and the European 
Community. 
 
It’s time, bluntly stated, that Ottawa, and indeed all of our 
Canadian neighbours from Vancouver Island to Bonavista to 
the Arctic north, as I have said, learned of the suffering being 
caused our farmers by this inaction. That is why we are here to 
send that message and to speak with one loud, strong, clear 
voice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The people of Saskatchewan gather 
here today with a message for Ottawa and for all Canadians. 
 
I want to say this again. We are gathered here today in an — it 
isn’t totally unprecedented but unprecedented in the agricultural 
area — we’re gathered here to communicate a message to all 
Canadians. 
 
I say to all Canadians, please, please listen, and please, please 
act and act now. This is not an attempt to seek a bailout or a 
handout or an “out” of any kind. We are simply asking for 
fairness and co-operation — the Canadian principles upon 
which our nation is built and upon which it has prospered, and 
the Canadian principles upon which this country will remain 
united and strong into the 21st century. 
 
Earlier, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my remarks, I quoted 
Ernest Renan about his belief that a nation is a body of people 
who have done great things together. And I believe that it’s 
true. And as I said I believe Canada meets that standard and 
exceeds that standard. 
 
But I also believe in the corollary that was proposed many years 
later by the eminent Canadian political scientist Frank 
Underhill. Dr. Underhill wrote the following: 
 

A nation is a body of people who have done great things 
together in the past and hope to do great things together in 
the future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a nation’s greatness is never finally proved. It’s 
tested everyday, every age, every era, every year, every decade. 
And it is by meeting these tests that a nation proves itself to the 
world and to its own citizens that it is exactly that — a nation, a 
body of people who do great things, always do great things. 
 
This crisis of farm incomes is such a test of our nationhood. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a test of fairness. It is a test of co-operation. And 
that is the message that we want to send right across the nation, 
from to sea to sea to sea. 
 
Before I take my seat I want to repeat again my compliments as 

Premier to all members of the legislature, regardless of our 
political differences, for setting aside those differences and 
working together on this issue which goes beyond politics. 
 
And I particularly want to thank the many citizens who have 
joined us here today and who will soon add their voices, in their 
own words, in their own language, in their own heartfelt 
feelings, to the strong, single voice with which we speak about 
that message of fairness — fairness and co-operation for 
Canadians and all Canadians. 
 
The farm sector, Mr. Speaker, has a long history in this 
province, going back to our very early roots. The first settlers 
who chose this place as the place to make their home. It is in 
essence what defines us. We are proud of farmers; we support 
our farmers; we support our agricultural sector — I mean in the 
sense of all of us — we are proud that they have feed and are 
feeding not only our country, our nation. The bread doesn’t 
grow in a supermarket in Toronto. That they feed our nation but 
they indeed feed a hungry world. They embody what has been 
called a way of life. 
 
We’re proud of the contributions made by them, just as we are 
proud of the contributions made to our country by the fishermen 
off the coasts; by the oil industry in Alberta; by the mighty 
industries of central Canada. 
 
We’re all into this together with only 31 million people or so as 
Canadians. Now is not the time for us to divide as a nation, but 
to be stronger and more unified than ever. We’ve been proud of 
them and we’ve been proud of their contribution to building this 
great country. And that is why we’re asking those Canadians to 
be similarly proud of what farming has done for them and for 
Canada, and Canada’s role in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we ask 
today, in this unprecedented event, that with one voice we say 
to the people of Canada and to our government in Ottawa, that 
there be recognition of the nature of this crisis; to acknowledge 
the injuries being suffered here; to act quickly with firmness 
and co-operation as good neighbours should, as proud 
neighbours should, in the greatest nation in the world in which 
to live. 
 
And with those few brief introductory remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 
now would like to move, seconded by my colleague, the Leader 
of the Official Opposition, the member from Rosetown Biggar, 
by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly strongly urges the Government of 
Canada to immediately provide an agricultural trade 
equalization payment of $1 billion to Saskatchewan farm 
families to address the agricultural crisis now facing our 
farms, our rural communities, our urban communities, and 
our province. 
 

I so move. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is my first 
opportunity to rise and speak officially in the Assembly. And so 
before entering into my remarks, I want to extend my personal 
congratulations to the Premier and his colleagues on their 
election. I want to also congratulate my colleagues. It’s good to 
see a group of very talented, very eager, and very dedicated 
people in the official opposition that are also prepared to work 
for the betterment of Saskatchewan. 
 
And perhaps it’s fitting in this first full day of sitting in the 
legislature that we are actually both on the government side and 
the opposition side working together in harmony to try to 
improve the lot of the economy of this province and therefore 
the people of the province. 
 
The subject matter for this first speech in the legislature is one 
that I’ve dealt with many times, but unfortunately the 
circumstances that cause us to focus on agriculture today are a 
long way from being positive. 
 
I will not go on for too long, Mr. Speaker. Those of us in the 
Assembly get to speak a lot. But today is unusual. Today we get 
to hear directly from the people of Saskatchewan, and quite 
frankly I like that. 
 
The reason the Saskatchewan Party proposed calling farmers 
and farm leaders to address the House directly over two months 
ago was to put a face to the many words that we as politicians 
have spoken during this crisis situation. So often the farm 
income crisis is just simply called the farm crisis. However, it is 
simply not just a farm crisis. It is a province-wide economic 
crisis that affects each and every person in the province whether 
they know it or not. 
 
And while we certainly want the federal government to listen 
carefully to what’s said here today, we also want to reach these 
people in our province and hopefully throughout our country 
who may no longer feel as closely connected to the farm as 
their parents and grandparents did. We want Canadians to know 
that this crisis is a personal tragedy for thousands of people in 
Saskatchewan and beyond. This is a really a people crisis that 
demands action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the members’ statements today, many letters 
were read by Saskatchewan farm people — mostly farm wives, 
grandmothers, mothers — who related personally the feelings 
of hurt and dismay that they are experiencing. And I would like 
to take a minute to read parts of two more letters to the 
Assembly. 
 
The first letter is actually addressed to Mr. Vanclief but it is a 
public letter to the people of Saskatchewan. And it says: 
 

I am a farm wife raising four sons aged 4 to 15. I work 
full-time. Due to low grain prices and excessive moisture, 
my husband was forced to work full-time in town. So that 
left our 4 sons on the farm for long hours. I did not realize 
how stressed my eldest son was until he expressed 
concerns, weeping to me one evening. He felt he had to (be 
the) head of the farm while his dad was away. He’s 15. He 
should be a kid while he can. 
 
I have stressed also to my sons that I would be proud to 

have them farm but to get an additional trade. But if we 
don’t get any additional help from the government there 
will be no farms for our kids to come back to. 
 
The other day my youngest son asked why so many farm 
yards have 2 houses on them. I explained to him that there 
would be a mother and a father in one house and a son or 
daughter and grandchildren in the other. He innocently 
replied: “I will build my house next to you some day.” It 
brought a lump to my throat when I thought this might 
never happen. 
 

And a second letter, and this was actually written by a husband 
and a farmer rather than a farmwife, but it’s also very touching. 
It says: 
 

Farming in Saskatchewan has never been a cakewalk. 
 
My forefathers came to this country shortly after the turn 
of the century with a sense of adventure, a need for 
opportunity, and a keen desire to succeed. 
 
My ancestors no doubt endured hardships that tested their 
endurance. 
 
Canadian prairie agriculture is characterized by people 
determined to succeed. One thing that has not changed is 
the farmers’ sense of pride and many farmers still prefer to 
put on a stiff upper lip regardless of how bad things get. 

 
We still have our pride and fortunately the facilitators of 
this letter campaign have pried a few stiff upper lips into 
telling their story. 
 
The insolence and cold-hearted responses of our nation’s 
politicians show a pathetic lack of appreciation for what 
farmers are sacrificing in terms of economic stability, 
mental anguish and family discord. 

 
(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of letters that I would 
actually like to table with the House that are written by people 
of farm families. And if one of the pages could come and take 
these so that they’re on the record, I’m sure the entire House 
would appreciate that. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agriculture economy is so important to the 
overall well-being of Saskatchewan, it’s incredibly naïve to 
believe that the current crisis situation is only affecting 50,000 
farmers. Everyone who is in business in this province is feeling 
or will soon feel the pinch, and everyone who works for those 
businesses will feel the effects soon after that. Whether you’re a 
farmer today or you’re a business person in the middle of 
Regina or Saskatoon who has never been to a farm in your life, 
this crisis will touch you in some way, shape, or form. 
 
For that reason it is important that we are united in our quest to 
get some much needed financial assistance for our farmers. It is 
important that despite the political differences between the NDP 
and the Saskatchewan Party, we show the rest of Canada we are 
on the same side of this debate as far as what we believe the 
federal government should be doing. I will return to this matter 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

in just a few minutes. 
 
We make no secret of the fact that we have differences with the 
current government especially when it comes to agriculture 
policy. We have been vocal in our criticism that the provincial 
government was so unwilling to acknowledge the serious nature 
of this crisis until the past few months, even though it was 
apparent going back to the spring of 1998 that real trouble was 
ahead. 
 
When we first raised the issue of problems on the horizon, or 
that problems were on the horizon in May 1998, we were told to 
stop playing the politics of fear. Yet here we are in the midst of 
the worst crisis in agriculture in many years and the people’s 
fear is now the fear of their government. 
 
We have been very critical of the government’s decision to 
cancel the GRIP program without having a viable alternative in 
place. Today Saskatchewan has the weakest farm safety net in 
Canada, something that has contributed to the extent of the 
problems that we face today. And we have been critical of the 
provincial government for not being at the table when the 
AIDA program was designed in order to better put 
Saskatchewan’s interest forward. 
 
On September 16 the voters of our province said you have 
failed agriculture and you have betrayed farmers, something 
must be done. And I want to make it clear today that we are not 
absolving the provincial government of these serious 
misjudgements, and we will continue to question the provincial 
government about its own decisions in relation to agriculture. 
 
But today, we as a province, must also focus our energy to 
getting the attention of the federal government, which so far has 
been less than sympathetic to the situation Saskatchewan finds 
it in. Indeed, in many ways the federal government has been 
downright disrespectful of our farmers and of our province. 
 
Case in point, Mr. Speaker: the Prime Minister’s failure to meet 
with farmers and their organizations in Ottawa or to come out 
here to Saskatchewan and see our problems first-hand. We want 
to make it clear that because the severe downturn in commodity 
prices is related almost entirely to the resumption of the subsidy 
battle between Europe and the United States that this is an 
international trade issue and therefore a huge responsibility 
rests with our national government. 
 
Once again that is not to say the province does not have a role 
to play here because it most certainly does. However with the 
amount of money that we are talking about, it is unrealistic to 
think that the provincial government can foot the bill for $1 
billion we all feel is needed to see us through this short-term 
cash crunch, plus invest dollars into safety nets and additional 
dollars for highways and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are people in the country today 
looking in who feel that their tax dollars should not be used to 
help farmers. They say government isn’t there to bail them out 
then why . . . doesn’t bail them out when they’re in trouble, so 
why should the government help farmers. Well, I’ll tell you 
why. 
 
I offer a small analogy for them. I tell them to imagine that they 

run or work for a business in which their prices are set for them 
by the government, where those prices are dependent on prices 
driven down by subsidies in other countries, where they can’t 
sell some of their products until the federal government tells 
them they can, and where the federal government is essentially 
their only legal selling agent. Also, and most importantly, they 
must sell their product for a lower price then they did three 
decades ago when their costs including taxes are currently 
based on 1999 rates. 
 
That in a nutshell is what farmers are facing today and that is 
the reason why the government very much has a responsibility 
to farmers in situations like this, a situation that is totally 
beyond the control of our producers. 
 
We have a situation in this province today that has been 
compared for good reason to that of the 1930s. This is the 
deepest downturn in the provincial farm economy since that 
time and so far the federal government’s response has been to 
nearly ignore the situation. 
 
We have a Prime Minister that only a few weeks ago stood 
proudly before the representatives of other democracies and 
stated that Canada’s federal system allows people in one part of 
the country to lend a hand to others when they are in trouble. 
Yet this has not been the case for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Nearly everything the federal Liberals have done to address this 
farm crisis appears to have been geared towards farmers in 
central Canada. The much reviled AIDA program is working 
out fairly well for farmers in Ontario and Quebec but the nature 
of farming on the prairies is very different and this program has 
not taken into account those differences. 
 
One of the letters that I just tabled in the House, Mr. Speaker, a 
farmwife who has been married to a farmer who has been 
farming for 35 years says in one paragraph: 
 

In 1998, we collected crop insurance. We have put money 
into NISA but have had to remove it in order to pay the 
bills. In other words, things are really tough on our farm. 
We have exhausted the existing safety nets. 

 
Then another paragraph says: 
 

AIDA is a farce. We applied for AIDA, taking the 
application to our accountant, only to be told that we did 
not qualify and being presented with a bill for his services. 
Tell me how that is supposed to help farmers. 
 

The sense I get from many people I talk to throughout 
Saskatchewan is the same as we heard during the late ’70s and 
early ’80s when western alienation was at its height. People 
have moved past the feeling that the federal government doesn’t 
understand the problem out here to the feeling that the feds 
simply don’t care. And quite frankly and very sadly, it’s hard to 
argue with them given what has gone over . . . what has gone on 
over the past year. 
 
As I said in Ottawa a few weeks ago, I truly believe this is a test 
of the federation. One cannot imagine the federal government 
turning its back on a major industry in central Canada if the 
auto industry or the steel industry or the supply-managed 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 1999 

agriculture sector were facing the same circumstances as prairie 
agriculture is today. Does one truly believe that it would be 
treated with a yawn and a shrug like we’ve seen here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
But in the long term, Mr. Speaker, we need a strategy that will 
allow us to avoid the situation repeating itself. We need a safety 
net in place that is effective, sustainable, predictable, and we 
need a level international playing field for agriculture trade. 
Nobody wants to go through this every few years because it is 
counterproductive and it is very damaging to the agriculture 
industry as a whole. 
 
As I conclude today, I want to leave this message again with the 
non-farmers who may be watching. There is no group in this 
province that dislikes asking for help from governments more 
than farmers do. There is no group that finds this more 
distasteful. They just want a fair chance to succeed on the basis 
of hard work and sound management. That fair chance is now 
not even remotely possible. It’s clear they do need help; indeed 
our whole province does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I end my comments because we as 
MLAs are here to listen to what our farmers and our farm 
leaders have to say. I want to thank them publicly for all that 
they have done and for all that they will do. The official 
opposition has counted it a privilege to work with them. I urge 
all members to hear their words very carefully and I can only 
pray that the federal government is finally ready to listen and to 
do the right thing. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the 
amendment, or the motion, as introduced by the Premier, the 
hon. member for Riversdale, and I’m looking forward to the 
input to the committee as that motion is carried. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
this is my first opportunity to speak to the Legislative Assembly as 
a newly elected member, the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 
Primarily it’s an urban riding, two small rural polls associated with 
it; but it is absolutely a pleasure on my part to be speaking with 
regard to our farm community and our farm families. 
 
My grandparents came to Saskatchewan at the turn of the 
century. They farmed the land, they homesteaded in the Dysart 
and Cupar area. Both of my parents grew up on a family farm 
and we still have close roots with our cousins, aunts, and uncles 
who farm in Saskatchewan, so it certainly is a pleasure for me 
to be speaking as my first speech to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as farming goes, so goes Saskatchewan. We have 
seen over the years our economy diversifying into other 
commodity sectors such as oil, potash, timber, and uranium. But 
the importance of agriculture remains the same. 
 
Agriculture provides about one sixth of the economic output of 
Saskatchewan, accounting for about 6 billion in commodity 
sales in good years. Agricultural exports are by far the largest 
category of exports in the province and account for 
approximately 46 per cent of total Saskatchewan exports. In 
fact, Saskatchewan agricultural exports account for 38 per cent 

of all Canadian agricultural exports. 
 
Between 1997 and 1998 Saskatchewan family farms were still 
among, and are still among, the most efficient and productive in 
the world. But the international subsidy war has dropped the 
value of our farm commodities by close to $400 million per 
year. This crop year they could drop as much as another 600 
million. That is a drop of close to $1 billion in annual farm 
commodity sales as a direct result of the international subsidy 
war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are as efficient as any in 
the world. They have proven their ability to compete in 
Canadian and international markets. Their ability to compete is 
rooted in the natural cost advantages in Saskatchewan as well as 
the innovative spirit and adaptability of our producers. 
However, efficiency and innovative spirit alone can only take 
farmers so far when they are forced to compete with the 
treasuries of foreign governments and when international 
markets pressure farm incomes. 
 
We need long-term solutions but we can’t risk losing 20,000 
farm families to foreclosures in the near future. We need to 
make Ottawa understand our farmers are Canadians just as well 
as every other Canadian in Canada. They need national 
protection as much as anyone else. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t have deep enough 
pockets to take on the grain subsidies of European or American 
treasuries, nor do Saskatchewan farm families. The simple fact 
is, if farmers are getting paid what their crops were worth, 
rather than a price controlled by the European and American 
subsidies, there would not be a farm crisis. This farm crisis is 
the direct result of the international grain subsidy war and it can 
only be resolved in the long term at a national level. 
 
The situation is not going to get easier. The forecast over the 
next few years by Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada show low 
farm incomes will continue. We have to act now. We have been 
trying to get Ottawa to listen. We have to do more; we must do 
more. 
 
However when you look at the statistics, statistics from the 
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) Producers Support Estimate of Total Support to 
all Agriculture Commodities in 1998, this shows Canadian 
farmers are subsidized at $17 US per acre, compared to $45 US 
per acre for American farmers and a whopping $362 US per 
acre for European farmers. And that’s what our farm families 
are trying to compete with. 
 
This can’t go on. We need the national government, we need 
the national role, we need solutions soon. 
 
Since the farm delegation went to Ottawa there have been 
stories in the media about a new mood of western separatism, a 
feeling by our farmers we have been abandoned by our national 
government. Ottawa must understand we are just as much 
Canadians as people who are living east of Thunder Bay. We 
need solutions to deal with this trade crisis, not just on trade 
policy, but also on dealing with input costs and the cost of 
transportation. 
 



December 7, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

(1530) 
 
Since the Crow benefit was eliminated in 1995 we have seen a 
loss of $320 million a year taken from the pockets of our farm 
families while their transportation costs have tripled. The 
federal government must take immediate action to ensure that 
producers benefit from railway productivity gains in the same 
way that would happen in a truly competitive environment. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers cannot be expected to adjust in the span 
of just a few years to losing half their net income from federal 
transportation policy changes. The dollars the federal 
government is saving because of those changes need to go back 
towards supporting Saskatchewan agricultural producers in 
these difficult times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers 
are facing one of the worst overall income situations on record 
— an income shortfall of $1 billion over the last two years with 
a poor income outlook ahead for the year 2000. Many of our 
farm families are facing the immediate risk of financial failure. 
Many more are facing a crisis in their short-term financial 
supports and prospects as well. This is affecting our farm 
families in the rural and urban economies that serve and depend 
on the agricultural industry. 
 
While a long-term solution depends on WTO talks — a trade 
resolution — there is no short-term solution through the WTO. 
We respectfully ask the federal government for a one billion 
agricultural trade equalization payment for Saskatchewan farm 
families. We need to have the federal government provide for 
help now to help our farm families, whether the American and 
European trade subsidies storm . . . was that one billion? Did I 
say one billion? The payment should be made through a 
program that ensures all commodities are covered fairly and 
effectively. 
 
We need a stronger long-term safety net to deal with situations 
like this in the future. We cannot maintain a competitive edge in 
the marketplace with other farmers getting several times more 
support from their national governments. Effective long-term 
safety nets and other national initiatives must be developed to 
provide the stability and environment needed for our 
agricultural industry to grow. 
 
As mentioned, my parents grew up on family farms. They grew 
up in a Saskatchewan where if one family was hurting, then 
everyone pitched in to help them out until the family got back 
on its feet again. Saskatchewan people come from a background 
where we help without asking because you never know when 
you’ll need that help yourself. 
 
I hope those values of helping your neighbour are not limited to 
just Saskatchewan. I hope those values are something we share 
with all Canadians because if we have lost those values, then 
what do we stand for as Canadians in our country of Canada? 
 
We are here today, working and hoping that Canada does work 
and can work for all its people. Mr. Speaker, we are working 
today to send a message that we are not going to give up, that 
we are not going away, because these are our families and our 

friends we are talking about, and in Saskatchewan you don’t 
turn your back on your family or your friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — As Leader of the Liberal Party in this 
coalition government, I am pleased to join with my colleagues 
in the Legislative Assembly in voicing my support for our farm 
families and I am pleased to support the motion. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of 
the Assembly, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess to allow the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture to meet in the Legislative 
Chamber commencing in 15 minutes from the adoption of 
this motion and that this Assembly reconvene at the call of 
the Speaker by ringing of the division bells five minutes in 
advance of reconvening. 
 

I so move this. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the Minister of Agriculture if you 
would like to adjourn debate on the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I do want to adjourn debate but I 
just want to make sure of the rules, that it doesn’t interrupt my 
opportunity to get back into the debate after the conclusion of 
the committee meeting. 
 
The Speaker: — It will not interfere with your ability to enter 
back into the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would move we 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, the debate has been adjourned by the 
Deputy Government House Leader and you’ve heard the 
motion. Leave has been requested to move for a recess. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — This House will then recess till the call of the 
bell, to recall members . . . Oh, I’m sorry. The motion is: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess to allow the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture to meet in the Legislative 
Chamber in 15 minutes from the adoption from this 
motion, to reconvene at the call of the Speaker by the 
ringing of the division bells five minutes in advance of 
reconvening. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 



 

 


