





























































Hansard: April 21, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 679 
 April 21, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Saskatoon area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today on behalf of Saskatchewan’s disenfranchised widows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
today on the issue of highways in Saskatchewan. The prayer of 
relief reads as follows: 

 
To call on federal and provincial governments to dedicate a 
significantly greater portion of fuel tax revenues toward 
road maintenance and construction so Saskatchewan 
residents have a safe highway system. 
 

Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Livelong, 
Denholm, Battleford, and Cando. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the 
highway systems in this province. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 

highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from, 
from all over this province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and bring forward petitions. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the NDP 
government to provide funding in this budget to have the 
Swift Current Regional Hospital equipped and staffed as a 
specialty care hospital and to immediately provide funding 
for the purchase and operation of both imaging equipment 
and a renal dialysis centre. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petitions here are 
from Maple Creek, Swift Current, Kincaid, Gravelbourg, 
Shaunavon, Mankota, Ponteix, Cabri, Caronport, Kyle, and all 
throughout the southwest part of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
once again on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the education of exceptional children. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have an access to an education that meets 
their needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition today are 
from Christopher Lake, Waskesiu, Domremy, Saskatchewan, 
and Prince Albert. 
 
And I present this petition on their behalf with pleasure. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all the members in the House I’d like to introduce a lady 
who is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, Donna Harpauer from 
Leroy. And she is going to be known as the next MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Watrous area. So 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

will you please stand, Donna. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to the members, a group of students who are seated in your 
gallery. They are here from the Balfour Special Tutorial 
program. And this is a group of 12 students who are in grade 
12, Mr. Speaker, just so that there’s no confusion. They’re here 
today accompanied by their teacher Karen Scherle, here to 
observe the proceedings and to tour the building. And I look 
forward to a visit with them after all that. And I would ask all 
members to give them a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to introduce 
three people seated in your gallery, neighbours from out near 
the farm: Zach Douglas and his two children — Matthew who 
is nine, and Sylvia who is six. If they would stand up and give a 
little wave. I’m sure all members will want to welcome them to 
the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always a pleasure for me to introduce through you, to my 
colleagues in the legislature, people seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. And today we have two very special guests seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are Mel and Evelynn Colhoun 
and they are here to keep an eye on a very special person, 
someone who is part of a special group for us in the Legislative 
Assembly, and that is one of our pages, Melanie Bratkoski. 
These are her grandparents. So we certainly say to all the pages, 
we appreciate all the work that you do for us and we know 
you’ll all be on your very best behaviour today. 
 
Please join me in extending them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, four people seated in the west 
gallery. These four people are my mother and father, Herb and 
Mary Ann Upshall, my sister, Joan Korfman, and her daughter, 
my niece, Jodie Korfman. 
 
I would like all members to wish them a big welcome to the 
Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of the few 
times that I agree with the Agriculture minister today, but I 
would like to join with him and welcome the Upshall family 
here today. The minister will be on his best behaviour seeing 
that you are here. So I’d ask the Assembly to welcome them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Massacre at High School in Littleton, Colorado 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this Assembly 
we deliberate the laws of the province and the policies of the 
government of the day. Our tools are reason and rational 
argument based on the belief that dialogue is the best means of 
building civil human relationships. 
 
It is hard, therefore, to respond in any meaningful way to the 
horror of yesterday’s multiple murder at the high school in 
Colorado, an event without reason, a moment far beyond the 
ability of language to comprehend and explain. We can only 
express our sorrow and bewilderment that once again human 
nature shows itself to be terribly flawed. 
 
We can — and we do — join with others across our nation and 
around the world in stating our sorrow at the senseless loss of 
so many young lives. 
 
And in this Assembly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
whom we represent, we can and we do offer our heartfelt 
condolences to the families and friends of the victims. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I would of course 
like to join with the member from Prince Albert Carlton in 
expressing our profound sorrow and sympathy for the families 
of all the victims in yesterday’s horrific events in Colorado. 
 
The shootings in this school are simply beyond my 
comprehension, which I’m sure is true for all members. As a 
former school principal I can only imagine the emotions the 
teachers and the students in this school are feeling today. 
 
We can be thankful that nothing like this has ever happened in 
Saskatchewan and we can only pray that it never will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schools not only in our country but around the 
world should be places of safety — sanctuaries for our youth — 
and we must work hard to ensure that they remain so. 
 
Our prayers go out to the people of Littleton, Colorado today. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, rightly or wrongly, there is a 
strong perception that our society is increasingly falling victim 
to random and motiveless violence which can neither be 
anticipated nor guarded against. Yesterday it was students and 
teachers innocently slaughtered in Colorado as they went about 
their daily routine. Our thoughts and prayers are with those 
people. 
 
But, in addition, we take note of the teachers and students of 
Saskatchewan who must be uneasy and disquieted today. We 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

appreciate all those involved in education both those on the 
giving and the receiving end. Our thoughts are with you on this 
difficult day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating Upgraded 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the heals of the 
very successful and popular budget introduced by the Minister 
of Finance some weeks ago, I’m pleased to advise the House 
that the Canadian Bond Rating Service has seen fit to upgrade 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating. The credit rating has been 
upgraded from A to A plus. As you know Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has a straight A credit rating already. The 
Canadian Bond Rating Service says that this is a result — the 
increase is a result — of the fiscal responsibility, balanced 
budgets, reduction in the level of tax core debt, and improved 
performance of our Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
sign that the government’s four-year financial plan is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Secretaries Day 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today we 
say thank you to those in our offices who handle all of the mail, 
make travel arrangements, field tricky phone calls, and basically 
organize our lives. And I’m referring to Secretaries Day. The 
work done by our secretaries and constituency assistants is 
being recognized today during the Professional Secretaries 
Week. 
 
Even though that work has changed dramatically in the past 46 
years since the first Secretaries Day — instead of pouring 
coffee today’s secretaries train staff, do research and serve our 
committees — they are an integral part of our workplace and 
everyone in this room will probably not function well without 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus I 
would like to extend a sincere thank you to all secretaries and 
constituency assistants today on Secretaries Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
proclaimed Professional Secretaries Week and today is 
Secretaries Day. During this week and particularly today, those 
of us fortunate enough to have support staff have the 
opportunity to express our appreciation in an appropriate way. 
For the assistance and companionship they give us throughout 
the whole year — thank you. 
 
Our secretaries make us look good, sometimes even when we 
shouldn’t. They allow us to take credit for mutual 
accomplishments and they never point fingers when we goof. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in previous tributes we have spoken of all 
the secretaries together when in fact they — just like you and I 
— are individuals. So I want to take this opportunity to name 
the individuals who make our caucus office a model of 
efficiency, courtesy, and productivity. They are alphabetically: 
Margaret Herman, Kjersten Hordern, Carrie Moldenhauer, 
Jannet Shanks, and Ann Thacyk. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, our constituency assistants deserve their 
own day, but I will include by name in this tribute, Ellen Oddan 
and Loretta Long, my capable assistants, and also the assistants 
of all of our members of our caucus. 
 
We don’t say it often enough but we do value your work, your 
dedication, and your friendship. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Canada Trust Scholarship 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, I’d like 
to congratulate a young constituent of mine, Holly Lacelle, 
earning a $50,000 scholarship from Canada Trust. More than 
2,700 students applied for this scholarship and Holly was one of 
only 20 chosen to receive this honour. 
 
Holly will also receive $3,500 a year towards living expenses 
and is guaranteed an offer of summer employment at Canada 
Trust during her four-year degree program in biology with 
honours in molecular genetics. The scholarship is awarded on 
the basis of consistent concern, care, and contributions toward 
their home communities. 
 
Holly is involved in the 4-H program, has revived her school 
newspaper, and started a writing club in her school. She also 
spends a great deal of time working with a student suffering 
from cerebral palsy. Holly lives in Cadillac and attends school 
in Ponteix. 
 
All in all, Holly is a young Canadian to be proud of. 
Congratulations, Holly. We wish her every success in her future 
endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Small Business Loans Association Program 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I had 
the privilege of presenting certificates of appreciation in four 
different communities in my constituency who have reached a 
milestone in terms of the number of jobs created or maintained 
through the Small Business Loans Association program. 
 
The goal of the small business loans program is to help small 
businesses which at times may have difficulty obtaining loans 
from banks. The provincial government provides each 
association with an interest-free revolving line of credit. 
 
The Glaslyn/Medstead Economic Development Corporation, 
since its inception in June of ’93, has had an impact on more 
than 75 jobs in the community. 
 
The Canwood Economic Development Corporation has helped 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

small businesses in that community create or maintain over 50 
jobs. Mr. Speaker, this organization has provided loans to such 
diversity as seed-cleaning operations and plumbing businesses. 
 
The Shell Lake Co-operative Lending Association has 
supported the creation of more than 50 part-time and full-time 
jobs. The Spiritwood Economic Development Corporation has 
approved 49 loans, helping small businesses to create 43 
full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of what the volunteers who run this 
program have been able to accomplish. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Visit to Minnesota Legislature 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you’re well 
aware, a number of members from this particular House had the 
opportunity to visit the Minnesota legislature for a number of 
days. And we spent some time with the Senate and their House 
as well, a very informative time. And we’ll inform members of 
this House of that next week. 
 
We also had the opportunity to meet the Governor, Jesse 
Ventura, and for a fee I will let members from the opposite side 
touch my tie. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members’ statements have elapsed. The hon. 
member appears to have used an exhibit in his statement, but as 
the removal of the exhibit would also disqualify him from 
remaining in the room, the Chair will look the other way this 
time. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporation Profits 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon is a big day for the minister. Today 
he announces how much money the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) family of Crown corporations sucked out of the pockets 
of Saskatchewan families over the past year. 
 
In 1997 the total profit was $221 million out of the five big 
gougers here in Saskatchewan — SaskPower, SaskEnergy, 
SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and the 
auto fund. 
 
And in 1998 SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and the auto fund nailed 
every resident in this province with more rate hikes. So I would 
expect the NDP family of Crown corporations managed to even 
get more money extracted from the people of Saskatchewan 
over the past year. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was the total profit of these five Crown 
corporations in the last year? How much more money did your 
family of Crown corporations take out of the families’ pockets 

of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know what the 
member is getting at. Their policy is clear. Their leader, Mr. 
Hermanson, has said over and over again that it’s his intent to 
sell SaskTel and the other Crowns. So I know what you’re 
trying to do. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, and particularly the 
member from Canora who was with me today for an 
announcement of a supplier contract in his hometown, where an 
employer contract with SaskPower, a company from that town, 
now employs nine people in large part serving SaskPower’s 
needs; I say to the member opposite, when you were in 
government with the Devine administration and you were 
supporting . . . he was supporting Mr. Devine, and everyone 
knows where he comes from, as you were going to the 
Conservation conventions, you had an intent to sell off the 
assets of the Crowns, and you did. You sold off the coal mines, 
you sold off the gas fields, you sold off Saskoil. And the debt in 
the Crowns went from 3.2 billion to 5.4 billion in that period of 
time. 
 
So we know what you’re about — privatization. But I tell you, 
you won’t get a chance because the people of Saskatchewan are 
up to your tricks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, the 
Crown corporations that you like to talk about and how you like 
to run them as a business — well, Mr. Minister, the 
shareholders I’ve been talking to don’t really like the way 
you’ve been running things. But there’s a shareholders’ meeting 
coming up real soon, and there’s going to be some changes on 
the management side over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, your NDP government’s record of 
gouging Saskatchewan families through one rate hike after 
another — SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel — the rates just 
keep going up and up. That may be good for the NDP’s bottom 
line but it hurts Saskatchewan families in this province, it hurts 
seniors on fixed incomes, it hurts the working poor. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you continue gouging the people of 
Saskatchewan through your family of Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member speaks 
nonsense when he talks about gouging the customers. If he 
knows anything about the rates for auto insurance in 
Saskatchewan as compared to his Tory counterparts in Alberta 
or Manitoba, he will know that by far the lower auto rates are 
supplied by the men and women who run SGI — that’s a fact. 
 
I’ll tell you what the member is really up to. He is up to the idea 
of continuing that old fine Devine tradition of selling off assets 
to their friends. That’s what they’re trying to arrange. 
 
But I want to say about the shareholder meeting coming up, 
you’re going to have to have more than 15 per cent support to 
be able to win that shareholders’ meeting because 15 per cent 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

isn’t going to do it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you have 
opportunity to see the polls and you realize that you’re 
dwindling down to that 15 per cent these days. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you were really concerned about the rates here 
in Saskatchewan, you would do something about it. Your rate 
review process is a joke and everyone in the province knows it. 
It is rubber stamp — one rate increase after another allowing 
your NDP Crown corporations to gouge more and more money 
out of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, we need a real rate review process in this 
province and later today the Saskatchewan Party will introduce 
a Bill to create a real rate review process. Mr. Minister, will you 
commit to supporting the piece of legislation that I will be 
introducing later today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I remember being a 
member of opposition when your leader at that time, Mr. 
Devine, introduced a Public Utilities Review Commission 
called PURC. Right here. He sat at this desk and introduced it, 
and it cost a great deal of money. They didn’t follow its advice. 
 
And then you and your party members — because you used to 
go to the conventions — decided to get rid of it. Now today you 
say you’re going to do another one. 
 
What I say to the member opposite from Kindersley, I have a 
quote here from The Press Review in Eston, your hometown, 
that says: “Saskatchewan Party leadership candidate meets 
Kindersley constituent voters.” And in the article it says, 
“Hermanson said that his government if elected should be 
allowed to sell off the Crown corporations on a selected basis.” 
That’s your policy. 
 
I challenge you to go out to the people of Saskatchewan in the 
next few months and tell them what your plan is to sell off the 
Crowns. Tell them that, and I say to you, you will be soundly 
defeated again on that issue as you were in 1991. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, you speak about remembering your 
days in opposition. I say to you, sir, you won’t have much 
longer to wait till you’re back there again. And it’s because the 
people of Saskatchewan are tired of you and your family of 
Crown corporations going through their pockets every time you 
get a chance. 
 
The ones that make profit in this province have a monopoly and 
charge Saskatchewan taxpayers whatever they want, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course that’s the ones that make money. 
 
But every time you pack a suitcase full of money and head off 
on one of your trips to gamble in some other part of the world, 
you lose millions of taxpayers’ dollars: NST — $16 million; 
Channel Lake — $15 million; Guyana — $3 million. Mr. 
Minister, at the end of 1997, SaskPower International lost $2.6 
million. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much more money did SaskPower lose on its 

foreign adventures in the last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite when he talks about the folly of privatization, 
I want to say that the most foolish decision by your government 
in the 1980s was to sell off the coal mines. 
 
Now just think about this for a moment. You own power plants 
and you own coal. And the decision was made by your 
convention when you were a member of the Conservative Party 
to sell off the coal mines. We still own the power plants but we 
don’t have any coal. And now we go to the private sector and 
ask them: what can we pay you for the coal? And then you have 
the audacity to say, why do the power rates go up, having sold 
off the coal mines? 
 
Now everyone knows about the folly of the Tories in 
privatization. Here again, Leader-Post, November 17, 1997: 
“Constitution policy platform okayed for (your new party, the 
new Tory Party) . . . ” and in it it says that: “privatize Crowns 
when it is in the public (or in your) interest.” 

 
I challenge you: which Crowns would you sell off? Which 
Crowns would you sell off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Memorandum of Understanding with Nurses 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, nurses across Saskatchewan are back 
at work this week thanks to an old NDP trick. It’s called now 
you see it, now you don’t. 
 
It goes like this. First the NDP ignores the nurses for eight years 
while the government is busy destroying the health care system. 
And of course it’s left to the nurses to hold that crumbling 
health system together. Finally, and the nurses can’t stand the 
intolerable working conditions anymore so they strike. The 
NDP sucks the union into a memorandum of understanding, 
promising to take care of all their problems. The nurses go back 
to work and the government files the MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) — never to be seen again. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that your strategy — to con the nurses’ union 
into signing a meaningless agreement and then ignore them for 
another three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the use of 
the word — unless I misheard it and in case I apologize if I 
have — the use of the word “con” the nurses into signing a 
MOU — I believe the hon. member referred to — is really a 
slap in the face of the nurses’ union, which union I have in my 
deliberations with them found to be very competent and very 
tough negotiators and far from being conned. 
 
And the MOU has been signed. It’s been signed by SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and it’s 
been signed by SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). The 
government has witnessed it; it’s our intention to do all that we 
can to get the parties — SAHO and SUN — to get the MOU 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

and everything that flows from that negotiated as quickly as 
possible. I think all parties want to do that; and if required to 
amend the legislation to reflect those agreements, we’ll be 
introducing those too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
believe this government any more. The nurses don’t trust you. 
Just ask them; they think they’ve been sold down the river just 
like you did to the social workers. 
 
Last year when the social workers threatened to strike over their 
lousy working conditions, the NDP conned the union into 
signing another meaningless letter of understanding that 
promised to deal with the social workers’ concerns. And you 
know what happened next? Nothing — not a thing. The NDP 
filed the letter of understanding in the nearest paper shredder. 
And when the social workers staged protests across the 
province, the Minister of Social Services passed it off as 
posturing for position. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that your plan for the nurses as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to address the 
member’s question. I am very concerned, Mr. Speaker, as are 
all the people of Saskatchewan the fact that their leader, the 
Tory Party leader, Elwin Hermanson, has been running around 
Saskatchewan saying provincial government policies, 
provincial government policies were responsible for a rapid 
increase in social assistance caseloads. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, 
and any one external, any objective observer will tell you that 
these increases were clearly occasioned by federal off-loading. 
Either this Tory Party leader Elwin Hermanson is ignorant of 
the facts, which is quite surprising given all the time that he 
spent in Ottawa, or he is being deliberately deceitful, Mr. 
Speaker. Neither quality commends him to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was a 
wonderful answer to a question I never asked. You conned the 
social workers into a phony agreement to shut them up before 
an election, and now you’ve done the same thing to nurses. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m looking at a letter sent by SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Union) to the Social 
Services minister on behalf of social workers. It’s dated 
December 2, 1998, and I want to read to you what the social 
workers think the purpose of your letter of understanding was. 
It said: 
 

An often stated belief of our members is that the letter of 
understanding is merely a tool meant to keep Social 
Services employees quiet until after the next provincial 
election. 

 

Mr. Premier, you conned the social workers last year and now 
you’ve conned the nurses this year with a memorandum of 
understanding designed to shut them up until after the next 
election. 
 
Will you commit today to finalize the contract with the nurses 
that addresses all the parts of the MOU before the next election? 
Or is this just another phony political stunt to shut the nurses up 
before we go to the polls? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I remain perplexed by 
the use of the word, conned, by the hon. member opposite there 
when she refers to the nurses. We have here a memorandum of 
understanding which has been duly signed and executed and 
witnessed by all the parties that are involved, which sets out the 
major issues to the resolution of the dispute. And the 
government’s committed to helping all the parties negotiate that 
agreement. 
 
And they are negotiating and they’re going to get an agreement 
— I’m very confident of that — along the lines of the MOU and 
everything that flows naturally from that. This dispute is now 
over. Some hard bargaining is going to take place but the 
dispute is over. 
 
What is it that urges the hon. member to say that the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, for whom we have the highest 
regard and respect, were somehow, somehow conned, somehow 
conned? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they signed, they signed the MOU freely and 
voluntarily. They signed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now hon. members will recognize the 
Premier is not located all that far from the Chair and the Chair 
is having difficulty being able to hear the answer being put. 
Order, order. I ask for the co-operation of all members of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I’ll just finish, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying that the nurses and SAHO signed the agreement, the 
MOU, freely and voluntarily, putting an end to this dispute, 
thankfully, with great relief for all of us regardless of ideology 
to all the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And I am 
convinced that they are determined to put this into a collective 
bargaining agreement as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tuition Fee Increases 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the University of Regina 
it’s a 7 per cent in tuition fees. The University of 
Saskatchewan? They’re bracing for an expected 10 per cent 
increase tomorrow. 
 
Yes, it’s happening again. Year after year the NDP government 
has abandoned its responsibility for post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan. Government spending on education is less today 
than when this government took office. Recent increases do not 
even come close to covering past cuts. 
 
The truth of the matter is the NDP is mortgaging our children’s 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

future. What the Tories did with hot tubs, the NDP is doing 
with neglect. The budget has been balanced by allowing the 
infrastructure of this province to crumble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know where the NDP priorities are. It’s in 
hiring communications officers and then launching expensive 
advertising campaigns. 
 
Will the minister now intervene to ensure that students are not 
hit with huge tuition fee increases? Will he act to protect quality 
and affordable post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question that 
member asks of us today he very well should have asked a few 
years ago, in fact over the last four years when his Liberal Party 
federally under the CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer) 
block transfer programs reduced spending for health care and 
education to the tune of $6 billion — $6 billion. And the only 
replenishment —I might say to the credit of the federal Liberal 
Party — has been 2.5 billion on health care with no 
replenishment to post-secondary education whatsoever. 
 
This government’s level of funding for both operating and 
commitment to capital we believe is adequate. But the other 
falsehood behind the member’s question, assumption, is when 
he asks the question of the government, how will the 
government guarantee that such and such a thing should happen 
or should not happen with respect to tuition fees. In effect 
saying that the Government of Saskatchewan should step right 
in and say to the University of Regina board of governors or U 
of S (University of Saskatchewan) board of governors, you’re 
going to do it our way or no way. That’s not the way it’s run. 
That’s not the way the autonomy as universities are conducted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education is a 
provincial responsibility and those of us who weren’t born 
yesterday remember that this Premier criticized the federal 
government in the budget of last year when they introduced the 
millennial scholarships and the new commitment to university 
education. Now he talks about the university board of 
governors. You can’t use the board of governors like health 
district boards — as mud flaps and fertilizer deflectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new increases will mean that since this 
government took office, university tuition fees in this province 
have doubled. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals propose a $1,000 
scholarship to each and every first and second year 
post-secondary student in this province. This would help mean 
that affordable and quality education is available to the young 
people of Saskatchewan and ensure our future as a province . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well this is the priority of the 
Liberals. Our young people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now the hon. member 
has been extremely lengthy in his preamble, and I’ll . . . Order. 
And I’ll ask the hon. member to go directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Will the Premier commit to quit hiding behind 
the skirts of the board of governors like he hides behind the 
skirts of district boards in health and say he will turn back 
tuition fee increases? Where are your priorities? 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, today, Wednesday, 
April 21 — if that’s the date — the number one priority of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party is education. Friday last, the 
number one priority of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party was 
health care. The Friday before that, the number one priority of 
the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan was highways. The Friday 
before that, the number one priority of the Liberal Party of the 
province of Saskatchewan was agriculture. 
 
Here is the Liberal Party platform, Mr. Speaker. And the hon. 
member is correct about this. They’ve called for a 
$1,000-per-year scholarship program — in fact they call for the 
following. They call for $350 million in additional spending, for 
which they offset $70 million in, they say, our savings, leaving 
a deficit of about $250 million. And they do not have the 
courage or the ability or the gumption to tell us how they’re 
going to make up the difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number one priority of the Liberal Party is to 
self-destruct itself in this province. That’s their number one 
priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the road builders and heavy 
construction association have embarked on a postcard campaign 
in a desperate effort to draw attention to the fact that work on 
Saskatchewan highways is underfunded. 
 
While the Minister of Highways says her department’s budget 
is about 15.8 million more than it was last year, that doesn’t 
translate into 15 million more of road construction and 
maintenance. In reality only about 7 million of the increase is 
budgeted for construction and maintenance, with only about 5 
million of that going to that rural strategic initiatives fund. The 
rest, almost half, will be going to increases in administration, 
operations, development, and planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister expect that these administrators 
will fill the potholes with ad copy from the NDP’s anti-nurse 
campaign? When it comes to highway budget increases, how 
can the minister justify leaving the Saskatchewan road builders 
and the motoring public with a half a tank of fuel while you’re 
siphoning off the rest for pencil-pushers and flacks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the 
Liberal Party’s multiple number one priorities include roads, 
and it’s the same thing. The fact that this member says $7 
million is going into administration is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
Those facts are inaccurate. This government has put over 10 
years, a plan in place to have $2.5 billion a year spent on roads. 
We’re moving to that and we’ll hit that. 
 
We are building roads in this province to the best of our ability 
within all the constraints. The member may not want to hear the 
answer, Mr. Speaker, but he’s going to. 
 
This province has put into road budgeting more money than we 
have before and we’re continuing to increase that budget. You 
will look around, see the road plans, and you talk to the people 
who are building the roads. They know that they want more 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

money but this government has a plan in place. That plan is 
going to be put into action and at the best of our ability in terms 
of the dollars that we have at our disposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that government’s 
promise of 2.5 billion to spend on roads over the next 10 years 
is as full of holes as this province’s highways. Saskatchewan 
road builders welcomed the initial announcement and they got 
ready. They got equipped for more work. But the current reality 
is that this equipment now sits idle while you say that they’re 
not ready to do the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government likes to blame a lot of the 
problems, all of their woes on highways, on the federal 
government and the lack of a national highways program. But 
on that account they’re their own worst stumbling block as well. 
That’s because such a program will in all likelihood involve 
federal/provincial cost-sharing if it’s ever to proceed. When 
Saskatchewan road builders asked for a provincial commitment 
to a national program they got a big fat no from this 
government. 
 
Madam Minister, will you change your tune? Will you back a 
national highways program involving provincial cost-sharing, 
or will you leave this idea to rust like so much of 
Saskatchewan’s highway equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial premiers right across the country in the premiers’ 
convention in Saskatoon in August last put as our number one 
priority health care. And I repeat again, to the credit of the 
Liberal government nationally with their re-entry into funding, 
we were able to make this an 11 per cent increase for health 
care, the largest expenditure health care budget in the history of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But we also said in Saskatoon in August that we have other 
priorities as well, one of which is an infrastructure program to 
build up our highway system on a federal and provincial basis. 
And goodness knows Saskatchewan needs it as much if not 
more than any other province, given our highways system here. 
 
The Minister of Highways has been working diligently, as the 
Minister of Agriculture has been, on a whole host of 
agriculture/transportation issues to try to get that infrastructure 
program set up. I am hopeful — I’ll only go this far as I wrap 
up — I’m hopeful that Mr. Collenette, the federal Minister of 
Transport and the Liberal government, are looking at this united 
provincial-premiers, territorial-leaders call for more money. 
 
If that program is announced by Ottawa, to the best of our 
ability, we will be there to assist our highways, our farmers, and 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. But the move is 
Ottawa’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Learning Disabled Students 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Earlier in this session, Mr. Speaker, I submitted questions to the 

Minister of Education to table research that proves that the 
educational interventions offered in the province to severely 
learning disabled children are indeed successful. I also asked 
the minister to provide documentation that the funding formula 
introduced in 1989 has served the educational needs of learning 
disabled children better than the old formula. And I am sorry to 
say today, Mr. Speaker, that the minister’s responses have 
raised far more questions than answers. 
 
My question to the Minister of Education this afternoon is this: 
since there were reviews in the 1980s, since there have been 
reviews in the 1990s, since there was review underway even 
today, if the reviews were accurate, why is there a need to do 
yet another one? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 
member’s question. And as she will know from her own former 
experience in the field of education for special needs children, 
that the dynamics of this part of our school population is 
constantly changing and we are constantly trying to do better in 
meeting their needs. 
 
And so that would be . . . the purpose of the review is to make 
sure that our approach to these issues, these very important 
issues, is as thorough and as modern and in keeping with the 
needs of those children as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are 
many, many young people throughout North America who are 
living a very difficult life. And they carry out actions that are 
inexplicable to us. Learning disabled children in this province 
have been found to be involved in more criminal elements, they 
are children who experience more mental health problems, not 
just learning difficulties. This is a very, very serious problem 
and we have not yet been addressing it in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The parent group, Concerned Parents for Learning Disabled 
Children, were provided with all of the responses from the 
Minister of Education and they remain very, very perplexed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wish today for the government to please give some hope to 
these families by telling them what they can expect in terms of 
a definitive policy for the very first time in a very long time 
from this government regarding the education of their learning 
disabled children. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, as the member will 
know these issues are very complex. And the school plays a 
important role in the lives of these children and students but it’s 
also a responsibility of parents. There are issues like poverty 
that contribute to some of the problems. 
 
We have made a special effort in the community schools to 
extend preschool programs, to access children — all children 
but particularly those with special needs — at an earlier age. 
And we are doing everything we can together with parents, 
community groups, through the schools to address the needs of 
these children in the most sensitive way possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move first reading of Bill No. 204, The 
Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 220 — The Crown Corporation 
Rate Review Act, 1999 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 220, The Crown Corporations 
Rate Review Act, 1999 be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Resignation of Member 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before proceeding to the 
orders of the day, the Chair has a matter he wishes to bring to 
the attention of the members. 
 
Earlier this day I met with the hon. member for Cypress Hills, 
and at the meeting that I had with the hon. member he asked 
that I would communicate to you this message: 
 

To the Speaker and Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan: 
 
Two years ago I was charged with a criminal offence. At 
the time I maintained that I was innocent as I do today. I 
assure the Assembly that while my trial is not over or 
concluded that I will continue to use every legal means 
available to clear my name in the future. 
 
I do recognize that there will be and has been 
embarrassment for the Assembly. For that I am deeply 
remorseful. 
 
The reason for my resignation is out of respect for the 
institution. I therefore resign my seat for the Cypress Hills 
constituency effective immediately. Signed, Jack Goohsen. 

 
And, hon. members, I will direct that all items in the name of 
the member for Cypress Hills will be dropped from the order 
paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22  The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 22, The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act, and I will so move following my 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that I outline for the hon. 
members some of the history, some of the difficulties that the 
government faced in making the decision that led to the 
introduction of this Bill. In order to fully understand this issue 
it’s important to review some history. 
 
Section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
came into force on April 17, 1985 and this particular section of 
the Charter forbids discrimination in a number of areas, 
including marital status. 
 
Prior to that date spousal benefits to spouses of workers killed 
while on the job were terminated if the spouse remarried or 
entered into a common-law relationship. And this was the case 
across Canada and was in keeping with the law of the land at 
the time. 
 
And section 15 changed all that. As of April 17, 1985 it was 
contrary to the Charter to discriminate in this way. 
Saskatchewan acted relatively quickly to bring its legislation, 
including it’s workers’ compensation laws into line with the 
Charter. And we amended our workers’ compensation law to 
comply with the Charter on September 1, 1985. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the enactment of section 15 and the 
subsequent change to our workers’ compensation laws meant 
we had to consider two groups of people when we were 
deciding what to do about this issue. 
 
The first group who had been collecting spousal benefits under 
our workers’ compensation system and who remarried or 
entered into a common-law relationship prior to the date of 
enactment, April 17, 1985. And secondly, there was a number 
of people who were affected by the lapse between the coming 
into force of section 15 and the amendment to our Workers’ 
Compensation Act. They had remarried or entered into a 
common-law relationship after section 15 was law but before 
our Act had been changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a regulation under The Workers’ Compensation 
Act has been enacted to authorize the Workers’ Compensation 
Board to reinstate the future benefits of the six women who had 
their WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) spousal benefits 
terminated in the time period between the enactment of section 
15 and the change to the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation 
Act — in other words between April 17 and September 1, 1985. 
 
They will begin receiving their benefits as soon as Workers’ 
Compensation Board has completed its calculation of their 
benefit levels. 
 
As I’ve already stated, it was the law of the land at that time for 
workers’ compensation and other benefits such as spousal 
pension benefits to be terminated upon remarriage. Now this is 
what had occurred with both of the groups of people I’d just 
mentioned. Although it’s important to note that although their 
spousal benefits were terminated, many of them continued to 
receive benefits for their dependent children. 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
concerned about the well-being of the people who had their 
workers’ compensation spousal benefits terminated when they 
remarried or entered a common-law relationship. Many of them 
are now elderly or in difficult financial situations, and we feel 
it’s important to do what we can to help them. 
 
The Bill we have before us today will authorize the Workers’ 
Compensation Board to make a one-time, non-taxable payment 
of 80,000 available upon application to each of the 
approximately 272 people who had their benefits terminated 
prior to September 1, 1985. And this includes the six women 
who are having their future benefits reinstated. 
 
I understand that WCB will conduct an advertising campaign, 
and will ask the Disenfranchised Widows Action Group of 
Saskatchewan to help notify potential recipients so as to ensure 
that no one is overlooked. 
 
These payments will total approximately 23 million which 
includes 1.2 for reinstatement of the benefits to the six women 
and 21.8 for the one-time payment. These payments are not 
expected to result in any increase in workers’ compensation 
premiums to employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to stress that it’s not necessary for the 
people who we are talking about today to belong to any 
organization or to employ a lawyer to apply for the special 
one-time payment of 80,000. The steps they have to take to 
obtain this payment are as follows: they must first provide the 
Workers’ Compensation Board with proof of their eligibility; 
and second, sign a release. 
 
However, I think it’s important to note that anyone who is 
involved in legal action against the government regarding this 
issue at the time they make their application, will not be eligible 
for the payment. Eligible applicants will receive the payment 
once the Bill before us has received Royal Assent and the 
Workers’ Compensation Board has processed their application. 
 
I’m pleased to be able to inform the Assembly that as of this 
week, a total of 55 people have informed the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) of their intent to apply for the payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government devoted a great deal of attention 
to the deliberation of this issue, and I must say it hasn’t been 
easy. There are a great many financial obligations which must 
be balanced by any fair-minded government. This issue is also 
complicated by the fact that it involved a constitutional 
document as well as provincial legislation. 
 
We had to take into account the effect of our actions on the 
business community which funds our workers’ compensation 
program through employer-paid premiums. We had to consider 
the needs of any future claimants on the workers’ compensation 
system, and we had to take into account the overall public 
interest of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said earlier, although we are not going back in time, what 
we can do is to take the steps I’ve outlined here today. We can 
reinstate future benefits for the women who had their benefits 
terminated between April 17 and September 1, 1985; and we 
can offer a one-time tax-free payment of 80,000 to all the 

people who had their Saskatchewan workers’ compensation 
spousal benefits terminated when they remarried or entered into 
a common-law relationship. 
 
In short, we can and will do what we can to help. And I believe 
these steps we have taken will help and I think we have struck 
the correct balance among the needs of the widows and 
widowers whose benefits were terminated, the needs of future 
WCB claimants, the needs of the business community which 
funds the program, and the needs of Saskatchewan people as a 
whole. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of 
Bill No. 22, The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this is an important day for a very small group of people 
in this province — the disenfranchised widows. 
 
And they have certainly brought their issue forward to the 
attention of the people of this province and to the attention of 
the government. And the government’s response has been to 
present this Bill today which would award all of the 
disenfranchised widows who did not receive their spouses’ 
pensions after they remarried, from Workers’ Compensation 
Board, they’re going to compensate them to the sum of 
$80,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This goes back now in Saskatchewan, 14 years since the date 
that the legislation was changed to allow a spouse whose spouse 
had died and who remarried to carry on with their pension, Mr. 
Speaker. And this came about, as the minister stated, because of 
a Supreme Court decision under charter . . . of the 15th clause 
of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
At that time, no consideration was given to those spouses who 
had lost their pensions previously because there was no 
legislation in place. It was only those that were going onwards 
from that point that would continue to carry that pension. 
 
But there was six widows, Mr. Speaker — and we’re talking 
mainly widows here; there may be one or two men involved, 
I’m not sure, but in general it’s women and widows, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re talking about — six widows from the time 
the court decision came down to the time the legislation was 
presented to this Assembly and passed; there was six widows 
that fell into that group. They were retroactively compensated 
and carried on with their pensions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there was a considerable number of other widows, Mr. 
Speaker, across this province who had been disenfranchised of 
those pensions prior to the Supreme Court decision. And those 
widows today, Mr. Speaker, have pressured the government and 
are asking for considerations, not back to the time that they 
initially lost their pensions, their spouses’ pensions, to Workers’ 
Compensation Board, but back to the date the legislation was 
passed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This took place . . . The reason that this was necessitated was 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

because of the Supreme Court decision, but also a decision in 
British Columbia where the widows in that province went to 
court and the courts awarded them damages and the return of 
their pensions and compensation from the date that the 
legislation passed in British Columbia until that day that the 
court decided, and they carried on with their pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the courts have not yet been 
asked to rule on this. But other provinces, namely in Ontario, in 
Nova Scotia, in Alberta, and I believe it’s occurring in 
Manitoba — I’m not exactly sure just where it is in the process 
— but those provinces went ahead and provided compensation 
without the necessity to go to court. Only in British Columbia 
so far has there been a necessity to go through the court system 
to achieve some grievance . . . or redress of grievance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But here in Saskatchewan, the government is recognizing that 
there is some substantialness to the claim; that they have to 
respond. And they’re responding by providing $80,000 across 
the board, Mr. Speaker, to those widows that have lost their 
pensions. And it’s without regard, Mr. Speaker, to what size 
that pension may have been, or to the demands that were being 
placed on those widows at that time when they lost those 
pensions, Mr. Speaker. It’s one size fits all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And a good number of the disenfranchised widows do not feel 
that one size does indeed fit all and they believe that the 
compensation should be paid back to April 17, 1985 and that 
their pensions should be reinstated. For someone who is quite 
elderly, as the minister stated, the $80,000 may be more than 
sufficient for them. 
 
But some of these widows, Mr. Speaker, are still fairly young. 
They have a long life ahead of them and the $80,000 
compensation is not anywheres near what they would receive if 
the pensions were reinstated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I think it’s incumbent on this government to revisit 
what they’re doing and to indeed provide compensation and 
reinstatement of those pensions. If the government was to say 
they would provide $80,000 today and reinstatement of these 
pensions, perhaps some of the widows would be interested in 
that. I don’t know. But I think, Mr. Speaker, there are very few 
of the widows that are interested today in simply the $80,000. 
 
One of the things that the government is doing in this Act 
though, Mr. Speaker, is saying you either take the $80,000 or 
you take your chances in court — one or the other. We believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that there should be some consideration given to 
allowing the courts to make the decision in Saskatchewan to 
determine what would indeed be fair compensation. 
 
And it’s not unusual, it’s especially not unusual, Mr. Speaker, 
when you’re dealing with an NDP government that things are 
done retroactively. And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, there are Bills 
before this Assembly that deem things to have happened as 
much as 50 years ago. We’re going back as much as 50 years in 
making corrections and changes to legislation to provide 
assurances, not for the individuals of this province and not for 
protection of the individuals of this province, Mr. Speaker, but 
rather for the protection of this government. We’re going back 
50 years, Mr. Speaker, to provide protection for the 

government. 
 
So I think in this particular Bill, in this particular case with the 
disenfranchised widows, that it would not be that onerous, Mr. 
Speaker, if the government was to give consideration to going 
back the 14 years. Failing to go back the 14 years, they should 
absolutely reconsider the reinstatement of those pensions for 
those widows, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that there are other members in this Assembly who wish 
to address this issue, and I will give them that opportunity. And 
we look forward, Mr. Speaker, to debating and discussing this 
Bill while it’s in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I congratulate and 
thank the Minister of Labour for putting this piece of legislation 
before us. I do have some problems with specific items in the 
legislation, but nonetheless I congratulate the government and 
the minister for finally dealing with a long, outstanding 
injustice in our province. 
 
I think we would also be remiss as a House if we did not all 
recognize — members from all sides of this House — that the 
reason this matter is before the public agenda is largely due to 
the efforts of the member for Saskatoon Greystone; that she is 
the one who took up the fight on behalf of the disenfranchised 
widows. She is the one who brought it to public attention and 
the attention of this House, and I think that she deserves the 
credit of both government and opposition members for having 
put this serious item on the public agenda. 
 
I think this is also a time for us to honour those women whose 
men were killed on the work site, and the widows, in many 
cases with young children, were forced to carry on in very 
difficult financial and emotional situations. And this is an 
attempt to give some recognition to them and some measure of 
honour to them. 
 
However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I do have to register 
two items which I do not like about the legislation. And the first 
— and we will take this up again in Committee of the Whole — 
but the first is section 4, which provides that if any widow takes 
this matter to court contesting that the compensation offered is 
not adequate and she is entitled to more, she becomes 
disentitled to share in this payment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, the position of the 
government and of the minister is that this is a social payment; 
that there is in fact no legal obligation to these people. Well the 
widows of course obviously disagree. They believe that they do 
have a lawful claim. I express no view on that. It will be 
litigated in due course and we will hear from our courts as to 
whether there is or is not a lawful claim here. 
 
But I put this to you, Mr. Speaker. Is it not illogical for the 
government on the one hand to say, we do not accept that there 
is a lawful claim here, we are doing this as an ex gratia 
payment only for which there is no legal obligation. However, 
anyone who disagrees with us and attempts to gain a legal 
judgment will be disentitled to their share of the fund? 
 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

Surely it would be more fair, Mr. Speaker, if the government 
said that in the event this matter is taken to court by any of the 
widows involved, the $80,000 to which they are entitled will be 
deducted from any judgment they receive. So that for example 
if the widow receives a judgement of 160,000, that would be 
160,000 in total including the 80,000 included in this 
legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I submit it is heaping injustice on injustice to 
say that if a widow attempts to take this to court and ultimately 
fails, she gets nothing either from the court action or from the 
$80,000 offer being made in this legislation. 
 
So I really ask the government to reconsider section 4. It looks 
vindictive and punitive to say that if a widow dares go near a 
court, she will be disentitled. I respectfully submit that sends 
out the wrong message. It still continues to look heavy-handed 
when the government is attempting to look compassionate on 
this group of women. 
 
I do have one other question concerning the legislation and that 
is the issue of who pays. The government takes the position that 
this is a social payment without legal obligation. Now if that is 
the case, if we are making this payment for public policy 
reasons, then is it fair that the payment ought to be borne by 
present-day employers in the province. 
 
It seems to me that is illogical. If this is a payment being made 
for public policy reasons, then it is the public which ought to 
bear that responsibility than present-day employers through the 
Workers’ Compensation fund. 
 
The government tells us this is a social payment; it is not an 
attempt to avoid a court judgment. If that is the case, then I 
respectfully submit that as a social payment it falls in much the 
same category as payments that the federal government has had 
to make for students in residential schools of a generation or 
two ago and the Japanese internment cases. 
 
These were government actions made at the time which in light 
of second thoughts and later generations came to believe was 
wrong. And we came to believe that some compensation was 
owned as a matter of social policy. So all of the people of 
Canada have had to participate in that payment. 
 
However here, Mr. Speaker, the government on the one hand 
says we are making a social payment for reasons of charity and 
consideration, not for reasons of legal liability. And yet we are 
going to charge this payment against present-day employers. 
They are the ones who will make the payment — nobody else. 
That seems to me illogical and unfair. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those two reservations, I will allow other 
members to join in this debate. 
 
I want to say that I’m pleased to see this on the public agenda. I 
hope all members will join with me in acknowledging that this 
legislation is before us today largely due to the efforts of the 
disenfranchised widows themselves and of the efforts to the 
member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
But I do urge the Minister of Labour to look again at the issue 
as to whether if a widow dares to litigate this matter, she will be 

automatically disqualified and disentitled for participating in 
this payment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great day for me to be able to rise and respond to second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
And I have but a few words to say and I want to begin by 
talking about some facts. One fact is that the majority of the 
people who are most affected are women. And many of us who 
are women often wonder if in fact this problem would have 
existed for as long as it has existed if it had been genderless. 
 
Many of the widows — and I’ll call them widows rather than 
grouping them in with widowers — had children who had to 
live without the guidance of two parents for all of their lives. 
These families have often lived in poverty or with great, great 
challenges financially. And now many of these women are 
elderly — some are not — and some are in poor health. 
 
It’s most understandable, and in fact it was laudable and it was 
healthy, that some of these widows were able to love again and 
commit again after suffering such pain and loss in their lives. 
And it does seem incomprehensible to those of us who really 
reflect on this situation that those who did remarry were 
punished by having their pensions ceased. 
 
It was a great privilege for me to bring this issue into the 
legislature and I was very, very honoured to be able to meet so 
many women who are courageous people and to get them . . . to 
know them just a bit. 
 
(1445) 
 
I must say it was very frustrating in this Assembly initially to 
try to deal with this matter when there seemed to be no political 
will at all to address it seriously. In fact some of the things that 
occurred initially were not only frustrating but they seemed to 
negate the importance of the circumstances of so many of these 
people who have endured so much. 
 
But the shade began to lift and the light began to shine through 
when the new Minister of Labour was appointed. And I do 
believe that that should be clearly stated in this Assembly. 
 
The Minister of Labour has demonstrated a determination to see 
this through where there was no determination before. There 
was a determination for her to steer this through Cabinet, to 
clearly have people understand the seriousness, the severity of 
this injustice. And without the support of some of her 
colleagues in caucus, I know that she wouldn’t have had the 
support to have the entire government finally endorse some 
package for these people. 
 
Now it would be great if we lived in a perfect world. But we do 
not. And would I have preferred for the widows to have 
received exactly what they wished? Of course I would. I would 
wish perfection on everything if I could. 
 
But my wishes aren’t going to make things come true. It was 
not, never will be, a perfect world. And retrospective justice is 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

very, very difficult to attach a sum to. 
 
Even though I sit on this side of the House, even though I’m not 
a member of government, I came here to be part of good 
governance. And good governance to me means, Mr. Speaker, 
that I need to look across the piece, not just simply see the 
circumstances facing this particular group of people who 
deserve recognition, support, and a sense of a fair and more just 
world, but to look at it in the context of government overall, and 
governance overall. 
 
And when I met with the Minister of Labour, when I looked at 
this from the legal considerations, from the Charter 
considerations, and most importantly on the considerations of 
the grounds of compassion, I understood the differences 
between why there were certain settlements in British Columbia 
as there were, why there were different settlements in New 
Brunswick and other places that are transpiring now. The fact 
that there were things done in the province of Saskatchewan 
legally, in this very Assembly, that changed the reality for the 
province of Saskatchewan and the widows here. 
 
But equally importantly for me, Mr. Speaker, the surplus in the 
Workers’ Compensation fund is something that isn’t only to be 
earmarked to meet this particular case. There are other people 
and other circumstances that have claim on those dollars as 
well. And as much as people would like to have more, it is more 
important to me that some sense of fairness prevail and that 
something transpire that gives support to these widows. 
 
As well, good governance means that one has to look at all of 
the other conflicting demands across our province. And I think 
that the stand that’s been taken, a stand that says a wrong was 
done and here’s an opportunity to try to rectify some wrong, is a 
very important message to be sending out. 
 
I reiterate that it would be great if in the best of all possible 
worlds that people could be compensated for such tremendous 
tragedy and some pretty significant injustice. But it’s not a 
perfect world. And I this day wish to say to the widows that had 
it not been for their determination, had it not been for their 
continued courage, had it not been for their willingness to fight 
for something that they truly believed was important, this would 
not be transpiring. And we have to add to that, that there is a 
Minister of Labour who was an individual with the intelligence, 
the compassion, and really the commitment to look to the plight 
of these women and say that, regardless of what is not there in 
terms of support, she was going to make sure that this was 
going to come to fruition. 
 
So I would like this very day to say thank you to the 
disenfranchised widows, to those who have subsequently called 
me who are not part of the organization, to the Minister of 
Labour, to the government for thankfully bringing something 
forward and finally bringing something forward for these 
individuals. 
 
And as well I would like to say to all members of the Assembly, 
who I hope will give a strong endorsement for this today, a 
thank you to them as well, because initially I don’t think most 
of us understood the gravity of what had transpired over these 
many, many years. 
 

And with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I would simply like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Suspension of Member 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
withdraw this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted and the motion is dropped. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 27 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 27 and Bill 28 deal 
with essentially the same matter, so I’ll make comments on both 
of those Bills in a single statement. 
 
These Bills are probably among the most important we’ve seen 
this session. Because without their passage the provincial 
government could well find itself in a severe financial crunch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both of these Bills stem from a decision made last 
fall by the Supreme Court of Canada. In that decision the court 
ruled that governments did not have the right to simply levy 
probate charges as service fees set out by regulations. Because 
they are charges levied by government where there is no 
discernible service being given, the Supreme Court ruled these 
probate fees to be taxes, not service fees. And because these are 
in fact taxes they cannot be brought in through simple 
regulation. They have to be legislated through statute like any 
other tax that the government charges. 
 
With this decision, coming down because of a situation in 
Ontario, obviously this could be used as a precedent in all other 
provinces. And for that reason each province, I understand, will 
enact legislation very similar so they can continue charging 
these fees as a full-fledged tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time of its decision the Supreme Court gave 
the provinces until April 22, which is tomorrow, to enact 
legislation to make these fees legal in the eyes of the court. As 
we speak, Ontario, New Brunswick, and Newfoundland have 
already passed this legislation. 
 
On the bright side, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does something we 
don’t see all that often from this NDP government. It actually 
takes something from regulations and puts it into legislation. 
This is a break in the NDP trend to move as much authority as 
possible out of this Assembly and into the hands of the cabinet, 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

in an attempt to make as many decisions as possible behind 
closed doors and away from the scrutiny of the public, the 
press, and opposition members. So we see a brief reprieve from 
that trend. 
 
It’s a shame though, Mr. Speaker, that it took a Supreme Court 
ruling to make this NDP government see the value in debating 
changes on the floor of this Assembly, which is what we are all 
elected to do. 
 
There is no doubt that with the majority that the government of 
the day has, this Bill will pass. And with the dollar figures 
we’re talking about which government has charged dating back 
over the past 50 years, it is probably essential that we do pass 
this legislation to avoid making the government liable to refund 
a staggering amount of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these fees currently generate about $3 million a 
year for the government. Spread out over 50 years you can get 
some sense of the amount of money that we’re dealing with 
here. 
 
However I don’t think that we can simply ignore what we’re 
doing with the passage of this legislation. I don’t think anyone 
in this legislature should feel all that comfortable with what 
we’re doing here no matter how practically necessary it may 
seem to the government of the day. 
 
We’re basically acknowledging that what has gone on for 
decades in this province has been illegal and against the rights 
of those who have been forced to pay these probate fees. To be 
fair, the current government did not set up this situation, but it 
certainly fostered it, like all other governments for the past 50 
years in most other provinces. And with this Bill, coming as it 
did on the heels of the Supreme Court ruling, we’re 
acknowledging that we are charging this amount of money 
where absolutely no service has been rendered. 
 
In essence what the government is doing here is imposing an 
estate tax, Mr. Speaker, and we should not think of these two 
Bills as anything but what they are. This is a tax on death. 
Someone once said that there are only two definites in this 
world — death and taxes — and this combines them. 
 
I think if we are to have an estate tax, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province, we should call it just that rather than disguising a tax 
as a fee. Anyone who has been through a probate situation 
knows full well that very little if anything in the way of actual 
service is provided by the government when they levy their 
fees. This has been judged unfair by the court and these fees 
have been recognized for what they are — a tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the key components of these Bills is the 
deeming clause — something we’ve seen this government bring 
forward several times before. Essentially what this clause does, 
Mr. Speaker, is to rewrite the history of the last five years, at 
least as it applies to these probate fees, which with the passage 
of this Bill are better identified as estate taxes as I mentioned 
earlier. 
 
We see in this Bill a clause that states that yes, what we’ve been 
doing for the last 50 years as it relates to probate fees has been 
wrong and in fact illegal. But despite that, we have the power in 

this Assembly to simply pass a law stating that none of that ever 
happened and therefore the government never broke the law. 
 
And while the government feels it has no choice in this instance 
given the ramifications and the amount of money involved with 
this decision by the Supreme Court, I don’t think we should 
forget that this isn’t the first time the NDP government has used 
this rather heavy-handed tactic. This is the third time that I can 
recall that the current government has used such a deeming 
provision to rewrite history. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we all remember the famous — or I 
should say infamous — circumstances surrounding the 
government’s decision to scrap the gross revenue insurance 
program. I think we all remember that, Mr. Speaker, because it 
wasn’t this government’s finest hour. They had missed giving 
the farmers the required notice but no problem, the NDP simply 
passed legislation stating that in fact they had given the proper 
notice. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we have the cases of the judges. The 
Assembly passed legislation requiring an independent panel to 
set the salaries of provincial judges. This legislation also stated 
that this independent panel’s decision would be binding. So 
when the panel came back with a decision the NDP did not like, 
what happened? What happened to this so-called binding 
decision of this so-called independent panel? Well the 
government simply passed subsequent legislation stating that 
the panel never existed — never existed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For many in Saskatchewan this kind of retroactive legislation, 
this kind of rewriting of history, is the cause of much 
discontent. It basically tells the people that the government has 
the power and the authority to pass almost any kind of 
legislation in this Assembly despite what has come before it. It 
is probably the most heavy-handed way to govern, Mr. Speaker, 
and no one should take comfort in this type of legislation. 
 
Another of my concerns, Mr. Speaker, is what’s going to come 
at us down the road as a result of this Supreme Court ruling. 
While this dealt solely with probate fees, as we all know there 
are many dozens of government fees on the books — many of 
which are far out of line with the cost incurred by the 
government to perform this service. 
 
(1500) 
 
One such example that comes to mind is the fees charged by the 
Land Titles Office, Mr. Speaker. Quite often a simple transfer 
of ownership will cost hundreds of dollars and no one can tell 
me that this fee is anywhere near what it actually costs the 
government to provide that service. No, this is simply another 
example of government taxing people heavily for a transfer of 
title, charging them whatever they want. 
 
Like the probate fees, Mr. Speaker, land titles is another profit 
centre for government, Mr. Speaker. And I question whether the 
province is going to find itself in a similar situation of having to 
pass retroactive legislation because one day the court will 
decide that these charges, too, are not service fees, but rather 
taxes, plain and simple. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just some of my initial comments on 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

Bills 26 and 27. I understand that the government will be asking 
for leave to deal with these Bills in committee today. And if we 
do get to proceed today, I’ll bring these concerns into question 
at that time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice indicates that he 
wishes to exercise his right to conclude debate. It is the 
responsibility of the Chair to advise all hon. members that if 
they wish to enter into debate that they must do so now. If not, 
then I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just briefly I 
would like to close debate by clarifying one simple point. That 
simple point that this procedure related to probate, letters 
probate or letters of administration, is a procedure that protects 
executors, creditors, beneficiaries — many, many people. And 
for the hon. member to say that this fee is not paying for a 
service or not paying for something that happens, I think shows 
a lack of understanding of how the law works. And what’s 
extremely important here is that these fees are charged on the 
basis of the kind of protection that’s provided to the public. 
 
So I just didn’t want to leave the impression that the member 
has raised that these kinds of fees are related to something that 
has no purpose. They serve great purpose for the orderly 
payment of debts in our province. And with that I close debate. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 28 — The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 
1999 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration des successions 
be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27  The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today Susan Amrud from Department of Justice, 
legislative services branch; and also Jan Kernaghan who is the 
registrar of the Court of Queen’s Bench and of Provincial 
Court. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. Mr. Minister, 
before I proceed with any questions I would like to comment on 
your statement to me earlier in the House today about the lack 
of understanding of what this legislation is about. 

Mr. Minister, I think that it was quite clear in my speech that I 
understand clearly that a fee is being charged for probate, but 
because the fee being charged is much in excess of what the 
services can possibly cost, that is the point we’re making. 
We’re making a point that this is taxation. And the very fact 
that you’re bringing forth legislation is, in effect, telling 
everyone in this Legislative Assembly and the province that it is 
a tax. So I just needed to make that comment because that’s 
exactly what it seems to be is happening here. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I understand it, the Supreme Court in this 
matter basically ruled that as government you do not have the 
right to simply charge probate fees; that they are no relationship 
to what it actually costs to issue letters of probate. Is that 
essentially correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think it’s 
important that I briefly explain what the purpose of letters 
probate or letters of administration are for. 
 
When an application for letters probate or letters of 
administration is filed with the court, it’s not simply rubber 
stamped by the clerk. The documents are received and recorded; 
a notice is prepared by the clerk and forwarded to the registrar 
of courts. The registrar searches the records and prepares a 
certificate stating whether there is a caveat filed against the 
estate or whether any other applications for probate have been 
filed. 
 
On receipt of the certificate the clerk reviews the materials filed 
to ensure they are complete. The materials are then reviewed by 
a judge to ensure that the acted rules have been complied with 
to determine that the person making the application is entitled 
to make the application; that the appropriate bond has been 
filed; that the will is properly executed and that children’s 
interests are properly protected. 
 
Letters probate or letters of administration provide proof to 
anyone the executor or administrator deals with that the 
executor or administrator has authority to deal with the property 
of the estate. An executor, being the person named by the 
deceased in his or her will, has authority to act immediately 
after the death. 
 
With careful estate planning it will often be possible for an 
executor to administer an estate without first obtaining letters 
probate. If there is no will, the situation is much more 
complicated. No one has authority to act until the court has 
determined the proper person to act, and issues letters of . . . 
issued letters of administration. 
 
Letters of administration protect people dealing with the 
administrator. For example, a person who wishes to buy land 
owned by the deceased or a car owned by the deceased can 
safely pay the money over and know that he or she will receive 
the property purchased. If a bank or credit union pays out 
money to a person who claims to be entitled to the money but 
has no letters probate or letters of administration, they are 
taking a risk. If they were misled and paid it to the wrong 
person, they will have to pay it again to the right person. 
 
Letters probate and letters of administration are court orders 
that protect the property of someone who is not here to protect 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

that property themselves, that is the deceased. 
 
The fees that are charged in this particular situation are related 
to the value of the property because the greater the value of the 
property, the greater the chance is that there may be some 
problem if it’s not dealt with properly. These fees have been 
charged since before Saskatchewan was a province. They were 
set out as they are in the present regulations in 1942. And we 
are now, in response to some of the questions raised by the 
Supreme Court of Canada, clarifying and setting out exactly the 
same fees in the law. Thanks. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, with this 
legislation you will charge $7 on every $1,000 of estate assets. 
Is that a change in the current rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. It’s been that amount since 1994. 
Before that it was $6. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Can you tell me how the government settled on $7 
per 1,000 as an appropriate fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The fee was raised from $6 to $7 after it 
had been $6 for many, many years. It’s based on comparisons 
with what’s charged in other provinces. I think Alberta and 
Saskatchewan have virtually the same fees, and they are the 
lowest in the country. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us what it actually costs 
the government to issue letters of probate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s quite a difficult question to answer 
because if it’s a case that involves many, many pieces of 
property and very many complex issues, it could be that a single 
case could cost thousands and thousands of dollars. 
 
Otherwise in a normal case, if you added in all of the clerk’s 
time, the court time, the court space, the . . . you know, heat, 
light, all those things, I don’t think it would be possible to set an 
exact amount but I’m sure that would be clearly in the 
hundreds, maybe to a thousand dollars for each one. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. If you could just repeat 
your last statement. It would be in the area of what? Or the 
range of what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It would be in the range of hundreds to a 
thousand dollars, somewhere in that range. 
 
But the difficulty in answering your question is that what may 
appear to be a simple estate — for example if we have some 
mineral rights that were in a title and ostensibly the value of 
that might be a dollar an acre for a quarter, so you have a 
hundred and sixty dollar asset — but there may be some 
possibility that an oil company might want to pay for a lease on 
that particular property and then you end up with some dispute 
over the ownership involved in that particular case. 
 
It could be that the amount of court time and judge’s time and 
everything else to sort out the final ownership around the 
documents that are brought forward to prove who should get 
letters of administration — that’s a situation where you have an 
asset that might only be a hundred and sixty dollars on the face 

of it — that could cost tens and twenties, thirty, forty, fifty 
thousand dollars to the government and the system. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last year 
the government took in about $3 million in probate fees. And 
I’m sure that that is recorded; otherwise we wouldn’t know that 
amount. 
 
Also I would imagine that it would be recorded and 
documented about what cost the government incurred in 
providing the letters of probate last year. Do you have that sum 
of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Your figure is accurate — about $3 
million. This is all incorporated into the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. We don’t break it down based on each particular 
procedure that’s done in the Court of Queen’s Bench. So it 
could include a three- or four-week criminal trial or it could 
include a civil trial. All of those costs are all put together in the 
budget for the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So there’s no written documentation of how much 
these specific costs were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. As you may understand, the Court of 
Queen’s Bench deals with all of the legislation that we have, 
and they don’t break it down as to which particular procedure 
costs how much. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, do all provinces have similar rules 
as to when such letters of probate are necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, all provinces, all states, all 
common-law jurisdictions use this method. And in fact I would 
say every country in the world has some method of providing 
proof of the documentation that allows for a transfer of assets 
from a deceased to those people who are to benefit. 
 
So this process is, I guess, worldwide. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, many people in Saskatchewan 
believe that very little in the way of service is provided for the 
fees that are charged. Many view this as simply an estate tax. 
And essentially that’s what the court rules. The court rules that 
these fees are a tax. How do you respond to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I guess what I would say is that in 
1971, most of the jurisdictions in Canada eliminated the estate 
taxes in a trade-off to charge tax on capital gains. And at that 
time I think every province did that except the province of 
Quebec, and they continued with their estate taxes and a flat fee 
for probate. All the other provinces eliminated estate taxes, 
went to the capital gains tax system, and continued with their 
court fees or probate fees regime. And basically that’s the way 
the country is organized now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well Mr. Minister, we still have these estate or 
death taxes, obviously. And we also have capital gains tax. So 
we have both where some provinces have substituted one for 
the other — that seems to me that that’s what you’re saying. 
 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, I’m not saying that. I’m saying that 
every province has this system of proving who should be the 
authorized person — an executor or administrator — to manage 
the affairs of somebody who has died and the assets are in the 
estate. 
 
I should also point out that these fees are only paid for by those 
estates where there are assets that require letters probate or 
letters of administration. For example, if assets are in joint 
accounts or a house is in joint names, then it’s not necessary to 
actually probate an estate, so there’s no fees paid in that 
situation. 
 
So I think the best way to understand this is that in those 
situations where you do require letters probate or letters of 
administration, this fee or this process is there to protect the 
executor or the administrator, the beneficiaries, banks, and 
everybody else that deals with them. But it’s not absolutely 
necessary in every estate, so therefore it’s not a general estate 
tax at all. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Supreme Court gave provinces until tomorrow, April 22, to get 
these laws changed. How many provinces have made these 
changes or are in the process of making these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time Ontario, 
Newfoundland, and New Brunswick have already passed the 
legislation. Ontario was the fastest. Manitoba has announced 
they will do so. Alberta and British Columbia are reviewing it. 
 
And we know that the provincial treasurer in Alberta announced 
yesterday that they were proceeding with an omnibus Bill that 
dealt with a whole number of these kinds of fees, and so that 
they’re proceeding in that way. They will not meet the deadline 
obviously, and so they will have to pass legislation that will I 
guess be retroactive back to the April 22 deadline as well as 
deal with all the fees they’ve collected over this century, I guess 
the best way to put it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, if these changes are not 
made in Saskatchewan or if the government would have 
determined not to make the changes, would the province be 
required to refund the money that it had collected illegally over 
the past five decades? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There would be this question around these 
things. Practically I think what would have happened is that if 
there were court challenges around a specific fee, then they 
would be dealt with in that case. 
 
I think the irony of this whole situation, if you think about the 
Supreme Court of Canada decision, the only person who will 
benefit in this whole process of having those fees refunded is 
Mrs. Eurig, because in Ontario they passed a law that 
completely eliminated a chance of any other Ontario resident of 
ever getting the same benefit that she did. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Now, Mr. Minister, can the Supreme Court ruling 
regarding government fees only be applied to probate fees, or 
can there be an argument made that it’s a decision that could 
potentially affect the legality of all other government fees and 
service charges? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There is that potential. And all of the 
governments in Canada are looking at this issue as it relates to 
fees and we’re doing that as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Were you concerned, Mr. Minister, that someone 
might look at other fees imposed by government and launch 
similar suits, lawsuits here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, we’re looking at it in conjunction 
with all of the provincial governments and comparing notes as 
to which kinds of fees are charged, and it’s something that 
we’re monitoring and we’re planning to fix if there are any 
problems that we discover. At this point, we’re still in the 
review stage. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In that regard, Mr. 
Minister, one example that has been brought to my attention by 
several people is the fees charged by the Land Titles Office for 
simple transfer of title. Some people are charged hundreds and 
hundreds of dollars for these transfers, Mr. Minister. 
 
In your opinion, do the charges applied to title transfers 
properly reflect the government’s cost in providing those 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ve looked at that issue. We think 
there’s a very good argument that those fees are justified based 
on the fact that we have a Torrens system and 
government-guaranteed title and that’s a different system than 
some of the other provinces have. It’s what we have in western 
Canada and it’s a system that has stood us in good stead on the 
Prairies especially because people can rely on the title that they 
get from the land titles and deal with that without having to do 
historical searches and other things before they buy or sell 
property. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I understand that as far as buying and selling 
property. But a transfer of title just from one owner, for 
instance, in the situation where there may be divorce or 
separation or whatever and just a transfer of title, these fees are 
quite exorbitant and that’s the kind of thing that has been 
brought to our attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know there are many other fees charged by 
government that I think you would have a hard time justifying 
in terms of the cost of providing a service. Do you think we’ll 
potentially see legislation brought forward to deal with all those 
sorts of fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I said before, we’re reviewing this and 
if there is the necessity of bringing forth legislation, then we 
would be bringing it forward at the time that we’ve completed 
our review which most likely would be in the next session. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will conclude my 
questions. I’m not sure whether . . . Did anyone here . . . All 
right, we’ll conclude questions from the official opposition and 
there are other members wishing to speak to this. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon 
to the minister and his officials. I will be rather brief because I 
think actually the member for Humboldt was actually quite 
thorough in the questions she asked. 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

But I do want to ask the minister if his officials are confident 
that with these amendments the probate fees can withstand the 
court challenge and will be found to be fees as opposed to 
simply a tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer to that is yes. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I did ask you last year about land titles fees and 
there . . . I mean at that time I believe the figures were that 
about half of land titles fees are required to run the land titles 
system of this province. And your answer was well it goes into 
General Revenue and it’s general revenue, which I think is in 
terms of the in Re: Eurig case a pretty stark admission that land 
titles fees are a tax and not a fee at all. 
 
So I wanted to ask you, is the problem in the view of your 
officials that we have used the term fee rather erroneously and 
misleadingly when in point of fact we have all along been 
talking about taxes. And as I say, as I understand it there was 
quite a frank admission that the land titles fees bear no 
relationship to the cost of running the land titles system. They 
are simply a tax and they take in about double I think what it 
costs to in fact run the system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate that question and I recall 
our discussion last year. I think the part of the equation that 
wasn’t included in your question though was the fact of the 
government backing of the titles within the system. Now we 
know that we haven’t been required to pay large amounts out on 
those guarantees and a lot of that is thanks to the staff at the 
Land Titles Office and the legal profession in Saskatchewan 
who have been very diligent in the whole land titles process. 
 
And I think as the member also knows, we’re in a situation 
where this year we’re moving forward with a new system that 
will put all of this into a new corporation where all of the fees 
will be used in the process. But that there will also still be a 
portion that would go to the provincial revenue fund to deal 
with the fact that there is government backing of the whole 
system. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — But of course as the minister has already 
admitted, payments for the guarantee of title have been 
negligible to nil. And in fact too the money, the money that we 
collect from the land titles system, is not put in any insurance 
fund but into the General Revenue Fund. So it’s not in a fund to 
guarantee the title. It’s in the General Revenue Fund of the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that is that 
any guaranteed amounts are also paid out of the General 
Revenue Fund. So it’s part of the process. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Getting back though to the legislation before us 
this afternoon, I’d ask the minister, I don’t see in the present 
schedule that there appears to be a formula relating probate fees 
to the complexity of the work required by court staff. And so I 
wonder if he could address us on . . . in terms of surviving a 
court challenge. It seems to me — and please correct me if I’m 
wrong — but it seems to me that what’s going to be required in 
future is that the probate fees are in some way related to the 
work and effort required by provincial officials, as opposed to 
simply a percentage taken off the top. 

And I’m going to ask the minister how he thinks that we do get 
around that, that obvious problem. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think in the simple answer . . . in the 
Supreme Court decision basically what the court was saying 
was that as long as you set out these fees in the Act so that you 
have this possibility of debate, like we have here about 
changing them, and then we’ve satisfied the requirements of 
having these kinds of fees, levees, charges, taxes, whatever you 
want to call them, dealt with within the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I think that it’s important to acknowledge one of the 
factors of why that particular case ended up going to the 
Supreme Court of Canada. And that related to the fact that the 
Government of Ontario at a point in their deliberations 
increased the fees by a four times factor, I think, or something 
like that — but a very dramatic increase such that it crossed 
over the line of fair compensation for the system that was set 
up. And so that in many ways that case was a reaction to what 
happened in Ontario. 
 
We know that now even, the fees that they have approved 
through their legislative process are still about four times what 
we pay here. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Does the minister think that we 
will have to cease using terms like “environmental handling 
charge” and other misnomers like that, that suggest that this is 
some sort of special charge going to a special fund for a special 
purpose when, in point of fact, that simply isn’t the case at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that is — 
although I understand the direction of the question — but a 
simple answer is that the Supreme Court has said they don’t 
really mind what you call it as long as you set out the amount of 
the fee in the legislation. And so that there can be a debate 
around any change, increase or decrease, of that particular 
charge. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, from what I 
understand, the Supreme Court ruling . . . with the ruling of the 
Supreme Court rather, there is the indication from that ruling 
that if a government imposes a fee to the public with the 
express purpose to not only recover costs but to actually turn a 
profit on providing the service, then that is a tax and therefore 
must be brought in through legislation. 
 
Now you are putting forward legislation. So in my mind and 
understanding, that is simply an admission that you are taxing 
people beyond . . . or collecting a fee, tax, whatever it is, and to 
your knowledge it is beyond recovering costs. The fees in place 
are simply too much. They’re more than what you need to 
recover costs, and that is why you’re putting forward 
legislation. 
 
I know that there are other clauses in this legislation where 
there’s a need for it. But I also realize and believe that this is an 
admission that in fact the fees charged by government in 
probate and with land titles and so on are exorbitant. They’re 
beyond and more than needed to recover costs. Is that 
something you would want to comment on? 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’d be happy to comment on that. I 
think the basic question is, can you track the exact work and the 
amount of effort and time that’s spent by all of the different 
people within the Court of Queen’s Bench as it relates to one of 
maybe 500 different tasks that are done in that court or a 
thousand different tasks? 
 
We looked at this and said we don’t know how we could do that 
because there isn’t just sort of one person doing this all the 
time, there isn’t one person doing this all the time, so to try to 
calculate whether this is 1 per cent of somebody’s job or 20 per 
cent, how much of the heat and light bill relates to this, how 
much of the cost of the building relates to this, was very 
difficult. 
 
But we do know that based on what we’ve compared with other 
provinces, we’re at the lowest level. And we basically made a 
decision that rather than try to get into that whole analysis 
which we didn’t know where it would go, we were going to go 
ahead and deal with the problem by setting out the fees in the 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just have to make the 
comment that in the situation where a land title is transferred in 
the case of a divorce, wherein the couple that are being divorced 
have previously had joint ownership, joint name on a piece of 
land, and there’s a simple transfer of that title and that is costing 
people, you know, close to $500 from what I understand, it 
seems to me like that is an extremely exorbitant fee especially 
in that kind of a situation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Administration of Estates 
Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’administration des successions 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
my officials for their assistance and also my friends opposite for 
their questions. I think we’ve clarified quite a number of issues 
for the people of Saskatchewan and I appreciate those 
questions. 
 
And with that I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, I just wanted to acknowledge also and 
thank the officials for coming in this afternoon, and the minister 
for his answers that the opposition has posed. Thank you. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
my right is Terry Scott, deputy minister of Agriculture and 
Food; and to my left, Martin Wrubleski, director of ag research 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and I welcome your officials this afternoon and thank 
them for making themselves available to answer the questions 
that we may pose to them today. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, in The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Act, 1999, I understand that PAMI (Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute) may borrow money from 
outside sources now because of government revenues . . . or 
government contributions to them being depleted and going 
down all the time. Mr. Minister, if those sources are financial 
institutions, is it the government’s intent to guarantee any loans 
made by PAMI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — No. They are of their own volition 
getting the money and they have been doing that. What this 
legislation does, it reflects what PAMI has been doing and in 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, with your 
permission and the permission of the minister and certainly the 
indulgence of his officials, I would like to take a moment to 
really publicly acknowledge PAMI and what their role is and 
the ongoing contributions that they’re making to our agriculture 
and industrial sectors. And if you will spare me three to four 
minutes I think that it would be beneficial to the entire 
Assembly and people of Saskatchewan to come to understand 
the major role that they play here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the years the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, 
known as PAMI to farmers, has tested nearly 800 farm 
machines, building an extensive base of experience in 
agriculture technology and processes that is unmatched in 
western Canada. Over 5 million copies of evaluation reports are 
in the hands of farmers and others in the Prairie provinces. 
 
Their record of recommendations for improvements to 
machinery manufactured in Saskatchewan have made a 
significant contribution to the quality and competitiveness of 
machinery manufactured in and exported from Saskatchewan. 
 
In their current programs, PAMI is performing aggressive 
research and development for its clients to promote and enhance 
sustainable agriculture and the growth and stability of the 
agri-food industries in our province. 
 
While being respected worldwide and having contracts with 
many multinational companies that sell their product here, 
PAMI primarily focuses on stimulating economic enterprises in 
Saskatchewan through a vast array of programs. As examples, 
they provide safety standards testing to companies like Doepker 
in Annaheim, Eastern Air Supplies in Canora, and Power Pin of 
Regina, to sell better, safer products. 
 
In their confidential development program, they help about 20 
manufacturers per year to develop new or improve existing 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

products. They are pursuing sustainable agriculture with 
examples like the publication of a direct seeding manual for the 
next millennium, and research on environmentally safe 
injection of hog manure into soil as a crop fertilizer. 
 
They are determining how new technologies like precision 
farming will best apply to our prairie farming systems. They are 
pursuing new harvesting and processing systems for the 
fledgling herb and spice industry. Their impact is spread to 
other sectors as they do safety testing to man-lift cables in our 
potash mines, and ambulance certification to assist Crestline 
Coaches of Saskatoon to obtain export contracts. 
 
They have also shown great innovation by identifying our ag 
machinery designs as potential land mine clearing machines to 
create new markets for companies like Schulte of Englefeld 
while making many parts of the world a safer place to live. 
 
In short, PAMI’s work continues to have a positive 
technological, economic, environmental, and social impact. 
And I do encourage my counterparts in government to 
remember PAMI as a strong resource of applied research and 
development expertise as our province searches for new ways to 
generate wealth and enhance the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I also commend PAMI and I challenge the management there 
and the staff to hold the course on their vision for the future. 
Thank you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I’d also like to welcome your officials here today. I 
have very few questions — just kind of clarifying a few points 
on this Bill. I think we’re in agreement that these are all positive 
changes. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you clarify exactly what you mean when 
you state in the Bill that PAMI will be able to work outside of 
its parameters of the agriculture industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — What this does, it puts in the Act the 
ability . . . actually what PAMI is doing now. Their mandate 
originally was just agriculture but as we’ve just heard described 
they’ve gone far beyond that. It allows them to bring in 
technologies that are not agriculture related, work on those. So 
it basically gives them the authority to do what they’re already 
doing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The amendment also states that PAMI still 
receives some government funding. And I guess maybe could 
you just explain how the funding works now with the 
government and PAMI, and what share you put in and how 
much it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The history of the funding is that 
government . . . the Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan 
governments funded PAMI — at that time it was in all three 
provinces — and then in 1988 I believe the Devine government 
started reducing the funding to PAMI over . . . so much 
percentage over a period of years. We halted that about five 
years ago, and it’s been at 768,000 for five years now. And 

that’s about 30 per cent, 30 per cent of the funding. 
 
And what we want to do . . . PAMI needs the stability because 
when they’re doing contract work it provides the people they’re 
doing the contract with, with some knowledge that this thing is 
going to be around for a while, and that the funding isn’t going 
to continue to decrease. 
 
So it’s base funding. And as they do more work for . . . contract 
work that ratio will change. It used to 50 per cent; now it’s 
down to 30 per cent. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Part II, section 
5(c) of the PAMI Act states that: 
 

(c) the institute may sell, lease, convey or otherwise 
dispose of and convert into money any of its real or 
personal property that the institute considers no longer 
necessary for its purposes. 
 

Can you just tell me: do we have . . . has the Government of 
Saskatchewan equity in anything that PAMI owns? Its assets or 
anything? Do we have an investment in there or is it just that we 
subsidize them every year in operating costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The legislation allows them to be an 
institute unto themselves. We provide them with a $768,000 
grant every year. Plus they apply — I forgot to tell you the last 
question — they apply for project funding from the 
government. But no, this is just a grant and they are an 
institution that runs themselves. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Act states 
that PAMI will be able to borrow funds or establish a line of 
credit to meet the cash flow demands inherent in the activities 
of the institute. 
 
I guess my question would be then: do we guarantee that money 
if PAMI borrows money or do we have any obligation to those 
loans that they make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — No. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be read a 
third time now and be passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Administration of Estates 
Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’administration des successions 
 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
Terry Scott, deputy minister of Agriculture and Food; to his left 
Hal Cushon, director of policy and program branch; behind Mr. 
Cushon is Ernie Spencer, assistant deputy minister; and then 
Jack Zepp is the director of admin. services. Beside Jack is Ross 
Johnson, budget officer administration services; and to my right 
is Doug Matthies, general manager of Sask Crop Insurance. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here today. It kind 
of somewhat scared me when I saw the number of officials you 
brought in but we’re used to being short numbered over here so 
it won’t be a problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start off today, and I’m sure you’ve got 
a number of these phone calls, and e-mails, and letters from 
farmers, but this is just an example. And I want to start off with 
the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program 
as I’m sure you’re aware of that’s on the mind of every farmer. 
But I want to read you this e-mail and it’s just an example of 
things we’re that getting in here and the describing to a T what 
the AIDA program is in the minds of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
(1600) 
 
The farmer starts off by saying: 
 

In trying to figure out if I might be one of the few people 
who might possibly qualify for the LIBERALS crazy 
program, I have found out a few unbelievable things about 
the calculations. The main one being that any income that 
was deferred from 97 to 98 is not counted in 98 (which I 
already knew), but that it is also NOT counted in 97!!! It 
seems to magically disappear in the favor of the 
government. They use an accrual accounting method for 
98, and then switch to an enhanced cash method for 95-97, 
(like NISA). The problem in this is that like I said before 

any moneys deferred from 97 to 98 can’t be counted in 98 
(accrual accounting) or 97 (cash-sort of accounting). What 
this does is lower your base average that is used to figure 
out if you get any payout. I personally deferred $60,000 to 
98 from 97, so that all of that money can no longer be used 
to up my average, thus making it even harder to get a 
payout. I know another person who phoned AIDA about 
this insane accounting method and they told him they knew 
about it, and it is the way its calculated, too bad for you!!! 
I’m 28 and a full time grain farmer, if I don’t have a hope 
of qualifying I can’t see how many others would qualify 
either. This is a Eastern Canada program for eastern 
Canada: the west will take another one on the chin. Thanks 
for your time. Ed Dilsner. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, I think this is an example of the calls we’re 
getting with this, as he said, insane program that’s going to do 
absolutely nothing for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And today I don’t know if you heard, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Vanclief made another one of his brilliant comments about the 
AIDA form in the House of Commons. And it could have been 
yesterday but I heard the tape of what he said, and he went on to 
actually in a way say that we’re very dumb as farmers here in 
Saskatchewan, because we can’t fill out this simple form that 
his bureaucrats down East have come up with. And he said it’s 
five pages, you just have to take the numbers from here and 
transcribe them over there. It’s that simple. 
 
Well if it’s that simple I think maybe we should send Mr. 
Vanclief some smelling salts. Because every accountant in this 
province is frustrated when the farmers are taking these in to 
them because it’s even complicated for them to fill out. On top 
of that what’s happening, and I know you know this as well as I 
do, it can be anywhere from 200 to a thousand, $1,200 to fill 
out these forms. 
 
I guess my question is, Mr. Minister, are you asking Mr. 
Vanclief to retake a look at this program, shake his head, and 
really understand this program? Because of his comments today 
I don’t think he even understands what he’s put in front of us, 
what he’s put in front of our farmers in Saskatchewan, and how 
little benefit we’re going to get out here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Before I recognize the minister 
for his answer, I just wish to remind the member that comments 
are to be directed through the Chair as opposed to directly at 
members opposite. And of course that is simply a reminder for 
the minister as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We all know and 
I’ve said ad nauseam that this has not been a classic example of 
administrating a government policy in the history of 
governments. But having said that you have to understand and 
I’m just . . . to answer your . . . To talk about your first point we 
get the calls too and we understand what the options are. We 
have no options in terms of the federal government. 
 
The alternative . . . if the case that you spoke of were to be 
corrected we would have had to go back and do all the NISA 
forms again over three years on an accrual basis. Now the 
question to be asked is why they didn’t just continue that? And 
we can argue about that. I’m not going to defend it because I’m 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

saying the administrative process here has not been a classic 
example of wizardry. 
 
But the one thing . . . and I did talk to Mr. Vanclief yesterday 
about AIDA. In the last two days actually, I had a couple of 
opportunities — not sit-down meetings — but to talk to him 
about the program. And my question to him was this: is there 
any chance of changing the forms this year. And the answer is 
no. 
 
And you know that’s basically the way we were treated when 
we started negotiating. In fact most of the negotiation was about 
how much money each of us were going to pay and not about 
the program because they weren’t negotiating program. And so 
that’s a flat no. 
 
But what he did say yesterday at a press conference — I don’t 
know if you saw that or heard that, I don’t know what portions 
of it came over the media — but we sat down yesterday 
afternoon in Ottawa and had a press conference on the WTO 
(World Trade Organization) conference. There was a question 
about AIDA. Mr. Vanclief, to my knowledge the first time 
opened the door to possible changes in the program for next 
year. 
 
Because my line is — and I wanted to ask you this as well — I 
know the program is not the greatest. We all know the process 
that we went through to get to where we are today. But what I 
want to ask you is this: you’ve been going around in the media 
in the country saying how rotten this is and the farmers can’t 
apply and it’s expensive and I know all that to be true. 
 
But the problem with that line is, is that if we don’t have 
farmers apply — there’s a 5-page form and it’s going to take a 
few hours to sit down and do it; I’ve looked at it myself and I 
hate forms as much as the next farmer as probably you do too 
— but the fact of the matter is if we don’t have people apply, 
even the knowledge of whether you’re going to get money or 
not going to get money is absolutely not there because none of 
us know. 
 
Our department’s done a bunch of numbers and it’s all over the 
map. So there’s no consistencies as to who’s going to get 
money and who isn’t. It depends on your farming operation, it 
depends on your gross margin, it depends on your inventory in, 
your inventory out. It depends on that as you know. 
 
But what I ask you to do is help us — never mind us, don’t 
mind me — help the farmers because if we don’t get people 
applying and getting turned down as we think many of them 
will be, then how am I or you supposed to go to the federal 
government and say: look you’ve got a program, you’ve had X 
number of people apply, only a certain percentage of those 
qualified, and even the ones that qualified maybe did or maybe 
did not need the money. 
 
So what I’m asking you to do is . . . while I know that in 
opposition you’re always supposed to oppose, I think what we 
have to do is ask farmers to apply, bite the bullet, sit down for 
those few hours it takes. And remembering that over 90 per cent 
of the eligible net sales are in NISA so that means almost all 
farmers are in NISA, and if they are, the form is not as hard as it 
is if you’re not in NISA. 

So the key here is not looking backward. You can criticize me 
all you like about going in the program or not. We can get into 
that if you like. But from here forward, now that the minister I 
think has opened the door yesterday to maybe possible changes 
next year, I think we have to encourage everybody to go in so 
we can do the analysis and explain to him as to what we already 
know probably — this program is not working very well. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Just would, before we continue, 
remind the minister that all comments are to be directed through 
the Chair and I know that the minister being a veteran member 
will do so. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, what you’re saying is farmers should go out, fill the 
form out because no one knows if they are going to qualify. 
And I agree with that — nobody in their right mind could figure 
out if they’re going to qualify in this program. 
 
The problem being is that when you take your form, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to an accountant and the accountant looks at it 
and roughs it in and said I don’t think you’re going to qualify 
for anything, how many farmers do you think are going to pay 6 
or 800 bucks just for the fact to show that they actually applied? 
 
I guess my question for you is, would you be willing to pick 
that up then in the case where the farmer doesn’t apply for 
anything or doesn’t qualify for anything? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I think the member knows the 
answer to that one. I’m saying is that there’s a five-page form. 
The answer is no, the government taxpayers won’t pick that up. 
And you know that. It would be a precedent that maybe you 
would like to set but I wouldn’t. 
 
The problem is . . . there’s a five-page form, there’s a five-page 
form that the farmers can fill out on their own. And it takes a 
little bit of time. I don’t know how much time but it would be a 
few hours; and that if you’re in NISA, it wouldn’t take more 
than a few hours. 
 
But you’d have to go back and you’d have to separate, for 
example, on the form under the NISA, if you were to custom 
work land . . . If I was to custom work land for you it would be 
an income, and if I were to rent my machinery out to you it 
would also be income. It was under the same umbrella in NISA. 
The AIDA program separates that. So you’d have to go back 
and there’s a few things you have to separate out, like your 
inventory. But it’s possible to do. 
 
Now what I’m saying to producers — and I know the cost to 
doing it through an accountant — but what I’m saying to 
producers is even if you don’t send your form in we’d like to 
hear from you. We’d like to know how many people aren’t 
qualifying. Because, I repeat, if we don’t know how the thing is 
not working, we won’t be able to go back to the federal 
government and say here is why it’s not working. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister, but I 
honestly believe Mr. Vanclief is way out to lunch when he says 
these forms are not that complicated. And I hope I’m not 
hearing you right that you’re kind of saying that to a degree — 
not to the degree he said — but you’re saying they’re not as 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

complicated as people think. Because every call I get, farmers 
are totally frustrated with the amount of time this is going to 
take to fill out. And when they get to the final count, they’re 
probably not going to get a nickel out of it anyway. 
 
And a call I had today, another call I had today, Mr. Minister, 
and you know this farmer, I know you do — Herb Rooke — 
had just called me and said this is unbelievable. We’re looking 
for money for spring seeding. I applied. I phoned in and got my 
NISA form sent out, phoned in to get a form sent out for AIDA 
on March 22 and I still haven’t received the form. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: will you look into 
that and find out why on earth they aren’t getting on the ball 
with these forms and getting them out there so at least there 
might be a little optimism in the farmer’s mind. At least he can 
start filling them out? 
 
If the form is taking this long to get out here, how long is it 
going to take to actually go through the process? It could be 
October before the farmer even knows whether he qualifies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I don’t know why he hasn’t got it 
and there’s absolutely no excuse for him not having it. And 
what I would say to you is what I would say to Mr. Rooke, is 
that we can find out, we can try to find out through the federal 
NISA administration why he hasn’t got it. But his easiest 
solution to his problem is walk into the rural service centre or 
call his rural service centre. 
 
Because what we’ve had . . . First of all, the feds ran out of 
forms so there was a gap there. Now I don’t know why they 
would run out of forms but that’s what we were told. They ran 
out of forms at one period in time. 
 
But what we’ve done to try to assist farmers is that the forms 
are on the Internet and if you go to your rural service centre or 
give them a call, they’ll give you one. Either mail it out or if 
you go in, they’ll just take it off the Net and you can have your 
form immediately. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
sure you’ve heard from farmers out there that are saying I’m 
going to get this spring . . . I’ve gone to get my operating loan 
— and I know this isn’t in every area of the province because 
some areas are a wee bit better off than others. But some areas 
are in really bad shape. The northwest corner up there where it’s 
dry is a perfect example. Over on the east side in our home area 
it’s not been all that fantastic. South of Regina. 
 
It’s all over the place, Mr. Minister, where farmers are going in 
to get their operating loan renewed or have already — this is 
getting late, but they’ve done it already — and they’re being 
turned down for an operating loan that they paid off last fall, 
thought they were in good standings. Some of them may even 
be going back to Cargill or Wheat Pool or ConAgra, whoever it 
is, and maybe haven’t been able to clear 100 per cent of their 
last year’s input costs off. And what I’m seeing and hearing 
now is that what’s happening out there is with Cargill and it’s 
probably good business on their behalf but it’s a situation where 
farmers are caught in. If you haven’t cleared off your last year’s 
account and you go to get it renewed, Cargill for an example, I 
hear, is not renewing any of them if you have anything 

outstanding. 
 
So a number of the farmers that I’ve talked to or have got a hold 
of me are going over to the Pool or they’re going over 
somewhere else. And there’s . . . I guess, and it’s good business, 
but it’s an old boys’ club because the minute that happens, you 
go over here and Wheat Pool or whoever it is said: look, we’d 
like to help you; we can’t help you; you still have outstanding 
money. 
 
So it’s just another example of where we’re not standing behind 
our farmers and helping them out when they’re really in trouble. 
 
If you remember, Mr. Minister, when we were down East and 
we met with Mr. Vanclief and one of his comments was, God 
forbid if we give a farmer something for nothing. Do you 
remember that? He said this is why we got a . . . we can’t have 
an acreage payment, we got to make it complicated, we got to 
let the bureaucracy spend a month and a half making it 
complicated so it takes three and a half months to finally 
analyze whether you get anything out of it. 
 
If we’d have gone at that time and made an acreage payment, 
Mr. Minister, it would have been way simpler. The farmers 
would have had their money in their pocket. Even though the 
amount of money might not have been anywhere near what we 
had hoped our farmers would get, they would have had, they 
would have known, and it would have helped. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve talked —and I don’t know how many 
times I’ve heard you say this in your speeches that . . . and this 
goes back probably after the trip we took down East, in fact you 
made those comments to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture down East — that we’re going to negotiate hard 
here in Saskatchewan; I’m going to be stubborn; we’re not 
going to put anything in from the provincial government, we 
don’t feel we should. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I think we agreed with you at the start of this process, and 
you know that. We felt that it was a federal responsibility and 
we had hoped the province wouldn’t have to put any in. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, we saw the light a lot quicker than 
you did. In fact the first time I saw it was when we were down 
East meeting with the Standing Committee on Agriculture and 
they asked you that: are you putting any money in? And you 
said, no, we’re going to be stubborn. And you could see their 
impression of what we were asking for down there really 
belittled the situation out here our farmers are in, and I don’t 
think they took us serious. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about having input into the program 
and so on. My question is: what input did you really have in this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I think just to clarify a couple of 
things, exactly what I said. I’m going to be stubborn but not 
stupid about this program. I never closed the door to putting 
money in but I felt that the share of 40 per cent that they’re 
asking for is totally unreasonable. And we can get into that, and 
I’ve said that ad nauseam. And to be honest with you, I think 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

the overwhelming majority of people in this province agree 
with me that 3 per cent of the taxpayers . . . In fact I say this to 
producers: if you think that the provincial government can bail 
you out for the money you need, then forget it. 
 
You know what? They all know that. 
 
And I said if you look at the federal off-load, at some of the 
policies that your government supported: removing the Crow 
benefit, deregulation, you know your . . . I won’t get into any 
more. If you want to get down, we can do that, but some of the 
policies you supported that took money out of here. I said if you 
think the federal government’s in a mode to give more money 
to the province, then you’re probably wrong there too. 
 
And so what we have, what we have to do is try to as, not just 
as producers or governments but everybody work beyond 
politics in terms of the federal off-loading. 
 
The process that we went through was we were asked to come 
to the table to negotiate a program. The program basis was 
predetermined by the federal government, supported by British 
Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, and a few 
more. 
 
We were asked to help fine-tune the program. An example of — 
we wanted to do more than that, more than fine-tune it — an 
example of what we’d asked for was to come up with a policy 
within AIDA that would cover farmers who had a multiple 
drought situation. Because if you recall in July, 1998 that was 
one of the reasons that, when I went to the fed-prov agriculture 
meeting, that we said — and we repeated, I think, in Ottawa — 
you’ve got problems from drought in areas and that was the . . . 
that spurred on this disaster program. 
 
But as we all know that carried through into general farm 
income shortages because of high input costs and low, low 
grain prices. 
 
We sat at the table. We said if you’ve got a program that says if 
you fall below 70 per cent of your three-year average then 
you’ll get paid. And your three-year average is so low that you 
won’t really trigger a payment — what good’s the program? 
You know and I know the answer. The federal government 
totally ignored it. 
 
We said if you’re a farmer or a producer who increased your 
land base, let’s say, you went from six to ten quarters of land in 
the transition year. Your land base of six quarters wouldn’t 
reflect the need of ten quarters. And so we should have some 
kind of a benchmark for those people. They totally refused. 
 
The only thing that — one of the few things I guess — but the 
only thing of any substance that we got through is that if you 
were a new farmer and didn’t have a three-year record of 
production for a gross margin, then they were going to, they’re 
going to do some kind of a benchmark to put you in the same as 
. . . to make sure you got a payment equal to the area that you 
were in. And I just don’t know the details of how that works but 
they agreed to do that. So they wanted us to come to the table, 
fine-tune, no input on major . . . anything of consequence, and 
basically they wanted us to come to the table and pay the bill. 
 

And that’s why I was stubborn and I will be stubborn. Because 
if you think, if anyone thinks that $70 per capita through this 
program from the treasury of Saskatchewan and $4 per capita 
through the treasury of Ontario is anything close to equal in this 
country, then you’ve got to shake your head. 
 
And I haven’t quit that argument because AIDA will come and 
AIDA will go but the next round of safe net discussions that 
we’re in right now, where we have problems because they want 
to take more money out of Saskatchewan, I offer to you and I 
will be coming and talk to you, we’ve got to get together and 
see how we can present this as a unit. Because it’s no longer 
politics. 
 
You see the numbers, you see the numbers that the feds are 
off-loading and maybe you can answer me the question of do 
you think that $70 per capita is fair. At the end your leader was 
saying just put your 40 per cent in. Do you think it’s fair that we 
should do that in Saskatchewan and Ontario puts 4 in? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure glad you 
brought Ontario up. Did you see or hear . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the minister should have heard this yesterday, and I’m 
just going to quote a little bit from the House of Commons, Mr. 
Howard Hilstrom, and the question he asked yesterday is: 
 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Agriculture talked 
about mailing out applications forms when I asked him 
how much money farmers had received from the disaster 
assistance program. 

 
Farmers do not want the minister to talk about sending out 
forms; they need the minister to help. Can the minister tell 
the House how much money he has sent out to producers? 

 
Listen to the answer and you see comparing Saskatchewan and 
Ontario. And this is from a Joe McGuire, a parliamentary 
secretary to the Minister of Agriculture of Food. 

 
Mr. Speaker, an example of what the government is doing 
as the applications come in is that Ontario, which has 
returned a thousand applications, is receiving a payout of 
about $25,000 a farmer. 
 
The farmers on Prince Edward Island have submitted about 
one-fifth of their applications forms at a payout rate of 
$38,000 a farmer. 
 

Now you talk about Ontario and criticize them. I would say if 
you’d had got on the ball, every farmer in Saskatchewan would 
appreciate $25,000, Mr. Minister. Would you care to comment 
on that — what your record is compared to what Ontario is 
doing? And I find it amazing that you could even criticize 
something they’re doing in Ontario when they’re standing 
behind their farmers and our farmers are getting absolutely 
nothing out of this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Maybe the member could just articulate 
a little more what he meant by if I was “on the ball.” I don’t 
quite understand what he means. What we should have done 
different? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, I would be glad to give you 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

the answer to that too. 
 
When you saw that the federal government was not taking us 
serious here in this province, it was time to put some money on 
the table, say to the federal government, let’s see how much we 
can do for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
They didn’t pay any attention to what you were saying; they 
didn’t think our problem out here was at all as bad as it is — 
they still don’t, I believe — because of the response that you 
gave them. And you’re trying to tell me by being stubborn as 
you were, negotiating hard, and still seeing that we’re getting 
nothing here in Saskatchewan that that was the thing to do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t believe that you still have that 
mindset, Mr. Minister, when you see what’s happening down 
East. 
 
You have to agree with what we’re seeing here. This program 
was designed by Easterners for Easterners. They forgot all 
about western Canada because . . . a couple of reasons, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Number one, our Premier disappeared through the whole 
negotiations. Hid in his glass bubble. The same guy that said a 
premier of the province of Saskatchewan should be measured 
by the amount of farm aid he receives for the province of 
Saskatchewan farmers when they are in a time of need. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are in a time of need. And that same Premier 
did absolutely nothing — he hid. And you went around this 
country saying you’re going to be stubborn. Well a lot of good 
it did us. 
 
Mr. Minister, also you talked a few minutes ago about the world 
trade agreements and GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade) and all these things. Many farmers out here are totally 
mystified by the way this works. The Europeans are putting in 
millions upon millions of dollars into their farmers through 
subsidizing grain a number of different ways. In fact, their 
subsidies amount to more than we even receive for our grain 
here. 
 
The Americans not long ago . . . And they receive more than we 
do for our grain, partly because of your protection of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. But they receive more for their grain 
than we do. I believe the Americans just put $7 billion in. And 
you’ve probably heard this as well as I have: they’re just about 
to think about putting another aid package together for their 
farmers. 
 
And we’re worried about the trade agreements we have with 
everybody else in the world, and we’re using that as a crutch. 
We used it when we cancelled the Crow and we’re using it now. 
You’re using it and you’re saying, well, it’s not trade-friendly. 
How can it be trade-friendly for the Europeans? How can it be 
trade-friendly for the Americans when you and our Agriculture 
minister say we can’t help our farmers here in Saskatchewan 
because it’s not trade-friendly? 
 
Mr. Minister, explain to the farmers in Saskatchewan why 
everyone in the world can get away doing whatever they want 
and in Canada we can’t. 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I think the member opposite 
knows that he is not being honest when he says I said it wasn’t 
trade friendly. The reason we got a NISA top-up is because we 
bargained hard. And that was one of the best things that farmers 
. . . Even though it wasn’t a lot of money, I got more positive 
comments on that. And even if we couldn’t do an acreage 
payment that the federal government didn’t want to do an 
acreage, we could have maybe done a NISA top-up. I’m 
agreeing with that. 
 
But I want to say one thing. Now you’ve got to watch your 
credibility and I know the member over there does take some 
pride in his credibility. 
 
But have you stopped to do the numbers? Have you stopped to 
do the numbers in Ontario? There are 67,500, roughly, farmers 
in Ontario. If they’re all getting 25,000, let alone 38,000 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I think he said 38 in PEI 
(Prince Edward Island).Let’s say 25,000. That would be, we 
figured out, $1.7 billion. That’s more than the entire program. 
And the Ontario money at 25, if somebody got 25,000, they 
would be paying out their 40 per cent so they wouldn’t be 
getting 25. 
 
What I’m saying is, even if it was 25 or whatever the number is, 
you’re trying to give a perception that Ontario farmers are all 
getting $25,000. Well give your head a shake. It comes out to 
more than the entire program for all of Canada — 1.7 billion. 
 
So I mean I’d watch the credibility aspect for yourself if that 
were true. 
 
Now part of the problem, part of the problem here is that you’re 
running around the province saying, farmers, you know this 
program is no good; there’s no use applying. 
 
Now what I tried to tell you is this. If you want to get into the 
politics about the farm program and you talk about the Crow 
benefit, you were the people who for years ran around saying 
get rid of it. You were the people. Everybody knows that. 
 
So I’ll tell you if we had the $320 million of Crow in 
Saskatchewan today my friend, you wouldn’t need AIDA. So 
don’t stand up here and say that all of this is a big problem 
created by the federal/provincial governments. I know the 
program is not a great program. But I’ll tell you, you’d better sit 
up and stand up and take some credit for getting rid of the Crow 
benefit. And we can go on about that. 
 
And if you want to talk about Ontario and Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well if the member opposite, Mr. 
Chair, wants to get up and talk, let him get up and talk. He yaps 
from his seat but he won’t take the mike. Maybe he should do 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, that’ll be more fun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about Ontario, if you want to 
talk about Ontario, if we assume he was right — which he’s not 
. . . I mean they’re putting $4 per capita in compared to 
Saskatchewan’s 70. Where do you think they’re getting the 
money from? What I’m talking about is fairness across Canada. 
And you should be too. 
 
And you talk about GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) all 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

the time. And I’ll talk about GRIP any time, because it doesn’t 
matter if you call it GRIP or if you call it AIDA or if you call it 
anything else. The fact of the matter is, unless there’s some 
fairness put in this country, and instead of standing there and 
chirping from your seats in the wilderness because you’ve got 
no federal party to represent you in Ottawa . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, you do. 
 
You do? You do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What is mine? 
Let me tell you something — he said what is mine. I did a little 
bit of research, I did a little bit of research . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. I just wish to 
express to all members the Chair is also interested in this debate 
and I’m having a great deal of difficulty hearing the minister in 
his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I did a little bit of research. 
You know, the member opposite’s leader, Mr. Hermanson, was 
a Member of Parliament for the Reform Party in 1995. And just 
for a little refresher course, in 1995 the Liberal federal 
government did three things: they took away the $320 million 
of Crow benefit over three years; they deregulated the rail 
system so that the profit sharing was gone and we lost another 
$105 million; and they reduced the federal safety net dollars 
from 850 million to 600 million. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Member — Mr. Chair, I ask the member — go 
back to the Hansard in Ottawa after the 1995 budget where this 
was done and read what your leader, Mr. Hermanson, said at 
that time when he addressed the parliament in Ottawa. Do you 
know what he said about agriculture after the Crow was gone, 
the deregulation, and the safety net was cut? Zero — zero. Go 
back and read it. 
 
And now he comes out here and you come out here with him as 
your leader and you say, well we’re the saviour of the farmers. 
I’ll tell you something. Producers can see through that, are 
beginning to see through that., because you cannot go around 
saying, we’re the saviour of farmers. 
 
Let me say one more thing — 1996, your leader Mr. 
Hermanson was again in parliament in Ottawa. And you know 
what he was advocating? More cuts to agriculture. And you 
know what? It was only $20 million — I’ll save you your 
speech — it was $20 million. And some of it was the feed 
freight assistance to the East and there was administration cuts. 
 
That’s not the point. We just lost 250 million in safety nets and 
300 million and 20 million in Crow and 105 million through 
deregulation the year before, and instead of standing up for the 
farmers of western Canada and Canada, your leader wanted 
more dollars cut from agriculture. 
 
Maybe you could tell the Assembly today why he wanted more 
dollars cut from agriculture. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well once again, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the minister reads . . . talks about part of a 
quote and forgets to go all the way. He did say make a cut to the 
Agriculture budget by cutting the money for the bureaucracy 
and give the money to the farmers. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t that be a shame if we finally 
forgot to build a huge bureaucracy and put our cash right in the 
hands of farmers. What are we doing? You’re agreeing with Mr. 
Vanclief, Mr. Minister — make up an AIDA package that is 
bureaucratically heavy-duty, but forget to give any money to 
the farmers. And that’s exactly what you’re saying here. Mr. 
Hermanson was saying exactly the opposite. 
 
You go on to say, Mr. Minister, in your comments, if I 
understand them right, that nobody in Ontario is getting 
$25,000. Well I find this is amazing. Because I’m quoting right 
out of the House of Commons, and I don’t . . . I would be sure 
this person isn’t lying. And I’ll read it again for you: 
 

Mr. Speaker, an example of what the government is doing 
as the applications come out in Ontario, which has returned 
1,000 applications, is receiving a payout of about $25,000 
a farmer. 
 

I have no idea why this guy would lie like that. Then he goes to 
say: 
 

The farmers on Prince Edward Island have submitted 
about one-fifth of their application forms, and the payout 
is about 38,000. 
 

Now you can say it’s blown the whole program right out of 
whack here, these numbers. But these aren’t my numbers. 
These are coming from down there. So I know it’s probably 
embarrassing to you to even fathom that a farmer would get this 
many numbers when your government has never stood behind 
the farmers in this province since the day you were elected. And 
you had a lot to do with that, Mr. Minister. 
 
You also talk about the Crow. The Crow was going, Mr. 
Minister. If you and your cronies would have woke up and saw 
it going and hadn’t have fought the system and cost us probably 
$7 billion because we bucked it along with the farmers union 
. . . You and your people bucked it. The National Farmers 
Union bucked it. Sask Wheat Pool lobbied against it. And guess 
what? By the time we got it, our farmers got it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was watered down to the point where it did 
absolutely nothing. It was a trickle. 
 
So don’t point the finger over here and say we tossed the Crow. 
What you did by dragging your feet and keeping your head in 
the sand as you usually do, cost our farmers billions of dollars 
in this province. 
 
You’re also the same people that cancelled the GRIP program 
and cost us how many millions more. And you turn around and 
have the audacity to tell me, Mr. Minister, that the farmers in 
this province are actually starting to stand behind you. 
 
Well I suggest, Mr. Minister, that you better . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s just 
go over it again because it seems to really rile the members up 
on that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



April 21, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

How many times have you cost us money? You dragged your 
feet on the Crow; you knew it was going — how many billion 
dollars? You cancelled GRIP the minute you got into power 
without any hint you were going to do it. That was somewhat 
similar to how you did with the 52 hospitals you closed out in 
rural Saskatchewan. Your record in rural Saskatchewan should 
be embarrassing to you. You shouldn’t even be mentioning it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister keeps going on about how his 
government is climbing in the polls in rural Saskatchewan. And 
as I was about to say, the polls, — and we know you poll every 
week so you should have a handle on this — is that you’re 
disappearing in rural Saskatchewan. You’re not dropping; 
you’re disappearing. Even the third party is ahead of you in 
rural Saskatchewan, and that’s amazing in itself, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, to get back to business — and I really have to do 
this — you took $140 million to put into the aid program 
outside of Saskatchewan begrudgingly. But can you explain to 
me, Mr. Minister, why when the 140 million came up, you took 
it out of last year’s budget instead of taking half of it out this 
year and the other half next year which would have been normal 
accounting practices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, I want 
to make one point before I start and that is: I don’t know if the 
quote you talked about from Ontario — $25,000 per farmer — 
is right. I think that you and I both know that it’s not right. Now 
maybe it was a mistake when it was said. I’m not saying he’s 
misleading the public, I’m . . . just maybe it was a mistake. But 
it’s impossible for every farmer, 67,000 farmers in Ontario, to 
get $28,000 because they’d use up the entire federal and 
provincial portions of the program. 
 
So while I’m not saying anyone was misleading, you know that 
quote’s not right, and so do I. I say your credibility could be at 
stake if you continue that. 
 
And I want to just mention, when we talk about your leader, 
Mr. Hermanson, after . . . This is June 27, 1996. And you said 
that Mr. Hermanson said that I should cut the budget and give it 
to farmers. Well I would like you to produce that quip or quote. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Okay, he says. I think I’ll be long in the 
tooth before that happens. Now I’m not saying that this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You already are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I already am fairly long in the tooth. 
That’s right. 
 
I’m not saying that this press report is . . . covers everything 
that Mr. Hermanson said. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh but you’re selectively quoting from 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — No, I’m not. I’ll read the whole thing. I 
can read the whole thing if you want. This press report says 
that: 
 

Reform MPs last week tried and failed to convince the 
House of Commons Agriculture Committee that more than 
$20 million should be trimmed from the agricultural 
1996-97 budget. 
 

Three things. As the committee voted in June, Mr. Hermanson 
suggested three cuts: 76 million from operating budget, 11 
million from the department budget, and 2 million from the 
fund that was the feed freight assistance subsidy program. 
 
And it doesn’t say anywhere in this . . . And you can take my 
word for it, but if you want it, I have it here. It doesn’t say 
anywhere where he wanted to give it back to farmers. 
 
My point is this again. My point is this. If the year before, Mr. 
Hermanson, your boss, said nothing opposing the $250 million 
cut from the federal Department of Agriculture’s budget in 
safety nets, if he said nothing about that and, if he comes in a 
year later and advocates 20 more million dollars of cut, I would 
argue that he’s not defending farmers. Now if he would have 
said, don’t cut the budget, just reallocate it, then I would agree. 
But the press release said; cut, and he quotes — it quotes Mr. 
Hermanson as “cut the budget.” If he took that 20 million on 
top of the 250 and said let’s reallocate, then I would say fine, I 
would agree with that. 
 
But I think the reason that he said cut, Mr. Chair, is because I 
have also went back and looked at the Sask party resolutions in 
agriculture just last convention you had. And under the 
resolution on value-added and private . . . what does it say here. 
“Pursue private sector value-added opportunities in 
agriculture.” Nothing wrong with that; I think that’s good. But 
the rationale . . . okay let me read it just so you don’t accuse me 
of . . . I’ll read the whole thing for you. This is the resolution: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party will encourage the pursuit and 
pursue private sector value-added opportunities for 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector at every opportunity and 
will create an economic atmosphere in Saskatchewan 
which will encourage entrepreneurs to start value-added 
business in our province. 

 
I agree with that a hundred per cent, but the rationale is what I 
don’t agree with. Here’s the rationale for the resolution. It says: 
 

Governments should never become involved directly in 
business through grants, loans, or direct investment. 
 

That’s your party’s rationale for a private sector . . . agriculture. 
Now I agree we have to encourage all private sector people to 
come into agriculture. But you can’t stand in your place and 
criticize the AIDA program when your policy rationale says 
you shouldn’t give money to farmers — period — through 
grants, loans, or direct investment. 
 
So maybe you can take a little bit of time to explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan and the farmers especially how you can 
on one hand say that you’re a great supporter of agriculture and 
farmers and the AIDA program should be improved and we 
messed it up, when by your own admonition you wouldn’t have 
put any money in. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re a great one to be 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1999 

talking because of your record of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
money that the minister put into the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan and what — six months later the bottom fell out 
of the hog industry. Your record’s not all that great too. It’s 
somewhat dismal. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just touch on a few questions on crop 
insurance here before our time runs out. Can you give me an 
estimate how many people you feel are going to be enrolled this 
year in the crop insurance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’m advised by my officials that we’re 
anticipating approximately 34,000 contracts in crop insurance 
this year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 4:46 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 3 - The Intestate Succession Amendment Act, 

1999/Loi de 1996 sur les successions non 
testamentaires 

Bill No. 4 - The Securities Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 18 - The Constitutional Questions Amendment Act, 

1999 
Bill No. 8 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 14 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 13 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 12 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

1999 
Bill No. 17 - The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 10 - The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 
Bill No. 27 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 28 - The Administration of Estates Amendment 

Act, 1999/Loi sur l’administrations des 
successions 

Bill No. 7 - The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Act, 1999 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:49 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 
 



 

 


