





























































Hansard: May 03, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 985 
 May 3, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t recall the answer, and I’m not sure that you 
gave the answer regarding New Careers. The responsibility now 
for similar programs that New Careers actually contributed out 
in the province of Saskatchewan, what group is doing that now, 
and do communities have the opportunity to apply to an entity 
like New Careers to do the same kinds of things that they were 
doing in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Basically they can apply through the 
career and employment services centres. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a lot 
of interest has been within the province over the last little while 
regarding the apprenticeship program and the need to address 
concerns in the whole area of the apprenticeship and trade Act. 
Of course we now have a new Act that has been passed through 
this House. 
 
I note that in your expenditures you have a line item that is 
indicated by “apprenticeship commission,” and you have almost 
$1.2 million for this year. Could you explain how the 
apprenticeship commission travelled around the province, in 
terms of were there additional expenses that you anticipated? Or 
is this money that you’ve allocated in this budget, is it now for 
the implementation of the new Act and all of the necessary 
costs? Explain how this will work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The commission has not yet been 
established. This is for — the amount of funding that you’ve 
identified — is for actually when the commission is 
implemented. And that’s a prorated number so the annual cost 
is anticipated to be in the vicinity of seven and a half to $8 
million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kinds of 
things will have to occur within your department, within the 
whole post-secondary realm to actually implement the new 
apprenticeship Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’s two main things that have to 
take place yet. First of all, and probably the bigger piece, is the 
regulation changes that have to take place. Also we’re 
transferring 27 staff to the commission as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
other question regarding the federal funding. Could you indicate 
what amount of additional funding the province has had to 
provide this year relevant to last year as a result of the federal 
withdrawal of funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The federal government will have 

completely withdrawn from training as of June 30 of this year. 
There’s been segments of withdrawal over the last few years, 
but as of June 30 of this year, they’ll be fully withdrawn, and 
the amount that we will have to backfill this year in addition to 
what’s been backfilled from years previous is about $6.5 
million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the other expenditures under training programs 
deals with the assistance for people with disabilities. A couple 
of concerns have been expressed to us in terms of who sets the 
criteria under which people qualify for assistance under that 
disabilities plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You’re speaking, I believe, of the 
EAPD (Employability Assistance for Persons with Disabilities). 
That is a federal-provincial program and the rules are 
established by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Will this program . . . will funding for this 
program also be withdrawn by the feds as of June 30 . . . 
(inaudible) . . . just continue it as a provincially sponsored 
program 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It will continue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, very much. 
 
Mr. Minister, under career and employment services, one of the 
responsibilities of that area, of course, is in the area of student 
summer employment. The student partnerships ’99, you’ve 
indicated by, I think, a press release back in April that the 
extension was going to be given for the deadline dates. I think 
it’s been moved to May 1, or was moved to May 1. 
 
Could you indicate the amount of responses that you had in 
1998 for numbers of students that actually went through that 
program. I know your press release, I think indicated that the 
number of employers was significant. How many students 
actually take advantage, or took advantage, of the summer 
partnerships program in 1998, and is there any trend that you 
see for 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Last year, in the year 1998, the 
partnership program created 1,775 jobs for post-secondary 
students in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, have you any response from 
employers regarding the amount of the subsidy? Are employers 
on the whole basically pleased with this? Or is there a concern 
that the amount of paperwork that employers must go through 
to enable them to receive a very small amount of subsidy is 
causing employers not to pursue this type of partnership with 
students — and as a result we have many more students that 
could be getting opportunity if there was a significant amount 
of funding to employers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Last year we did survey employers, and 
to my knowledge I don’t think we received any responses that 
suggested they’d like to fill out more paperwork. But the fact 
that it was oversubscribed suggests that they did like the 
program. Having said that, however, we certainly are interested 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

in working with the federal government to try and find, if we 
can, in the coming year or years, ways that — maybe for lack of 
a better word — harmonize so that there is less paperwork and 
more efficiencies can be created. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, one of the 
expenditures under career and employment services is in the 
area of operational support, a significant increase, almost 
doubling from $8 million to $16 million, 15.7. Could you 
indicate what you see your department doing differently in the 
area of operational support that would necessitate that huge an 
increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Largely it is the 20 new offices that will 
be opened and the assuming of the 97, I guess it is, HRDC 
(Human Resources Development Canada) staff from the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Could you indicate where you will see these 
20 new offices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They’ll be located in Regina, Moose 
Jaw, Swift Current, Saskatoon, Biggar, Humboldt, Wynyard, 
Yorkton, Weyburn, Fort Qu’Appelle, Creighton, Estevan, 
Melfort, Nipawin, Prince Albert, Meadow Lake, North 
Battleford, Lloydminster, La Ronge, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Minister, for clarifying those 
positions. Mr. Minister, in post-secondary education funding to 
universities and regional colleges and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), we’ve seen a lot 
of press since the budget regarding the actual funding of 
universities. We’ve seen the complaints of the presidents from 
both campuses. And of course now we’re starting to see the 
response of students regarding funding. 
 
When we take a look at university funding and see that only $3 
million was provided to the universities — and that is both of 
them — for university funding, that's a very insignificant 
amount when you look at the fact that their budget last year was 
in excess of 180 million and it’s only increased by 3. 
 
As a result, we’ve heard from the president of U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), Dr. Ivany, saying that he feels 
that your government has turned its back on post-secondary 
funding and especially universities. And as a result, major 
changes will be taking place in tuition and in restructuring. 
 
When you take a look at also, Mr. Minister, some of the other 
funding that was allocated, we see for instance, in the area of 
the operation of SIAST, we see a $4 million increase on 
approximately a $51 million expenditure. That’s a significant 
percentage increase, not nearly, you know, the same amount at 
the university level. 
 
How do you account for the differences in how funding is 
allocated to SIAST and how funding is allocated to the 
universities? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Boy I could launch into a speech here, 
but I’ll keep it as brief as I can. 

An Hon. Member: — Sure, go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No that’s fine. 
 
First of all, I want to put it in context. First of all, all of these 
decisions are made in the context of the federal funding 
withdrawals and also reductions in the CHST (Canada Health 
and Social Transfer). 
 
First of all, last year the university received a funding increase 
of 5 per cent so that was substantial, also a doubling of the 
amount of money assigned for capital, roughly from 10 to $20 
million. We maintained that in the base this year. If you add to 
that the increase in operating this year, the maintenance of the 
capital this year in this year’s budget, and a commitment to the 
University of Saskatchewan that we would, in fact, fund their 
two highest priorities — that being the Thorvaldson and 
kinesiology buildings. So there’s a commitment right in the 
budget and in the budget speech this year for that to happen in 
the next couple of years. 
 
With respect to your question as it pertains to how we make 
decisions between SIAST and the universities, last year SIAST 
and the regional colleges received nearly zero or as close to 
zero as could be — I guess there’s a small increase — but 
nearly zero. So it was appropriate this year that they were 
brought up to speed. There was salaries negotiations that had to 
be dealt with, and largely that’s the rationale. We believe that 
largely we have this year in the budget for the universities 
fulfilled their highest priorities. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While there is a 
definite need to address the concerns of capital, I think we can 
see very clearly from articles like this where it says, where’s the 
plan for post-secondary education? These are the kinds of 
things that are being expressed by the people at the universities. 
When you look at a 1.1 per cent increase in operational grants, 
that’s a given that we’re going to have tuition fee increases. 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, how you can justify . . . how 
your department can justify that now the various boards of 
governors of both the University of Regina and the University 
of Saskatchewan are looking at increases in tuitions ranging I 
believe from 8 per cent to 12 per cent. 
 
Students have been calling on a regular basis now saying like, 
that is a ridiculous amount to be asking students to contribute if 
indeed the various other things haven’t happened along in the 
system. We haven’t seen the huge increases in all kinds of other 
departments, yet we’re asking students to contribute an 
additional 12 per cent to their education costs. How do you 
justify that kind of a tuition fee increase in the light of . . . to the 
fact that your department has only contributed 1.1 per cent to 
the operation of the universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — One of the things too that I just do want 
to mention that has largely gone unnoticed is with the reduction 
in the sales tax from 7 to 6 per cent, the universities will 
achieve — I think you’re speaking to some degree of the U of S 
but this would apply certainly to the U of R (University of 
Regina) as well — just as an example, the U of S would see a 
savings of somewhere in the vicinity, based on their budget, of 
probably 4 to $500,000, so that’s not a small amount. 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

With respect to the tuition, I want to be clear that first of all that 
the universities operate autonomously. Last year if you 
recognize that we increased the budget by 5 per cent, the U of S 
increased their tuition to . . . by 6.7 per cent, I should say; and 
the U of R by only 2 per cent. So there is not necessarily a 
direct connection between what the province provides in the 
budget and the tuition. 
 
Also with respect to other provinces, Saskatchewan’s tuition 
fees are not at all out of line and probably fall actually on the 
lower end of relative tuition fees. 
 
And lastly it’s interesting, I just saw a comparative number 
based on what tuition fees are today as compared to, for 
instance in even the 1930s and the 1940s, in relative dollars 
they really have not gone up at all yet. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Two questions then from that response, Mr. 
Minister. The first one would be is: what is the percentage then, 
if you’re saying that it hasn’t changed as a result of the adjusted 
dollar, what is the percentage then that tuition is of the actual 
cost of a year of education? Has that changed dramatically over 
the last couple years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As an example in the 1950s the tuition 
made up 40 per cent of the budget. Over the years it’s gone up 
and down, but in the last few years it’s been roughly in the area 
of 25 to 27, 28 per cent. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I know there 
are various colleges at universities that have higher tuitions and 
some that have lower tuitions, and I guess you’re indicating to 
me that an average is somewhere in that 25 to 27 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you would have received a similar 
letter, but this is a letter from the student medical society of the 
College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. And I 
just want to read a couple of lines into the record, Mr. Minister. 
It says . . . the letter is addressed to myself, and it says: 
 

This letter is to express our concerns about potential tuition 
increases at the University of Saskatchewan, particularly in 
the College of Medicine. In the past 10 years, tuition has 
increased approximately 295 per cent from a rate of $1,950 
for the ’89-90 school year to the current rate of $5,750 for 
the ’98-99 school year. 
 

Now that’s the end of the line that I’ll read into the record, Mr. 
Minister. Now that’s a very significant amount of increase 
when you say 295 per cent for this particular college, while yes, 
others may not have increased that amount. 
 
So in the last 10 years, the College of Medicine has basically 
gone from a $2,000 tuition to a $5,700 tuition — significant 
dollars, Mr. Minister — and I’m wondering how that mixes in 
with your percentages and how that mixes in with the fact that 
you’ve indicated that adjusted dollars, we’ve really haven’t seen 
anything that has changed that much. I don’t think we’re 
operating on a 295 per cent dollar change from 1990 to 1999. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all again, I just want to be clear 
that tuition is a decision of the board of governors of the 
universities. In medicine, even with the tuition that you’ve so 

described, there’s a very, very high demand to get in because of 
the quality of the program. 
 
The tuitions largely, I would believe, are a reflection of the cost 
of the program. Even with the tuition that you’ve just described, 
that still only represents approximately 15 per cent of the 
overall cost. So when I, just a question or so earlier, I described 
that the average contribution by a student was about 25 to 27 
per cent; even at the fee that you’ve described for the College of 
Medicine, it still only represents roughly 15 per cent. So I can 
only surmise that’s why the board of governors makes that 
decision. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
there’s been some suggestion — I guess we’ll refer to it as 
rumour — that says that the universities of both Regina and 
Saskatchewan are lobbying your department very extensively. 
The student bodies are of course very, very concerned about an 
8 per cent or a 12 per cent rate increases. 
 
Can the universities of Regina and Saskatchewan in Saskatoon 
expect additional dollars that haven’t been described in the 
Estimates thus far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have been in discussion with the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina for a 
long time already on some of their pressures and some of their 
concerns. 
 
One of the things that most recently we’ve been working on is 
negotiations with the federal government on the millennium 
scholarship fund. You will have heard probably just in the news 
today, or yesterday I believe it was, Alberta has signed on to the 
millennium scholarship program with the federal government. 
And we in Saskatchewan here have believed we’re very close 
for a while now, and we are very close now. So those are the 
sorts of things that will in fact certainly provide assistance for 
students in Saskatchewan in the very near future also. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Another question, Mr. Minister, connected to 
that. Will you allow the universities to be able to move capital 
monies that you’ve allocated, if they need to? Will you allow 
them to move that into operating to lower tuition fees as a 
result? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Those are certainly decisions that the 
universities are able to make. We wouldn’t necessarily 
encourage that to happen, but they have the freedom to do that 
if they would like. 
 
What we . . . I guess what we . . . what I would like to say 
though, before I take my place here, is that we really want to 
conclude the discussions with the Millennium Scholarship Fund 
before the universities make decisions, and that might be able to 
assist them in some regard. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good. Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, a few questions in the area of capital 
expenditures. You’ve indicated a commitment to capital. And 
during interim supply debate, when I was talking with the 
Minister of Finance, he indicated that the capital dollars that we 
see in the Post-Secondary section are only a portion of the kinds 
of dollars that you’re talking about. I know we’re looking at, I 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

think . . . $22.7 million is the same budget in capital this year as 
it was last year. And of course that’s capital not only for the 
universities; that’s capital for SIAST and everywhere else. 
 
In SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), I 
see another capital project line and I would like to have an 
explanation from you as to how the universities can determine, 
from looking at your Estimates, as to what kinds of monies will 
be actually allocated to the universities, both the U of R and the 
U of S, the kinds of projects that will occur at the SIAST level, 
how is this broken down in the capital areas you’ve indicated in 
both Post-Secondary and SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We send out budget letters to all of our 
stakeholders, so they would receive individually, the 
universities and colleges, would receive clarification in a budget 
letter about what their capital would be for the coming year. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the last areas I’d like to spend some time on is in the area of 
student support programs and the student aid. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Minister, as I indicated in discussions with the 
Minister of Finance, I asked the question of the minister as to 
why there was a $1 million reduction in the Saskatchewan 
student aid fund. And the minister’s response was that it was 
very complicated and that you would be the only one who could 
actually give that answer. So here’s your opportunity: could you 
tell me and the people in the province of Saskatchewan what 
packages are in place for students to be able to access student 
loans. 
 
And indeed what occurred to allow you to have a million dollar 
reduction in the amount of money that you provide to students, 
when I’m hearing from students that there’s so much more need 
to meet, and yet there is no ability for them to seek that kind of 
assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well I’m extremely pleased that you 
expressed enough confidence in me to explain this to you. First 
of all as it pertains to the student support programs, that’s an 
area that we are really extremely proud of. And I think largely, 
maybe we haven’t done nearly a good enough job of explaining 
it to the public of Saskatchewan and to the students and in fact 
probably to their parents or their guardians. And I think that’s 
something that we could do a better job of. 
 
But the rationale for the 1 million reduction that you speak to is 
the fact that we have a surplus in the student aid fund. We’ve 
been drawing that down. This year we’re drawing that down by 
approximately $5 million so even though our expenditures 
overall are higher, it will show a reduction of $1 million 
because we’re reducing a surplus that currently exists in the 
student aid fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — If you feel that that surplus has to be reduced 
and are using it, could you indicate the level that that surplus is 
at right now. And also, where do you want to take that surplus 
level if you’re reducing it by as much as $5 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just doing some quick calculating here 

— through March 31 of 1999 the surplus was about $20 
million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The other part of my question was, if that 
surplus is at that level and you’re now trying to lower it, where 
do you want to take that surplus to? What level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Historically the fund has had a surplus 
of 2 to $3 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I guess that begs the question, Mr. Minister. 
How did it get to that level to be at $20 million if it historically 
was at 2 or 3 million? And I’m also going to add another 
question to that, Mr. Minister, and I know you would appreciate 
the kinds of comments, because I think a lot of people have 
shared them with you. Individuals . . . students who have both 
parents working, not necessarily you know huge-paying jobs, 
but where they’re . . . what I’ll refer to as the middle-income 
area. Both of those parents, because they work, when a student 
from that family applies for a student loan, they’re virtually 
denied to zero. And that’s been a problem that we’ve identified 
with a number of people. 
 
And the other side of the coin, Mr. Minister, both of those 
parents have not set aside the kinds of finances necessary to put 
one or two or, in fact, we know of one family who have three 
children now enrolled in the university programs. And they’re 
not qualifying for student assistance. The parents have to 
literally go to their own financial institution and try to establish 
their own personal loan to be able to finance the students. 
 
On the other side of the coin, you’re telling me that the 
student-aid fund has developed a $20 million surplus. Should 
we not be looking at those kinds of concerns where we can try 
to ensure that a student who wants to go to university, but 
doesn’t have the financial wherewithal even though the parents 
have, you know, their income tax forms indicate that they’ve 
received this kind of a dollar as far as their salaries. I think we 
need to look at that area. 
 
And I’m wondering, has there been any development within 
your department to address the concern of what I’ll refer to as 
middle-income . . . students from middle-income families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, sorry for the delay there. 
 
First of all your question was how this surplus came to be. It 
came as a result of the lender financing agreement with the 
banks. We used to essentially be the bank — the Government of 
Saskatchewan used to be the bank. We sold all of the student 
loans to the bank at the premium, if you will, or a discount of 5 
per cent. Essentially if I can explain that the banks believe that 
they could collect 95 per cent of loans that have a loss of 
approximately 5 per cent. 
 
We had on our books an assumption that if we remained the 
bank, if you will, an assumption that we would probably not 
collect more than 75 per cent — 75, 76 per cent in there. So we 
had a loss recovery of the difference between a loss of 25 per 
cent and the 5 per cent that the banks actually paid us, so that it 
is a one time surplus that does exist. 
 
Now those funds are going . . . right now they’re being 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

contributed for the most needy students by way of a number of 
programs that we just described earlier. 
 
With respect to qualifying for student loans the . . . Canada sets, 
under the Canada student loan program, they set the rules for 
qualifying. And again one of the reasons why we’ve been 
anxious to negotiate an agreement under the Millennium 
Scholarship Fund so we have a bit more control over dollars 
that could be targeted to as many students as needed as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would hope that 
you are successful in arriving at a new agreement that indeed 
will put in place opportunities for students. I think that’s the 
biggest disappointment, Mr. Minister, when I hear from young 
people who say I want to go to university, I have the marks to 
attend, but I don’t have the financial wherewithal. And I think 
that’s something that as a province, as a nation, we have to 
address. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I could get you to . . . and I know it’s been a 
couple years since you have had the Royal Bank as the financial 
institution that was awarded the tender to look after the current 
Saskatchewan student loan program. You indicated a 5 per cent 
sort of a sale price. Is that the same percentage that you have 
with Royal Bank regarding handling of all of the new student 
loans that are being set up by Royal Bank? 
 
And the other part of the question, Mr. Minister, is you’ve 
indicated that you have turned over all of the accounts that 
were, you know, previously . . . previous accounts, you’ve 
turned those over to the Royal Bank. Can you tell us if you 
monitor the collection process or have you allowed that to be 
handled by Royal Bank by whatever collection agencies they 
use and whatever type of method they wish to use in the 
collection? Is your department following up on those delinquent 
accounts, I guess is the best way to describe them. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I just want to explain 
briefly. On the millennium as well — much to the credit of all 
of the provinces, and certainly to the credit of the federal 
government as well — on the Millennium Scholarship Fund, 
one of the things that we’ve done to address some of the points 
that you’ve made is originally when the program was 
established, it was to be 100 per cent merit; it’s now been 
flipped on its head so that 95 per cent goes to needs and only 5 
per cent to merit. So that is something that’s been negotiated 
that will help students a great deal. 
 
The reason for the 5 per cent discount, first of all, is to the 
credit of the good staff we have in Post-Secondary that were 
able to negotiate a very good deal that other provinces were in 
fact not able to even get close to in terms of negotiating deals. If 
a student finds themselves in any financial distress, they would 
apply to the bank and they actually have an opportunity to get 
up to as much as 18 months of interest relief. But the decision 
as to when and where it’s turned over to collections is the 
decision of the bank itself. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there 
are a lot of questions in this area but I’m going to end with one 

question regarding full-time employment. 
 
We’ve had a number of calls from students who have 
graduated, have financial student loan commitments of 25,000 
and 32,000, just to name a couple of examples, and yet they 
haven’t been able to obtain full-time employment in the area 
that they’re trained, or they have very low-paying jobs. 
 
What kind of procedure is in place for those students to ensure 
that the bank doesn’t, you know, go after them after 18 months 
and end that kind of a system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I just want to be clear, the 
average loan in the province is about $13,000, not quite as high 
as you described — I think you said about 25,000 did you say 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the average across the 
province is about 13,000. 
 
Again, first of all, the student, if they’re working part-time and 
don’t have adequate income, they can apply for interest relief 
which gives them, first of all, a six-month grace period. And 
then on any principal payments, on any payments of any sort, 
and then following that is an 18-month interest relief period. So 
they would have a total period, if you will, of 24 months before 
they would be required to get into full repayment . . . into a full 
repayment schedule. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, since the early 1990s, there has been discussion 
and planning surrounding a joint-use facility in Humboldt 
between the Carlton Trail community college and the Humboldt 
Collegiate. 
 
I wonder if you could update me on the status of that discussion 
with your government. I’d like to know where this stands at this 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, it is my understanding that 
they’ve already . . . the college has $750,000 that we’ve already 
paid to them out of last year’s budget, so they’ve got that in 
their hands. So we were meeting . . . the department has been 
meeting with the colleges and the school board. They’ve, to my 
understanding, identified a location and are currently just 
simply refining the plans right now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could I 
just ask you to repeat that dollar amount. Was it 250,000, you 
said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Seven hundred and fifty thousand. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. That was my understanding, too. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1998, the budget did allocate that amount to 
this project. So I’m wondering whether or not that amount of 
money has been forwarded to Humboldt at this time or whether 
or not the government retains that money until final planning of 
this and beginning construction is happening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They have 653,000 right now, and 
we’re holding 97 until the plans are completely in place. 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the other 
thing that is happening regarding the Carlton Trail community 
college is, as you well know, that it has been decentralized as 
far as programs. For instance, Davidson, Wynyard, and Semans 
now have offices in those towns, and some of the programs are 
running out of that. I’m wondering if, in your estimation, 
whether or not this sort of decentralization will affect the 
probability of that joint-use facility coming into being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, that is good news, I must say, 
because there was certainly some concern on my part and other 
people’s also. 
 
Mr. Minister, could I ask you if you had consultation or 
meetings with the Humboldt town council in regards to the 
decentralization of the community college? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, I did. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, were you in favour of the 
decentralization, and was the . . . what about what the town 
council was saying? Were they in favour of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, it’s important that as we 
described the regional colleges that they’d serve the entire 
region and not just one community, so we need to balance that 
off. 
 
In our meeting with the regional college, we agreed that what 
we would do would be to monitor, to ensure that Humboldt 
wasn’t too adversely affected if that was the case. But even they 
agreed that it’s important that the training and programs service 
the entire region. So, essentially, the short answer is that we’ve 
agreed to monitor Humboldt’s training programs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
some question in mind about whether or not the decentralization 
will, in effect, impact on that joint-use facility and whether or 
not it will be the kind of facility that people of Humboldt had 
envisioned. Because if the programs are decentralized, certainly 
the same space will not be needed any more that was 
determined in the first place. So you have just mentioned to me 
that this decentralization would not put that project in jeopardy. 
 
Could you give just an idea of what your thoughts are, whether 
there’s been further discussion with town council and the 
Humboldt Collegiate on maybe whether or not the facility 
would look the same when it’s finished or whether or not it 
would be, maybe, not as expansive as what was first intended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, it certainly isn’t anybody’s 
anticipation that this will adversely affect the joint-use facility 
at all. The training in any region should reflect the needs of the 
region. And I mean there will be cycles. There will be up and 
downs in the amounts of training that are offered but there is no 
belief this will adversely affect the joint-use facility. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, if I might ask, do you have 
information or knowledge about when they might start 
building? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Some people will have interpreted this 
as delaying but both in our meetings, the town council and the 
regional college board had wanted to plan well. So they didn’t 
want to build something in a rush just to get it up. So they 
wanted to plan well, and as a result, I think they’ve done good 
planning. 
 
The anticipated tender is to go out sometime this fall. Whether 
the construction will actually start this fall or not, we’re not 
sure. But I think certainly that is a possibility that it could start 
as early as this fall. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve had communication with many students at 
our two universities, and of course it got me looking at some 
older material. And I found with interest that in 1944 the then 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) Party promised 
that if they were elected they would abolish university tuition 
fees in Saskatchewan. And I would like to know when you 
think your government will get around to redeeming that 
promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the problem is we’ve elected too 
many provincial Liberal governments in the interim, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, that promise to abolish 
university tuition fees was repeated in the 1971 platform and in 
the 1991 platform. Is it still the policy of this party and this 
government to abolish university tuition fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, it’s enshrined in the 
legislation and the board of governors makes those decisions. 
So the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — May I then ask . . . I understand that with the 
increases now, this year, 8 and 12 per cent, was well above the 
rate of inflation. The rate of inflation is now, I believe, 1 to 2 
per cent; the rate of increase in tuition fees is about five times 
that. And that will make a total increase in tuition fees since this 
government took office of about 100 per cent. They’ve 
basically doubled since 1991. 
 
Now can our students expect doubling again in the next eight 
years? Why is no action being taken by this government? And 
why were university students told to expect that tuition fees 
would be abolished when, in point of fact, it took eight years for 
this government to double them. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, the decisions . . . the 
decisions regarding tuition will be established by both boards of 
governors sometime in the middle of May. 
 
But I want to remind the member that had there not been the 
federal Liberal withdrawals from education training, the 
question that you’re asking wouldn’t even be relevant. Because 
the amount of money that we’ve put in in backfilling has been 
. . . had a substantial draw on our provincial budget. 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

So having said that, I would encourage the member to 
remember why the province is having difficulty in providing all 
of the funding to the universities. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I want to sincerely thank the 
minister for raising the issue of the federal commitment to 
post-secondary education, because of course that reminds us 
that in the 1998 budget there was announcement of the 
Millennium Scholarship Fund — a major commitment from 
Ottawa to post-secondary education. And at that time, the 
Premier of our province was highly critical of the federal 
government for getting involved in post-secondary education 
when he said, well this is a provincial field and the federal 
government should not be as interested in post-secondary 
education and our university students as it appears to be. 
 
So what I would like now to ask the minister, now he raises the 
issue of Ottawa being so committed to our universities when the 
province appears to be losing interest in post-secondary 
education, I want to ask the minister: is it still the policy of this 
government to be critical of the Millennium Scholarship Fund? 
Is this government still of the view that that Ottawa is putting 
too high a priority on our universities, or does the minister now 
congratulate the federal government for taking an interest in 
universities that unfortunately the provincial government has 
not shown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, to the member. First of all, no it’s 
not our policy to be critical any more because the federal 
government has in fact listened to us. When the millennium 
scholarship was first introduced it was to be 100 per cent merit 
based. All the provinces argued that that was an incorrect 
program, that the program should be changed to reflect needs. 
In fact, to the credit of the federal government, they listened. 
And we now have a program that’s 95 per cent need and 5 per 
cent merit. 
 
I want to remind the member also because this . . . not just to 
him but to I think to the public at large, there is a belief that the 
Millennium Scholarship Fund is exclusively university. That is 
not the case. The Millennium Scholarship Fund is 
post-secondary, which also applies to the colleges and to 
SIAST. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, I 
want to sincerely thank him for pointing out that the federal 
government has come to the assistance not only of our 
university students but of our students in SIAST and Kelsey, 
and all those involved in post-secondary education. And I 
apologize for sounding that it was just the universities when the 
federal government in fact is coming to the assistance of 
students who are pursuing any form of studies after high school. 
So that’s an important correction. I thank the minister for 
making that. 
 
I want to ask the minister, though, that of course the real 
problem with our campuses is that quite literally the roof is 
falling in. Now first of all it was the university gym collapsed. 
Now I understand the most historic building on the campus, the 
Administration Building, Convocation Hall, is closed and shut 
down. Now that was not mentioned in the budget. The minister 

mentioned that . . . Thorvaldson is mentioned in the budget this 
year, but the Administration Building I understand is not being 
able to be used at this time and I would like some indication as 
to when something will be done about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chair, identified the kinesiology building and the Thorvaldson 
Building as their priorities, and in this year’s budget we made 
commitments to funding those . . . capital funding for those 
buildings. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well yes but I was mentioning, what is going 
to happen to the Administration Building? I understand that it 
cannot be used now. When can we expect some dollars to go 
into that so that it can be reopened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With respect to the Administration 
Building, the functional space has been replaced, and they are 
using it. With respect to the historical part of the building, 
certainly that is a concern identified by the university, and we’ll 
continue to work with them to see what options are available 
with the limited number of dollars that currently exists. 
 
Mr. Hillson: —Mr. Chairman, thank you. We know what’s 
happened over nurses. A few years ago, we were firing nurses. 
Our young nursing graduates could not get jobs. They were 
going to Texas to get employment. Now we’re in a nursing 
shortage. 
 
Now I’m not going to ask about nurses now. I think my 
colleagues have already laid that issue out before the people of 
Saskatchewan. But we’re now told that we’re soon going to be 
in the same situation with our teachers. What I understand that 
has been happening is that we have half the number of 
education graduates, those in the teaching program, has been 
cut in half and that we are moving into heavy retirement years 
for the province’s teachers, and that the day is now in sight 
when there will be a teacher shortage in the province. 
 
Now I want you to address the specific issue of the fact that we 
are graduating fewer people from the education program, the 
teacher’s program, at a time when we know that demand is 
going to dramatically increase. But I also want to ask why is 
there not more forward planning to make sure that graduates 
will be related to the anticipated need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well I think the member makes a good 
point, and it’s for that very reason that a labour market analysis 
is currently taking place with the board of teacher education and 
certification in conjunction with the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, is my information correct 
that we are going to be graduating about half the number of 
teachers the next few years that we were previously graduating, 
and if so, I mean, how has this happened at a time when they 
say we’re moving into high retirement years for our teachers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Our information doesn’t suggest that the 
numbers that are being graduated is half, as you have suggested. 
But having said that, in years past we graduated somewhere in 
the vicinity of 6 to 700 students with the requirement . . . 
teachers I should say, 6 or 700 teachers per year with the 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

requirement in the province of Saskatchewan of approximately 
400 a year. So even a reduction of 2 or 300 still doesn’t create a 
problem where we’re going to have a teacher shortage. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well this may not be a question for your 
department but can you tell me . . . you mention labour market 
surveys. Has the Government of Saskatchewan done the work 
to anticipate the number of retirements we can expect from the 
teaching profession in the next 5 to 10 years? 
 
I’m told that it will be very dramatic, that we have not had high 
retirements until now, but in the next 5 to 10 years, a very large 
percentage of our teaching profession will be leaving our 
schools and will need to be replaced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer is yes, we have done that 
analysis, but largely that it would be the Department of 
Education that should be answering that question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Very well. I accept that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I do want to ask you though, the Maclean’s surveys that come 
out each year. Now some people would suggest that this is 
popularization and perhaps trivialization of the issue of 
post-secondary education and I’m not saying that this is 
necessarily something that should get us alarmed, but 
nonetheless, each year the Maclean’s survey suggests that the 
position of our universities in Saskatchewan, relative to other 
universities in Canada, is declining. 
 
And that is of concern to us and I want to invite the minister to 
comment on that, on the Maclean’s survey in general, how 
department officials view that — if they view it as a valid test 
or, say, a cheap popularization. 
 
And also, the minister to comment on how he feels our two 
provincial universities continue to stack up against other 
institutions of higher learning in Canada today versus how they 
would have a few years ago. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I want to say to the member first of all, 
with respect to the Maclean’s survey, I think that, in the kindest 
way, our department would be more inclined to agree with your 
latter characterization of the Maclean’s survey. 
 
As an example, in Saskatchewan here, we place a very high 
priority on access and on equity. Maclean’s, as an example — 
this is only one example; I could cite a whole number of them 
— but one example is that they score very high marks for 
students that have . . . or for colleges and universities that have 
high entrance average levels. 
 
University of Regina, for instance, acknowledges that. Often 
when you have students that have low incomes, it’s directively 
reflected by the fact that students leave schools and colleges — 
or schools I should say — earlier and that obviously reflects in 
lower averages. We think that we need to get more of those 
students and people back into our educational system. And it’s 
for that very reason that we place high importance on access 
and equity. And in fact, we’re marked unfavourably by 
Maclean’s as a result of doing something that we think is very 

positive. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I note, though, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, 
that Maclean’s also uses such tests as the number of library 
books per student, the student/professor ratio, the amount spent 
on research relative . . . as a percentage of the university budget. 
And I want to ask the minister if he thinks that those are valid 
tests; or if he considers them to be invalid, if he could perhaps 
expand on why he considers them to be invalid tests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think it would be naïve to admit that 
lots of the test yardsticks that Maclean’s uses are certainly valid 
and some of the ones that you’ve just cited probably are. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Would the minister please tell me how many 
students in Saskatchewan we anticipate entering post-secondary 
programs in the fall of this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’d anticipate about 10,000. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The minister is aware that the Liberal proposal 
is $1,000 to each student entering a first- or second-year 
program. And I want to ask the minister if he thinks that $1,000 
to every student in a first- and second-year program would help 
in some small way to ameliorate the heavy increase in tuition 
fees that our students have experienced under this government, 
and of course, the doubling tuition fees in the last eight years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Certainly, I think any assistance to 
students will be well received by the students. Having said that, 
however, I mean there’s always the issue of having to be able to 
pay for it. 
 
But in the surveys to students they’ve identified the fact that 
their heaviest burden is not tuition; 75 per cent said their 
heaviest burden is living costs. So in the program you’ve 
described you may not be quite hitting on the areas that the 
students identify as their highest priority. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I’m not quite clear that I follow the minister’s 
last reply. Is the minister saying that a thousand dollar grant to 
each first- and second-year university student would not be of 
assistance in meeting their living costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, I’m not saying that at all. I think 
any assistance will be well received by the students. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the minister for 
that answer and so I will close with asking him then if he is in 
agreement that the Liberal plan of a thousand dollars to each 
first- and second-year post-secondary student would be a 
benefit to education, a benefit to our young people, and a 
benefit to the future of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think if you can afford it, I think if you 
can afford it, Mr. Chair, any money is good money. 
 
Subvote (PE01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PE02), (PE05), (PE04), (PE07), (PE03), (PE06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE05), (PE04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I just want to take the opportunity to 
thank opposition members and the third party members for their 
good questions. And I certainly want to take the opportunity to 
thank my officials in their great assistance in putting together 
the budget. I know this has been challenging at times as it is 
every year, but with . . . especially with the changes from the 
federal government to the provinces on all the negotiations that 
had to take place, it certainly is to their credit that we have the 
good programs that we do have in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the minister to introduce her officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my left is 
the deputy minister, Fraser Nicholson. Behind him is Larry 
Spannier, the associate deputy minister. Behind me is Jocelyn 
Souliere, the executive director of corporate management. Next 
to her is Dave McQuinn, director of economic analysis, and 
next to me is Bryon Burnett, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations. 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome, Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials 
tonight. Madam Minister, we heard this afternoon you had a 
good pre-election good-news project in Saskatoon. I thought for 
a minute maybe you were announcing something to do with the 
potato industry, but then I thought better of that. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to go into some questions on 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), and because it’s economic development, I think 
that’s a big part of what SPUDCO is out there. 
 
But we’d like to go back into, Madam Minister, about the losses 
we see today on account of the bankruptcy and the situation that 
the Lake Diefenbaker project is in. But, Madam Minister, we’d 
like to first deal with the money that the government has 
involved in some of these projects out there and, for example, to 
the two buildings that were sold to Lake Diefenbaker project. 
And the explanation, I believe, that the minister the other night 
gave, was that you had $3 million tied up in debentures when 
you sold them and $2.8 million with a mortgage. Madam 
Minister, can you explain. Are we in a position to lose the total 
5.8 million at this point? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we have no information here about SPUDCO. That is, 
my department has no money invested in SPUDCO so you’d 
have to ask the appropriate agency when they come. But we 
have no information here at all on that file. We haven’t been 
involved in any part of the financing of the file. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I find that amazing, Madam Minister, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because when something like SPUDCO is 
announced, it gets into a project like this, the first people out 
there are Economic Development, including yourself, Madam 
Minister, to make these great news announcements out there, 
especially now when it’s election time. 
 
And yet when it comes time to answer questions on something 
like this, you disappear into the woodwork, kind of go into a 
cocoon and we can’t ask and find the answers from anyone. 
 
I would suggest, Madam Minister, this is a big part of economic 
development. What we’re seeing today is a number of private 
investors in this province losing their shirts. And partly because 
your government got involved in business out there where it 
should have kept its nose out of — kept its nose clean and 
stayed out of it. We saw this happen in the hog industry, and in 
no time what was happening? We have hog producers that have 
been there for 30 years that are going under because your 
government got involved. So you may not want to answer these 
questions in Economic Development, Madam Minister, but I 
feel very, very sorry for the individual investor out there tonight 
that’s going under because of you getting involved in the hog 
. . . potato industry with SPUDCO, Madam Minister. So I guess 
you don’t have to answer our questions here, but we will get the 
answers somewhere. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again I think what I’d like to say 
about Economic Development is we no longer make direct 
grants to business from our department. We make no direct 
investments to business. The only funds that we expend are 
really in two main areas. We co-match funding for regional 
economic development authorities which are broadly based 
regional groups out there who promote economic development. 
We have the strategic initiatives fund which funds things like 
research and development but not private agencies, public 
research facilities where a whole group can have access to it. 
 
So that’s been the shift because people have told us that 
Economic Development should not be directly investing in 
specific businesses. 
 
(2030) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I am also very disappointed that there’s no answers to 
the questions that we have on SPUDCO. When we talked about 
the government’s involvement in the infrastructure, that is your 
job to make sure that the basic infrastructures are here in this 
province, so the people can expand business and grow, and we 
don’t have to pick winners and losers. I think that there are 
many potato producers out there who are concerned before 
today’s announcement that because of the government 
involvement — whether it’s through Sask Water Corporation or 
SPUDCO or whatever else you want to call it — there’s going 
to be an impact on businesses in this province. 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

I know that they were scared of trade retaliation that may have 
happened because of the government’s involvement in 
SPUDCO under whatever name you want to call it. I think the 
people of this province have a right to be able to ask somebody 
who is responsible and what’s going on. And whether you want 
to say it’s not my responsibility, I don’t think that that’s what 
people in this province are saying when they’ve invested their 
own money. There is a lot of individuals out there tonight that 
are going to bed knowing that they are probably going to go 
bankrupt as well. They probably had their life’s earnings and 
savings going into businesses that have gone under because of 
an involvement. 
 
I’m sure that, if we’ve heard it, you’ve also heard that trade 
retaliation is something that was on the minds of people in that 
business and in the States. And I know that maybe you’ve 
gotten out of it now because unfortunately this company didn’t 
work, unfortunately for the people who invested money. 
 
But as overall, as a Department of Economic Development, if it 
isn’t your business to know what is going on right across this 
province when it comes to involvement and spending 
taxpayers’ dollars — no matter what the name is — it’s 
somebody’s responsibility. Now we may not have Sask Water 
up here to ask specific questions to tonight, but somebody is 
going to have to answer for the dollars that are invested in this 
province. 
 
Will you please tell me what your thoughts are on the trade 
retaliation that may have happened because of this involvement 
in the potato industry. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I know, that 
wasn’t a major factor in what occurred. 
 
I think that the point I want to make is, what’s happening here 
is the budgets of the different departments are coming forward, 
and what we have detailed information on is what’s funded out 
of our department. And what I said before, I think, is something 
that’s widely supported by the people of this province. 
 
At one time this department, the Department of Economic 
Development, used to make significant grants to individual 
businesses. That no longer is part of our mandate, so we’re no 
longer involved in those activities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then, Madam 
Minister, I have a couple of questions on SOCO and you are the 
. . . The government does fund the administration of SOCO and 
also you are the chair of that board as well. So I would like to 
ask you for an update on Canamino and also on Wolverine. I’ve 
noticed . . . Wolverine Resources at Humboldt. I’ve noticed 
both of those names have been up frequently in the last little 
while and could you ask what . . . tell me what the status of 
those projects are. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I’ll deal with Canamino first, and 
then Wolverine. Canamino, we are working with the people 
involved, previously involved in Canamino, to hopefully use 
that technology. We have no final decision as to how this will 
proceed, but we are working on the notion that the technology 
should be kept in Saskatchewan, should be available to other 
companies even if those companies don’t have the resources 

themselves to use it. So I think you’ll see, in the not-too-distant 
future, a positive result in terms of the technology that was 
developed in Saskatchewan, through Canamino, staying in the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The minister may have forgotten that I asked a 
question on Wolverine as well. But before getting back up and 
answering that question, would you confirm please that the 
company that is looking at perhaps buying or taking over the 
technology of Canamino, is it a BC (British Columbia) firm 
which will also be receiving funding from this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we have — sorry I didn’t answer the question on 
Wolverine— but we have no investment in Wolverine. It’s got 
nothing to do with SOCO. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, thank you. It must have been 
an error in newspaper article I read lately that said that Mr. 
Benson from SOCO was now in charge of managing that 
company. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, no, we don’t 
have an investment in Wolverine. And I’m sure the member 
opposite knows this as well as I do: that we should probably not 
believe everything that’s printed in the newspapers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, with the technology that 
SOCO received from . . . or acquired after Canamino went 
down, is something that you said would be a good thing to stay 
in this province. Will you . . . I also understand that there’s a 
BC firm that’s looking at this technology and perhaps moving 
into Saskatoon and that there is a possibility of government 
investment in that firm. Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, no, I can’t confirm 
that. 
 
Actually we’re at a delicate stage in the Canamino file and I 
quite honestly can’t reveal what we’re discussing except to say 
that from what I know right now, the result I believe will be 
very positive because I believe what people at Innovation Place 
want is they don’t want that technology that was developed in 
this province to leave; they don’t want the place turned back 
into a warehouse. And that I believe will not happen. 
 
But the final details we don’t have and until we do we really 
shouldn’t breach any confidentiality here by getting into those 
details. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The whole area 
of SOCO is something that we see the government has invested 
a lot of money lately and a lot of it is in equity rather than in 
loans. Could you give me an idea of how much of the money 
this year that was spent, given out in equity versus loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I can give you is our SOCO report. I notice it’s 
got a beautiful picture of the minister on the front page, so you 
may find that particularly rewarding. We have it here. We have 
all of the loans, and we note how much is equity and how much 
is loan. 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

Now we don’t have it totalled up in terms of percentages, but 
we can do that for you. But I can also just give you the list and 
send it across along with the lovely picture. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I will appreciate 
that lovely picture, and I trust it’s one where that minister also 
has the flower on that she received today at the opening of 
another business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, I just have a couple of questions on the Small 
Business Loans Association. I noticed, and it was brought 
forward in the budget, that the funding doubled for that program 
this year. And I believe that means that people can borrow up to 
$10,000. Has the criteria on investment changed? Is it still 
totally in the hands of the small business associations in the 
towns? Or does the government have any further involvement 
in okaying projects? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The criteria are exactly the same. 
This is actually the government’s most successful job creation 
initiative in that, as you probably know having a rural riding, it 
is very successful in rural communities where we basically turn 
the decision making over to local boards, and all we do is we 
back the loans. 
 
So what happened was a very good news part of the budget that 
hasn’t received enough attention. The limit was $5,000 for each 
loan. It’s been that for a long time. It was far too low. They 
were telling us across the province it was far too low, so we 
doubled the limit so that it’s $10,000 per individual loan. And 
the limit for each SBLA (Small Business Loans Association) 
was only 50,000. And again, particularly rural communities, 
they said that is not enough to allow us to do what we need to 
do, so we doubled that to 100,000. 
 
But the program is the same and the criteria are the same. And 
it’s a wonderful program in which local people, particularly in 
rural communities, make the decisions. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome, Madam 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, could you tell me what amount of money was 
allocated in this year’s budget to the REDA (regional economic 
development authority), Carlton Trail REDA? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — They received the maximum 
funding allowable in terms of their core funding which would 
be $60,000. And then there’s the REDA enhancement program 
which allows REDAs to apply for particular capital projects. A 
lot of them have used that to buy computer equipment and of 
course they’ll be eligible for any extra funding that they qualify 
for in terms of those grants. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
it’s my understanding that only about 1.9 per cent of the 
businesses in Saskatchewan that actually set up business are 
successful and only 1.9 per cent of those use REDAs. I’m 
wondering whether or not the investment of taxpayers’ money 
for regional economic development authorities is justified. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think what they do is they don’t 

just provide services to small business, although they are really 
the only agency out there in many rural communities that 
provides that service. 
 
In your part of the province, the Humboldt REDA is probably 
one of the most successful in the whole province and they’ve 
done things like dealt with housing shortages. When there was a 
housing shortage in that community, it was the REDA that went 
in and said here’s the way to find a solution. And it wasn’t 
investing government money; it was bringing in contractors to 
help build housing. When they found there was a training 
shortage they were able to work with the institutions to enhance 
the training. 
 
So across the piece they’ve been incredibly successful, and 
again if you break it down, government dollars invested in 
REDAs, relative to the number of jobs created, they would 
probably rank as the number two or three after SBLAs in terms 
of their effectiveness, again particularly in rural communities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
certainly don’t claim to have the greatest amount of expansive 
understanding of what it would be that communities like 
Humboldt need to have in order to bring in extra housing, but it 
seems to me that municipal governments could certainly play 
the same role in ensuring that if there’s a shortage of housing 
that they seek out contractors to do this work. And why would 
we have to have an economic development authority to do that 
at a major added expense? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In most cases what’s happened is it 
is the municipal economic development officer that becomes 
. . . that funding is flipped over into the REDA. For example, 
Saskatoon is an excellent example. They used to have their own 
economic development authority person working for the city of 
Saskatoon. Now instead of a municipal official working on 
economic development, they have a separate agency which we 
do some cost sharing of funding with to perform that function. 
So there’s usually not a duplication. And in the case of 
Humboldt they don’t have a separate economic development 
agency whereas 10 years ago they would have. 
 
So it’s in fact taking a function that was being performed by a 
municipality. And it’s doing this jointly with other — what’s 
happened in Humboldt too — other communities working with 
Humboldt besides the communities working separately as they 
were in the past, all at cross purposes. They do it on a regional 
basis, so they can promote the whole region outside the 
province, and working with the provincial government. So it’s a 
more coordinated approach to economic development. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, I’d just like to divert a bit 
from the topic that we were just discussing and go back to the 
issue of Wolverine industries. Madam Minister, I understand 
that the venture capital that came in from basically Asian 
countries and so on that assisted in Wolverine’s operating was 
stopped after a five-year period of time. And I understand also 
that there was some advancement towards . . . from the people 
out there to being able to . . . They were trying to determine 
where they could get assistance to continue the operations at 
Wolverine. And I also understand that they did approach SOCO 
for some assistance. Now is there any ongoing discussions 
between SOCO and Wolverine, or have there been discussions? 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Or has there been any decision made as to whether or not 
SOCO would assist Wolverine? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, as a minister I’m not 
involved in any discussions that occur. Anything that would be 
occurring would be just totally on a commercial basis. What I 
do know is that there’s been no decisions made. That is, we 
have no investment. We have no involvement in Wolverine. 
 
And what would have happened is, every immigrant investor 
program naturally sunsets after five years because that’s what 
the law of Canada says has to happen. That money has to be 
back out in five years. So companies like Wolverine often get 
caught because they didn’t realize when they got into an 
immigrant investor program the implications of the five-year 
sunset clause. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, when Wolverine got into their 
industry there and came to understand that there would be 
outside venture capital available, was it not up to the Minister 
of Economic Development to discuss with them and inform 
them that there was a five-year sunset clause on that capital 
coming in? Why would they not have been advised so that they 
were prepared and could maybe make other arrangements? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite. 
First of all, the minister is not at all involved in those immigrant 
investor programs. There’s no government money in them. 
They’re run by the federal government. It would have been 
clear in the contract with Wolverine that this sunsets after five 
years. My point wasn’t legally that they wouldn’t have 
understood that. Often . . . sometimes companies can 
overestimate their capacity to repay. My point was they would 
have known. Clearly their lawyer would have told them, what 
you’re signing here is a five-year sunset clause and it’s an 
automatic. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Madam Minister, are you saying this evening 
that the Saskatchewan government does not have any part in 
administering that venture capital or being a liaison or anything 
at all? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have no involvement. There’s a 
minister assigned because you have to have a minister assigned. 
But in terms of the running of the programs, the decisions 
made, the funding — none of it comes from the provincial 
government at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, under 
Tourism Saskatchewan the amount of funding that is given out 
this year, some $6.9 million, is it sent out to each tourism 
district in an equal proportion? Do they apply for it? Or how is 
the money given out to each region? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What happens is about two and a 
half, three years ago we established Tourism Saskatchewan, an 
independent agency. The grant goes from the Government of 
Saskatchewan to the tourism agency and then they make the 
decisions with respect to it. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the 

minister would be good enough to tell me about the publication, 
partnership for progress. How often is that publication 
published and what approximately is the cost of that 
publication? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I’m not sure exactly what document 
he’s talking about. There’s been Partnership for Renewal, 
Partnership for Growth. They are Economic Development 
strategies which have come out, usually within a year of the 
new mandate of the government. That is the first one came out 
in about ’92; the second one came out in about ’96. 
 
And really they’re updates in the Economic Development 
strategy of the government. That is the original one is in force 
but it’s updated about every four years. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m been told that initially the 
SPUDCO operation was designed to grow white seed potatoes 
for the export market and that it instead changed to grow red 
food potatoes for the domestic market; and that that has led 
directly to the flooding of the local domestic food market which 
has led directly to the price of potatoes dropping to 2 cents a 
pound, which means that not only the Lucky Lake operation 
which appears now to be facing financial ruin but all of the 
potato producers in the province are now left in an extremely 
precarious position. I wonder if the minister could comment on 
that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I’m sorry, as I said to the member 
opposite, my department has not been involved in the details of 
SPUDCO at all. None of that analysis was done by my 
department, so I have no information here as to what occurred 
there. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Do you have any information as to whether the 
drop in the value of potatoes of 2 cents of pound relates directly 
to actions taken in this province as opposed to larger economic 
pressures throughout the continent? Is it actions taken in this 
province which has led the flooding of the domestic food potato 
market? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I don’t have any information on 
that, but I know that the member opposite, if he used his 
significant intelligence, would know that that’s leading to a 
particular answer; that is, the province of Saskatchewan is a 
significant player in the oil industry but we don’t have any 
capacity by how much production we do or don’t have in 
Saskatchewan to affect the global price for oil. 
 
We’re a significant player in agriculture. We don’t have the 
capacity in terms of what we produce to affect the global price 
of grain. 
 
And I would say that, logically, the same thing would be true 
for other sectors like potatoes. 
 
Subvote (EC01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (EC02) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (EC05) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I just have to go back for a 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

moment to the necessity for REDAs. Madam Minister, you 
were talking about housing, housing shortage for instance in 
Humboldt, and the demand by the communities around 
Humboldt to have homes built there to accommodate the 
workers at the industry that is in St. Brieux and in Annaheim. 
 
Madam Minister, by the time that that housing . . . the housing 
contract and construction took place, it was pretty well too late. 
There are a number of houses in Humboldt right now that are 
available because people are moving out of Humboldt for 
whatever reason. 
 
One of those reasons is the economy. People are moving to 
other provinces. But the fact remains that we now have housing 
there. The demand for the housing that was needed was there 
two or three years ago. By the time that these homes were built 
through REDA, it was too late basically so now we’re sitting 
with a number of houses there that are not necessarily going to 
be used, or all of them may not be filled. 
 
Madam Minister, I think that the REDAs and all of the red tape 
and regulations that go with it oftentimes, oftentimes don’t meet 
the market needs at the time that they are there. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Now just a general answer to the 
member opposite. I think there’s two points here. One is what 
the REDAs do is they allow a region to work co-operatively 
together. They allow, for example, the Lakeland region around 
. . . north of Prince Albert to do joint advertising of the tourist 
potential of the whole region. So it allows it to operate as a 
region. 
 
And they only develop if there’s local demand. That is we only 
get in in cost-matched funding for a group that’s already 
formed. So there has to be people on the local scene willing to 
invest in them before the government gets involved. That is, we 
don’t go in and say to them, well now you have to do this. The 
initiative comes locally. And you know, I think that they’ve had 
a significant impact on communities across the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, I just beg to differ with 
you on this aspect. I think that private business, along with 
communities, can certainly take care of the needs of those 
communities without having government involvement in place. 
Thank you. 
 
Subvote (EC05) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EC07), (EC06), (EC13), (EC12), (EC04), (EC11), 
(EC09), (EC10) agreed to. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending and Investing Activities 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 167 
 

Subvote (EC02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Vote 154 
 

Subvote (SO01) — Statutory 
 
Vote 154 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 

The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her official. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
On my right is Graham McNamee who is the chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Subvote (SM01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome, Madam Minister, and your official here tonight. I 
really have very little, Madam Minister. The one thing I’d like 
to touch on again though we brought to your attention the other 
night — and I believe you had planned to get back to us — was 
on the community of Marquis, the problem that that community 
have. Do you know the problem we’re talking about, Madam 
Minister, and has anything been resolved in that situation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I do certainly recall 
this question being raised in the last exchange that we had, and I 
guess the answer hasn’t really changed . . . is that the Municipal 
Board did render a decision in that matter and perhaps it’s . . . 
the decision as in many cases doesn’t universally satisfy all the 
parties to the issue, but it is the best that we can do. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I wonder though in part of the Act, I believe in part of 
the Act it says the municipality may enter into an agreement or 
a bylaw, or I was wondering if that shouldn’t be “shall” one 
way or another. And I’m not insinuating that we want farm 
buildings taxed, and I think you understand what I’m saying 
here. But I guess the problem being is we’re kind of dumping it 
on the municipality, and I guess in some cases that would be 
fine because the municipalities like their own autonomy to 
make their own decisions. 
 
I think in this case though what we’re seeing especially in a 
small community is where the council is caught in between here 
where one taxpayer took the problem farther on, and the 
Municipal Board ruled in his favour. So we have one paying 
tax, one not paying tax, and so on. So I just wondered what 
your opinion would be on that, Madam Minister. Maybe as 
government, we set the rules and regulations a little bit more 
stringent, and then the small municipalities might . . . you know 
it would take some of the onus away on them, especially I don’t 
think with the bigger municipality it probably would be the 
problem, but the very small ones it definitely is. 
 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that in 
this case, and cases like this, the word “may” is in my 
judgement more appropriate than the word “shall” because 
especially in the case of a very small community, you know, as 
you very well know you can’t legislate co-operation. And if 
there’s a difference of opinion in a community where there is a 
small number of people and where in many cases they might 
even be related to each other, that if you change legislation to 
say “shall” then they don’t have the option of taking the matter 
to a third party which in this case was done. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have at this time, Madam Minister. Thanks for your 
answers and to your official. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister 
if the department has done any further work on the issue of 
non-compliance by municipalities to join regional library 
boards? Now I know the legislation now says there is no longer 
an option, that all municipalities must participate in a regional 
library, but the reality is that not all do. And I recall last year 
asking the minister well what if they don’t. And I’m 
paraphrasing here but I believe the answer is well but they have 
to, which really — I trust the minister will agree — begs the 
question: so I’d like to ask what the current thinking on this is? 
What is the policy of the department in terms of compliance 
with the regional library legislation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a very 
interesting question and I’m glad that the member opposite 
raises it because since the new library Act — well new, 
replacement for the one that had existed for some time — was 
passed and proclaimed a couple of years ago, we certainly have 
identified some flaws, and that legislation and some of the 
provisions in it are under very active consideration. 
 
And of course in this context where you’re asking the question 
— is one of the options that has not been determined but is 
being looked at — is providing for the Municipal Board to be a 
Court of Appeal in those circumstances. So if the members 
opposite have any constructive suggestions about some 
revisions to the current library legislation, we would certainly 
be amenable to receiving those suggestions because those issues 
are currently under review. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I appreciate the minister has said no final 
decisions have been made. However, is the department 
considering the possibility that municipal grants may be 
funnelled direct to regional library systems for those 
municipalities which have not paid their assessment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that I 
quite understand the question. One of the issues where we’ve 
considered — just considered — the possibility or the option of 
including the participation of the Municipal Board is in the area 
of potential boundary changes when municipalities want to opt 
out of one library and move to another, that sort of thing. 
 
On the issue that you directly address, there are several options 
to deal with that and I’m not sure that there’s one that’s 
favoured at the moment. It’s a difficult situation. One of the 

suggestions that has been made is that grants could be withheld. 
Not that we want to do that, but because of that 
recommendation or suggestion has come in from several 
different sources, we did refer it to the Department of Justice 
and their advice is that we don’t have the authority to do that. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — One area where of course there clearly is no 
authority to legislate and we require voluntary compliance is of 
course the area of First Nations’ reserves. And I’m going to ask 
the minister, first of all, if she has the figures as to how many 
First Nations have entered agreements with regional libraries? 
And what is the department doing to encourage First Nations to 
have arrangements with regional libraries so that library service 
will be available to their band members? 
 
The Chair: — Before I recognize the minister, I just want to 
point out to members that we’re dealing with Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board which oversees municipal, financial activities 
and hears the rules on appeals concerning municipal 
boundaries, planning, assessments, and on monies due to the 
province. 
 
Order. I further point out to committee members that under 
Municipal Affairs, which is coming up, there is a provincial 
library portion with $8.094 million budget where I believe these 
questions would be more appropriately directed. 
 
I don’t know if the minister wishes to respond, but before I 
recognize the minister, I do want to caution this is going to end 
here and go into the proper area. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, you have just 
articulated much more eloquently than I could exactly what I 
was going to say. 
 
Subvote (SM01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 
new officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Larry Chaykowski, who is the executive director of 
finance, administration and facilities. On my left is John 
Edwards, the executive director of program and policy 
development and review in the department of Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing. Behind John is Doug Morcom, 
who is the director of grants administration. And behind me is 
Peggy Clark, who is the acting assistant deputy minister, 
municipal and community services. And on Peggy’s right is 
Peter Hoffmann, the assistant deputy minister, housing, and 
president of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I apologize for apparently being on the 
wrong vote earlier, however, I’m sure there are thousands of 
people out there who are being held in suspense for the answer 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

to my question. So I would now ask Madam Minister if she 
could tell us what is the department doing to encourage First 
Nations to participate in the regional library system, to make 
sure that library services are available to their band members? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, at the moment that I 
am aware of there is no formal program, and the degree of 
development of those kinds of relationships will vary from one 
part of the province to another, from one First Nation to 
another, and from one regional library to another. The exception 
would be in northern Saskatchewan, where we do have a very 
well-developed library system that we hope will serve as a 
model for the relationship of libraries with other First Nations. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Does the minister have any figures as to 
the number of First Nations that are affiliate members of the 
regional library system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I haven’t got the 
answer, the specific answer to that question at the moment but I 
can undertake — if there are any — to let the member know in 
what numbers they are and where. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, on the question of housing, I’ve 
had a number of inquiries — both from seniors and from 
northern residents — who want to access housing authority 
housing for social as opposed to economic reasons. For 
instance, in North Battleford there is a dearth of other housing 
available and seniors oftentimes want to access the community 
living aspects of the housing authority for our seniors. And they 
want the social atmosphere that is afforded by this housing. And 
of course there is the rule about one quarter of income. And the 
argument has been placed before me, and which I now place 
before the minister, is that for seniors who have considerable 
financial means, they have put to me that they should pay the 25 
per cent up to a full economic rent, but that it is unfair to say 
that if they want the benefits of this social housing, that they 
should have to pay two or three times an economic rent in order 
to access it. 
 
In other words, the 25 per cent should be charged up to a full 
economic rent but it is unfair to charge above a full economic 
rent. And I’d like the minister to address that and see if she 
agrees with that philosophy that for seniors who can afford it, 
yes they should pay the full amount but they shouldn’t really 
pay 200 per cent of the full amount, that that is not fair. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all let me 
respond by saying that we are one of the only, if not the only, 
provinces remaining that charges only 25 per cent of gross 
income, you know, with some modifications and adjustments 
for housing in our rent-geared-to-income units, where most 
provinces have moved to 30 per cent at least some time ago. So 
our policy in that regard is still more generous. 
 
And I think it’s very important that when there is a finite 
amount of dollars available — since the federal government, the 
Liberals in Ottawa, have been out of social housing since 1994, 
and we’ve entered into an agreement with them to devolve their 
responsibility to us starting back in the beginning of 1997 — 
and we are doing the best that we can, having assumed 
responsibility for the direction of what used to be the central 
mortgage and housing portfolio, to reallocate any profits that 

are generated after the maintenance of the current portfolio and 
so forth, to the greatest needs that exist in the province. And 
those would be in the areas of housing for seniors, of housing 
for low income people to access decent housing, and for 
housing in remote and northern areas where there is not a 
housing market, where people are not able to obtain mortgages 
and so on as individuals because of the locations. So those are 
essentially our targets. 
 
Now there is a perception that . . . unfortunate perception, 
because social housing is so much more than shelter. There is a 
great deal of programming going on that enhances the quality of 
life of people who live in our social housing all over the 
province. And our housing portfolio is directed by volunteer 
housing authorities so that the decisions that are made about the 
development and maintenance and operation of a housing 
portfolio in a particular community. The decisions are made by 
local people so they can be more sensitive and more flexible to 
the needs of the community. 
 
And so the perception that social housing is a place where 
people go and stay is really far from the truth. There is a large 
turnover in our social housing portfolio. As people, say, are 
young, have low incomes, or are disadvantaged by some 
circumstances in their lives, and their income is reduced for a 
time, they pay 25 per cent of their income — that’s likely less 
than a market rent. 
 
Then as their circumstances improve or they get a better job or 
whatever the case may be, then 25 per cent of their income does 
begin to represent more than market rent. Then they move and 
they access other than social housing, leaving vacancies for 
others who are part of the target group that have difficulty. 
 
And so to say that it’s unfair when someone has the means that 
put 25 per cent of their income as rent over the market, then 
based on what the resources that are available to us, those are 
the people who are not part of our target market, who should be 
accessing housing in the private or other sectors so that spaces 
will be made available for others whose circumstances are not 
so fortunate. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the minister’s 
explanation and it reminded me that when I was married with 
two small children and a university student, we lived in social 
housing. And of course as I graduated and got work, we moved 
out. And I agree with the minister that’s only fair, and that’s as 
it should be, and that’s as the program is designed. 
 
But what I’m getting at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, so 
maybe after the election, I’ll qualify for social housing again, 
but we’ll leave that problem aside for the moment. 
 
But my question though was related to seniors, who tell me that 
they want to live in the seniors’ high-rise because of the 
activities, because of the atmosphere, because of the programs 
available, and if the true cost of an apartment should be 5 or 
600 a month, well that’s what they should pay. But because 
they have been frugal and saved and not dissipated their estate, 
is it really fair that they should be told that their share is 1,500 a 
month? 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

Those are the people I’m getting at, that they have legitimate, 
non-financial reasons for wanting to live in the seniors’ housing 
and all the various programs they can access there. And should 
they be denied that because they haven’t dissipated their 
resources? 
 
And I’d really like the minister to address that as opposed to the 
circumstance of, you know, the young couple just getting on 
their feet and when their income improves of course they 
should be moving along and making space for others. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m very glad 
that the member opposite recognizes that we’re doing such a 
good job of programming and enhancing the quality of life in 
our social housing units for seniors that there’s a huge lineup to 
get in. 
 
But I really do believe . . . And I certainly am aware of some 
seniors’ housing developments that are not social housing. 
They’re privately owned or are condominiums that are owned 
by the residents themselves that do have program enhancements 
for their residents. And I’m sure that in any of our social 
housing units where we have the assisted living and the other 
enhancements that we've been developing that do improve the 
quality of life, that we’d be very happy to assist others and give 
them information about how we’ve developed those programs 
to help them to do it for themselves. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Somewhat related to this, you’ve already 
mentioned those parts of our province which simply don’t have 
a housing market, and one of those is oftentimes the North. And 
I know that the member from Athabasca used to be extremely 
concerned that people in housing authority housing had the best 
housing available in the North. And if such a person got a job, 
ironically as his income improved and he got a good job, he and 
the family are now required to move into what is frankly, by 
comparison, a shack — out of the good housing authority 
housing. 
 
Now is it not possible that something couldn’t be worked out 
whereby they would pay a full economic rent for the house 
they’re in but not be forced to move, which can act as a severe 
disincentive for people to leave social assistance to become 
economically active, to get a job, when in a very real sense in 
the North they can be punished for so doing. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, it’s really 
the same principle at work, is that if . . . many times we get 
requests from people who have qualified for social housing 
under the rent geared to income provisions of 25 per cent of 
their income. And then their income improves but they’re loath 
to move out of the house so they want us to sell it to them. In 
the absence of new funds to build new houses to replace it, if 
we sell all the social housing units to people that are in a 
position to have higher incomes, you know than the 25 per cent 
would be recognized by the market, then where would people 
on low incomes live? 
 
So there are other options. People that are in that position, some 
of them buy mobile homes, some of them buy ready-to-move 
homes, some of them build house or log cabins or whatever. 
And I know it’s more difficult. Conventional lenders are not 
that keen about, depending on the location, lending money to 

mortgage houses in very small northern hamlets, isolated, 
where the resale value may be limited. 
 
But we do participate in the rental market assistance program 
and in the remote housing program which has been going on for 
a few years. We’re going to be providing 110 new units again 
this year. So while it may not be home ownership for those 
people, they certainly will have options and that’s the market 
that this new initiative is targeted towards. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my 
questions. I’d just like to thank the minister and her officials 
and especially to say, if this is my last opportunity to question 
the minister, to thank her for her co-operation over the years 
and to wish her all the best in the future. 
 
And I also take this opportunity to advise hon. members that 
last week I had the honour of being with the minister in my 
home community of the Battlefords. And she was at a banquet 
with 300 people and when she announced that she was leaving 
politics and quitting as minister, the whole crowd rose up and 
gave a standing ovation and cheered. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Good evening, Madam Minister, and good 
evening to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I just wanted to pose a few questions to you 
surrounding the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. A while 
ago I did submit some written questions to your department 
asking about how much funding went from the Saskatchewan 
Lotteries to the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. And I also 
asked which member organizations of the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Mechanism received these monies and how much each 
of them got. I also asked what were the operating and 
administrative costs of the umbrella organization known as the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I need some clarification on the answers 
that I received. For instance, if we look at the year 1997-98, the 
Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association states that the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism received $90,124 from the 
Saskatchewan Lotteries trust fund. And there was also a 
statement here that the member organizations receiving funding 
through the lotteries were: Saskatchewan’s seniors education 
group, $17,285; Saskatchewan seniors fitness association, 
21,200; Saskatoon Council on Aging, 5,000. So that comes to 
about $45,000. 
 
Madam Minister, I asked about the operating and administrative 
costs of the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism, and the answer I 
got for 1997-98 was that the operating budget was $200,990 
and the administration costs were $117,763. Now considering 
the fact that Sask. Seniors Mechanism only received $90,000, 
I’m wondering where the Seniors Mechanism get their extra 
funding for administration and operating costs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this is not something 
that we would have any information on, and this is not, this is 
not funding that we do directly. This as the Seniors Mechanism 
or the Seniors fitness, the other organizations that you’ve 
mentioned, would be and might be members of the . . . I think 
you mentioned the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 
Association, the SPRA. And they receive as one of the global 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

organizations that receive money from the lotteries. 
 
They would receive applications and they would provide 
funding based on the criteria that they set. This is completely at 
arm’s-length. And like any of the other 12,000 organizations in 
the province that receive some funding from the lotteries, they 
also have many other sources, and it’s not directly from us — 
it’s at arm’s-length — so we wouldn’t have a way of knowing 
that information. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, when the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism was established, it was established basically 
because its job was to distribute the revenue from lotteries to 15 
groups in the province. I wonder if you can tell me what the 
original terms of reference for Seniors Mechanism were that are 
not being followed right now because there aren’t 15 groups 
any longer receiving money through the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism. 
 
It appears to me from some of the answers that you gave me 
between the years of 1995 and 1998, we only have about . . . 
well at the most, there are five organizations receiving funding 
through that, and I know that the Saskatchewan seniors 
association pulled out of this whole seniors mechanism simply 
because they did not agree with the distribution of money. 
 
Madam Minister, it seems to me that very few member 
organizations now are receiving money through the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism — money that was intended 
for many more member organizations. I think that something 
has to be looked into in this aspect because we do have a great 
deal of money going out to just a few associations, a few 
member organizations. 
 
I’m told that the Saskatchewan seniors association now pretty 
well funds itself though its memberships, and that’s about it. So 
there is a disparity here in funding, and I don’t think it’s really 
very fair to all the seniors of the province when the 
Saskatchewan seniors association has the largest number of 
members of seniors throughout the province, and we don’t that 
group getting any money any more. 
 
Now they did pull out, like I said, because they believed that the 
money was not being properly distributed. In fact, the retired 
teachers pulled out. The legion members withdrew from Seniors 
Mechanism because of this inequity of transferring funds. 
 
And so I want your comments on this, Madam Minister, 
because I think it’s incumbent upon you as minister to make 
sure that all seniors in the province are being provided with 
funding, and that there is an equitable distribution of these 
funds. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said, the 
distribution of these funds is entirely at arm’s-length from the 
government using criteria from the three global organizations 
that are transparent and made public to anyone who asks. And 
the only way that we know that there is someone who is not 
happy with the distribution is if they come directly to us or to 
others; and in that case we would go, for instance, to make 
inquiries of SPRA about what has transpired and what the 
situation is. 
 

So I guess there’s two options here . . . is we could ask SPRA 
those questions on your behalf, or you could ask them directly 
yourself. But there is no way without asking them specifically 
those questions that we would have that information on hand. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
you in your department have a great deal more resources than I 
do, so today I’m asking you if you can get a financial statement 
from Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism itemizing everything 
that they spend money on. And I would like to have included in 
that the kind of salaries and wages that people in the Seniors 
Mechanism are getting. I’d like to know the number of people 
that are employed through the Mechanism. And if I can get 
those kind of statements, it would be very beneficial because I 
understand that even the Seniors Mechanism people can’t get 
financial statements from the Seniors Mechanism office. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we will certainly 
do the best we can to obtain whatever information that the 
SPRA has available on the issues that the member raises and we 
will provide to her whatever information we are able to get. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
asked a question to you through our written questions awhile 
ago on the task force on municipal legislation renewal. And I 
was given some answers about the individuals who are on the 
board, but I’m wondering if you can tell me who is on that 
committee in an advisory capacity? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I would need to have a 
bit of clarification, I think, before I can give the answer that 
member asks when she says who is there in an advisory 
capacity. Is she asking who are the members of the task force? 
Because in terms of taking advice, they are receiving briefs, 
then holding hearings about, you know, around about the 
province and taking advice from a number of people. 
 
Let’s see if I can find here a listing of . . . The chairman is Dr. 
Joe Garcea, he is from the University of Saskatchewan faculty; 
the vice-chair is Pat Youzwa that members may remember as 
the former deputy minister of Energy and Mines, now working 
in the private sector; Maria Lynn Freeland is the city solicitor 
for Prince Albert; Val Kononoff is a nominee from SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and a 
former vice-president of SARM; Murray Westby, of course you 
will recognize as being the former mayor of Watrous and the 
former president of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association); Bobby Woods is the former mayor 
of Buffalo Narrows and a representative for northern 
Saskatchewan; and Cliff Wright being the former mayor of 
Saskatoon among other boards and commissions is the other 
member. So there’s a total of seven members. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That is the 
answers that you had given me in this written question, but at 
the same time I was advised that there is an advisory council 
that is talking to this board and that they are serving in a 
capacity where they also receive some remuneration of some 
amount. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, these task force 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

members will receive remuneration in the form of support for 
their office and secretariat and per diems when they meet. 
 
I’m not sure what else you might be referring to unless it is the 
review committees that we had set up within the department 
who are just in the process of reporting to me right now, and 
their findings will definitely be related to the task force as well 
as information. And that was the committee on the reassessment 
. . . the review of the whole reassessment procedure and the 
committee on the review of exemptions from taxation. But 
those committees were . . . they received briefs and held 
hearings, but none of the people who gave them advice were 
remunerated, and the secretariat was entirely people from 
within the department that are currently on the payroll. So there 
weren’t any, you know, weren’t any additional costs to those 
exercises. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you Madam Minister. Then perhaps, if 
not at this time after this session tonight, I could get a list of the 
people that are on those two committees you just discussed. 
 
Subvote (MGO1) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (MG02), (MG07), (MG17), (MG03), (MG15), 
(MG16), (MG18), (MG05), (MG13) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 165 

 
Subvote (CI01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Vote 153 

 
Subvote (ST01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
 

Nil vote. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 

Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 

Subvotes (MG03), (MG12), (MG05), (MG13) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 
the staff members here for their diligence throughout this 
process, and I would like to thank all the members opposite for 
their questions. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to thank your officials tonight. And I would 
also like to take this opportunity, Madam Minister — it may be 
the last opportunity we have had to question the minister — and 
I just want to thank you for the way that you have been to deal 
with through politics and whatever with Municipal 
Government. It’s been a pleasure to work with you and I just 
want to wish you the best. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would first like to bring to your attention a 
major problem in this province that I have been informed of, 
certainly from women in this province who are suffering 
through continual abuse from their former partners. 
 
I have a letter here that I would like to read some excerpts from, 
and I know that your department and you have received the 
same letters. I am told by these two particular women that have 
come to me about this that you have been informed and made 
aware that they are asking for better treatment by your 
department, better treatment by the justice system. And they’re 
asking for that in order to free them and their children from this 
control and abuse by former partners. And so the letter goes as 
such: 
 

Please find the following letters and information regarding 
unjust and inappropriate treatment experienced by our 
families, in our struggle to keep our children and ourselves 
safe from abusive former partners. 
 
This information that I’m giving you does not convey the 
true depth of our struggle, or the scope of ignorance and 
lack of response by agents and institutions in this province. 
As you will clearly see from the letters, many people have 
been made aware of the problem and no one is responding. 
 
We have a right to peace and safety from all types of 
abuse. We deserve a life free from control of our former 
abusive partners. We need and deserve justice and 
immediate intervention. 

 
Now what they’re asking, Mr. Minister, and what they’ve asked 
you for is: 
 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

A review of the home studies that were used for custody 
and access proceedings, and a review of their experience 
with the justice system and the blatant disregard for 
abusive behaviour towards women and children. 

 
From what I understand, Mr. Minister, these people . . . these 
women have been contending with this for some time. And I’m 
wondering why you are not complying with their wishes to 
make sure that all of the information they brought before you 
and to do a review of these home studies that were used for 
their custody and access proceedings is not gone over? 
 
And also they’re asking for a review of the justice system that 
has determined obviously that former partners of theirs that are 
obviously abusive and should not have a right to be visiting 
them at their home or visiting their children, continue to get this 
kind of access. This is a dangerous situation. It’s a traumatic 
situation for many women and children. And I’m asking you 
today whether you’ll take this in hand and see that something is 
done about it so that these women can have some peace of 
mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for raising this very important 
issue. What I would say is, I do know about the cases that 
you’re talking about and that they are under review, and that the 
people that are involved can expect to receive a response from 
the officials in my department around a number of the issues 
that they’ve raised. Because these are of concern for all of the 
people of Saskatchewan when you’re dealing with children and 
families. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I am 
heartened to hear you say that you are reviewing these 
situations. However, the letters that I received were as early as 
April and still nothing has been done. So I’m hoping that this 
kind of treatment and these issues do not take your department 
as long to respond to as they have in the past because these 
women have been bringing this forward to yourself and their 
respective MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in 
their constituencies for quite some time and have been basically 
ignored. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just go on to some general questions 
about the justice system. Before that, though, I notice that 
you’re doing some consultation and I’ll allow you time to 
respond. Do you want to respond? Okay. 
 
Okay, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to go to some general 
questions. Earlier this year there was a very tragic situation 
involving a high-speed chase in which some innocent people 
were killed. At the time you said that you thought it was worth 
considering imposing jail sentences under The Highway Traffic 
Act, 1996 for those who are involved in high-speed chases. Is 
this something that you’re still considering? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you again for raising an important 
issue. If you’ll recall, at the time of this incident I made the 
comment that we should look at these particular issues and look 
at some of the penalties. What we did then was immediately 
have it put on the agenda for the federal-provincial-territorial 
meeting of deputy ministers. They actually did discuss this at 

their last meeting. 
 
The reason for that is that when you deal with criminal 
penalties, there are some constitutional restrictions on the kinds 
of things that the province can actually do. And also it was clear 
that this was a national issue because other provinces then also 
added their information to this particular item in the discussion. 
And we anticipate that there will be further work in this area to 
see whether some changes to the Criminal Code would be 
appropriate. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you had 
mentioned at the time that it was worth considering imposing 
jail sentence under The Highway Traffic Act, 1996 which is in 
provincial jurisdiction. What you’re referring to here is 
Criminal Code implications and The Highway Traffic Act, 1996 
allows you the parameters to maybe place laws in 
Saskatchewan regarding things like this, like high-speed chases. 
I’d like to know whether it is necessary to connect that to the 
Criminal Code. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think it’s important to realize that when 
you get into the area where it impinges on criminal law, we 
have to be quite careful how we do this. Also it’s important we 
do this on a national basis. 
 
I’d also like to inform our legislature that there is presently a 
private member’s Bill before the House of Commons on this 
particular issue as well, so we know that there’s discussion 
happening right across the country. There’s concern right across 
the country, and we think that if we can get federal law through 
the Criminal Code to deal with some of these issues 
specifically, that it will serve not only the citizens of 
Saskatchewan but all the citizens of Canada. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, this sort of reminds me a little bit of 
the . . . of some of the requests to impose harsher penalties for 
perpetrators of the child-sex trade where in Manitoba they are 
taking cars away from people that are charged and inevitably 
those cars are not going back to those people if they are 
convicted. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that was done under provincial legislation, 
under their highways legislation. Likewise, jail sentences could 
be . . . seems to me, jail sentences could be the order of the day 
here under provincial legislation. I wanted to know whether or 
not your department has met with police officials in the 
province to discuss this proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate your comments about this, 
but I know that practically if we can make a change in the 
Criminal Code, that will be a more effective response on a 
national basis and eliminates any concern at all around the 
constitutionality. 
 
But practically, if that process doesn’t result in a solution very 
quickly, then I think that your suggestions around dealing with 
the highway traffic code and my previous discussions around 
that — we’ll have to take another look at that. And it’s possible 
that by the time we go into our next session that we would 
know what the federal process . . . what results have come from 
there, and then we could have this further discussion around 
whether we should do something within the provincial 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

jurisdiction. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
hope that you would take some leadership role there and see 
that this sort of thing is not left on the table for too long. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to talk a little bit about the problems in 
legal aid. Last year we saw a work stoppage by legal aid 
lawyers who were protesting what they called severe 
understaffing and underfunding of the legal system in 
Saskatchewan. Do you feel like the concerns raised at that time 
were justified, and have they been addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well what I would like to report is that we 
have been now in negotiations . . . the officials of the Legal Aid 
Commission have been in negotiations with the workers around 
coming up with a contract. And my understanding is that there’s 
substantial progress with that and that many of the issues that 
were of concern to some of the workers have been dealt with. 
So that’s one part of the situation. 
 
We’re also in the process of evaluating the legal aid system, 
together with the employees and the management and the law 
society, Canadian Bar Association people, as well as people in 
the community, to look at some of the workload issues that you 
raise. That process is ongoing now. We expect a report, I think, 
in another two or three months. But practically, what we do 
know, that in the process of the discussion they’re already 
identifying some things that can be fixed and they are working 
on them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the average 
caseload right now of a legal aid lawyer is, and what it was last 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the actual number, but I think 
the numbers of the caseloads are fairly even, or they haven’t 
gone up that much at all. But the difficulty is that practically 
these cases are more complicated when they involve Charter 
issues, when they involve a number of other constitutional 
issues, and so that you end up needing to look at the cases in a 
more detailed fashion. I have the numbers for you for the last 
five years if you would like to have those. For 1993 the number 
was 22,297; 1994-95 was 22,668; 1995-96 was 21,651; 1996-97 
was 21,484; 1997-98 was 21,980. And that’s the total caseload 
for the whole legal aid. 
 
The staffing numbers over those years were: in 1993-94, it was 
126; then in ’94-95, ’95-96, ’96-97, it was 131; and in 1997-98, 
it was 132. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Minister, could you average out the 
average caseload of a legal aid lawyer with those figures that 
you have before you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you did it on a straight average, it 
would work out to just over 300 files a year for each lawyer. 
There are about 60 lawyers and just over 18 . . . or around 
20,000 cases. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I think, Mr. Minister, last year we had some 
discussions surrounding the caseload of legal aid lawyers. And 
it seemed to me at that time the caseloads were quite severe for 

any lawyer to be able to do an appropriate and proper job for 
their clients. Mr. Minister, there has been some . . . I guess there 
have been some articles in the newspapers surrounding the issue 
of whether or not legal aid lawyers are taking on more work 
than they really can handle simply because of the way their 
salary arrangement is or their contract arrangement is. 
Obviously they are pulling in some money for this. 
 
Now I certainly wouldn’t want to charge them with that, but it 
was a point in the paper. And I’m wondering if you think that 
you know, with the increase in funding for legal aid in the last 
year, which I understand it’s been increased by 22 per cent 
actually, not over last year but over the last five years, could it 
be that there is more of a problem within the system that is 
beyond money even when we see an increase like that? And yet 
we see the system deteriorating. 
 
I want your comments, Mr. Minister, on whether or not you 
believe that legal aid lawyers are in a sense maybe taking 
advantage of this system and maybe taking on a greater 
caseload than what they should be and not properly treating 
their clients because they cannot find the time to deal with it. 
This seems unfair to clients. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If I understand your question correctly, 
there’s an assumption that the lawyers get paid per case or 
something like that. In Saskatchewan our Legal Aid 
Commission is basically all salaried lawyers. There are very 
few people that are paid to do a specific case but they’re all paid 
a salary and they handle the cases that come into the various 
legal aid offices. So it’s quite different than, for example, the 
Ontario system where the legal aid system pays money out to 
private lawyers as the main way of providing the service. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Minister, each legal aid lawyer then, 
according to what you’re saying, gets a salary. They get a salary 
for handling cases for people that do not have the money to be 
able to represent themselves in court. So there’s a salary then 
that is directed towards each specific client, is that correct? Or 
is there an overall salary for a year’s service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is that they are salaried 
employees of the Legal Aid Commission and they handle as 
many cases as they can based on their salary. It’s an annual 
salary; they’re on full-time, permanent jobs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as we well 
know there is a severe backlog in our court system. Can you tell 
us if the system shows any signs of improvement over last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you’re referring to the provincial court 
system which is where most of the criminal law cases take 
place, I don’t think there really is a backlog in the courts other 
than possibly in the North where there is a greater pressure on 
the court system. But practically the cases are heard in 
appropriate time frames in Saskatchewan in most of the 
situations. 
 
And so we do end up getting a lot of media reports from other 
places, but I think what I could also say as far as the Queen’s 
Bench court, which is where the very serious criminal cases are, 
Saskatchewan has the best record in Canada for availability of 
Queen’s Bench trials. In other words if you want to get a trial in 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

Queen’s Bench, whether it’s a criminal matter or a civil matter, 
and you’re ready to go, we have the fastest court system in the 
country. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, not long ago a member of the 
Assembly was in court and was convicted of child sexual abuse. 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know why it was that from the 
time that the accused was charged it took a number of months 
before that ended up in the courts. It was a very, very simple 
sort of . . . it’s an example of a very simple case, and the 
evidence was there. And so I was wondering, Mr. Minister, why 
you believe it took that long. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, as the member well knows, I 
cannot comment about a case that’s still before the court. 
 
(2200) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 
turn to the maintenance enforcement office. A year or two ago, 
this House passed legislation allowing the government to take 
away the driver’s licence of those parents who failed to make 
their court-imposed maintenance payments. Can you give us 
any figures, Mr. Minister, as to how many times someone’s 
licence has been taken away under those measures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I can answer that question very 
specifically. In November 1996, the ability to withhold driver’s 
licence was introduced as a method of enforcement. And since 
that time the maintenance enforcement office has issued 1,790 
letters which is the first letter, the warning letter; they’ve sent 
935 final notice letters; and they have in fact suspended 703 
driver’s licences from non-payers, mainly self-employed people 
— in other words, people that you can’t garnishee their wages. 
And this method of withholding driver’s licences has been very 
successful in enforcing the payment of maintenance orders. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m happy to hear 
that you believe that this method is very effective. We have a 
number of people calling us, though, Mr. Minister, who are 
finding that that is not the case, and somehow we get a lot of 
complaints from people who have severe problems getting 
through to the office of maintenance enforcement. It seems that, 
from what they tell us, the phone is busy for hours at a time and 
people are really getting frustrated. Can you tell us if this is a 
complaint that is brought to your attention frequently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. The answer 
is yes, it is an issue that’s brought to us as well. Let me explain 
what happens at the maintenance enforcement office so that we 
can understand what is happening. Basically the maintenance 
enforcement office has two people whose specific job is to 
answer the telephone, and they do their best to get to each call 
as quickly as possible. They handle 3 to 400 calls every day 
from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
 
In addition to these two full-time telephone receptionists, the 
maintenance enforcement office also has an automated 
telephone system so that callers can access their latest payment 
information, the balance of their account, or if the parents have 
custody of a child, the last four enforcement actions that are . . . 
(inaudible) . . . on their account. They can get this information 
automatically. 

The automated system has 14 incoming lines and it operates 24 
hours a day. There are now over 11,000 calls to this system 
every month. So if you add those two together: you have 11,000 
calls going to the automated system; you have between 300 and 
400 calls per day, say for 21 days, that’s about another 8,000 — 
7 or 8,000 calls coming to the live receptionists. 
 
The maintenance enforcement office is a very busy place, and 
we have some very capable people there. I would just like to 
point out when the Provincial Ombudsman filed her annual 
report last week, she had a section called kudos, and I’ll just 
read from page 3 — I think it’s page 3 of the report — where 
she says: 
 

Our hats are off to Lionel McNabb, director of the 
maintenance enforcement office in Regina, who is always 
willing to give complaints his personal review and look for 
workable solutions. 

 
That perspective of the director, I think, also goes right across 
the people who work in that system. But we do know that, 
especially at some points of the month, there’s incredible 
pressure on the telephone system and on the employees. And I 
guess we’d just like to thank them for the work that they’ve 
done, but also recognize that it’s a hard job. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to thank you for that. I do 
believe that the few people that are there are doing whatever 
they can. 
 
However, there are such frustrating situations that many people 
come to us with. For instance, one of my constituents came and 
said that the spouse that was supposed to be paying for 
maintenance for the children was not doing it, and so she 
phoned the maintenance enforcement office, and they asked her 
a simple question like, do you have his social security number? 
Well this is years later, and there is no way that this woman 
would know that social security number, but it seems to me that 
that sort of thing should be in the possession of maintenance 
enforcement if they have her ex-husband’s files. So instead this 
woman had to start trying to find out what her ex-spouse’s 
social security number was. And this really makes a major 
backlog as far as dealing with people’s complaints. 
 
So those are just some of the little things, I guess, that do cause 
this backlog as far as people getting the service they need from 
maintenance enforcement. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand the budget for the maintenance 
enforcement office is increasing to 1.34 million this year from 
1.1 million last year. How far do you believe this increase will 
go to addressing the backlog at the enforcement office? And I 
do understand that it’s an extreme backlog. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I’d like to 
just make a comment about the social insurance number. What 
the staff do know is that the person who has the best chance of 
finding information about a delinquent payer is the former 
spouse or somebody in the family, and so that’s why they do 
make those requests. But they also use the national and 
interprovincial tracking systems which are much easier once 
they have some of these numbers. 
 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

What I would like to explain is that the maintenance 
enforcement office has a staffing level of 30.6, so it’s 30 plus 
one part-time position, and the budget is, as you’ve set out, 
$1.345 million. Last year, April 1, ’98 to March 31, 1999, the 
total payments processed through the maintenance enforcement 
office were $27.95 million. And we are very proud to say that 
this past year 80 per cent of the payments were collected, and 
before this program started the figure was only 20 per cent 
collected. 
 
So we know that they work hard. We know that possibly we 
could even get some more money to them, but practically these 
people are doing a good job, and they are working for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The federal government 
is currently considering a shared parenting Act. Can you tell us 
how this will change custody arrangements if that Act is 
passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There was a report from the Commons 
committee I think chaired by the Member of Parliament, 
Shaughnessy Cohen, who subsequently has died. The federal 
Minister of Justice, Anne McLellan, through her department is 
going to respond to that report and to, I think, suggestions from 
other parts of the country sometime this month. We think the 
date is May 10, but we’re not totally certain, and so then we 
will see what the federal government response is to one of the 
issues there being a concept of shared parenting or parental 
responsibility or, you know, there are a lot of different words to 
describe that. 
 
And we know that the legislation that we have is now, I guess, 
already 15 years old, and some of these concepts have been 
continued to be examined by the courts and by the judges and 
by people who are caught in the whole web of how you solve 
some of these problems. And so we’re looking forward to the 
kind of response that the federal minister will take as it relates 
to this federal divorce custody access law. And we’re going to 
be providing . . . well we already have provided the information 
that we have received in our consultations within the province, 
and then we’re going to look forward to what the federal 
minister does and clearly will respond at that point. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to pose one 
more question to you before I turn the questioning over to some 
of my colleagues. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was informed that the judge in Weyburn would 
be resigning the end of May — May 31, I believe. And I was 
wanting to know on behalf of someone who had requested that I 
ask you whether or not there would be a replacement judge in 
Weyburn upon the resignation of the existing judge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question, and also I’d 
like to thank the member for giving me heads up that this was a 
question that she would like to ask either in question period or 
here. 
 
The position in Weyburn is one that we’ve been talking to the 
Chief Justice who manages all of the judges within the 
province, and I, in fact, was talking to him about that particular 
position today. And the situation is that as the plans are now we 

would be replacing that person, but I’m waiting for the report 
from the Chief Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, 
Minister and officials. With the new land titles Crown 
corporation, now there is reference to a transfer of assets and 
liabilities, and I wonder if you can explain what is actually 
meant by assets and liabilities. What would be included in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer to the question is that 
the assets and liabilities relate to assets of the land titles offices 
and also of SaskGeomatics. And that could include things like 
leases which are liabilities but they also include, at least since 
they’re often Xerox machines or things like that, assets. One of 
the liabilities or one of the concerns would be some of the 
records and any kinds of liability that might arise around these 
liabilities or around work that’s been done within the land titles 
system or within the SaskGeomatic system, and those kinds of 
things would be transferred on. But practically they’re basically 
being transferred from one part of government to another so 
there’s no intent to slip out of the government responsibility at 
this stage. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — No, I wasn’t referring to that and perhaps I 
should be more specific as to where I am headed. 
 
My concern is that the new land system, I understand, will cost 
many millions of dollars and is going over budget. How much 
will that be and will that be a liability? 
 
On the other hand we know that for many, many years land 
titles fees in this province have gone into the General Revenue 
Fund, and I understand they are about double the cost of 
operating the land titles system. So there is a lot of money 
which has gone into the General Revenue Fund from land titles 
fees and I’m assuming that money is gone and spent and would 
not be an asset, but on the other hand what about the costs of 
the new land system? How much will that be and will that 
become a liability that the new Crown corporation will be 
saddled with? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The budget for the new corporation is on 
budget as the way it is now and there’s no anticipation that it 
will go over the budget. There’s various contingencies held 
within that. What will happen is that the Crown corporation will 
end up borrowing some money to have the . . . set up the assets 
and so that . . . but this is budgeted to be paid off over I think 
the first 10-year plan for the corporation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So then can the minister tell us how much he 
anticipates establishing a new land system will cost? And I 
think he’s already confirmed that that will in fact be a liability 
of the new Crown corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The cost to full implementation of the 
program over the next three years will be $45.5 million. That’s 
the figure that I had given earlier today when I was asked some 
questions about that. And this cost will be paid back over I 
think the next 10 years, the first 10 years of the operation. It’s 



May 3, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

also being set up so that there are funds that will be paid into 
the General Revenue Fund out of this. And I think that figure is 
$8.5 million a year. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I’m sorry I’m not quite following what the 
minister last said about the 8.5 million. Is he saying that is a 
contribution from the General Revenue Fund to the land 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The amount of 8.5 million will be a 
dividend that will be paid from the Crown corporation to the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So my question is the 45.5 million that will 
ultimately then be financed by future users of the land titles 
system, is that my correct understanding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It will be paid for partially by future 
existing users. There will also be expanded users. There will be 
new services. There will be new kinds of products that will be 
provided with this coming together of the land information 
through the land titles and with the SaskGeomatics. So some of 
those new services will assist in paying off this. The money that 
is used to set up the system will eventually be recouped through 
the new corporation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well when the minister says some of the cost 
will be financed by users of the system, what do you mean? 
Where will the rest be financed? Is there in fact another revenue 
stream besides users of the system? For instance, is the General 
Revenue Fund contributing to it or as I understood it, users will 
be totally financing the system as opposed to partially financing 
the system as the minister just suggested. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The system will be paid for by the users 
but there will be some new services other than the existing 
ones. So that was the intent of my answer to you, was to say 
that the present users will not bear the full costs of this because 
there will be some new users who are interested in the new 
information. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So then the anticipation is that users of the 
system will finance the costs of instituting the new system plus 
an $8.5 million dividend to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Is that my correct understanding here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And would I also be correct then in saying that 
the millions of dollars which have been collected by the land 
titles system that have gone into General Revenue and have not 
been used to pay for the land titles system over the years, that is 
not an asset that will go into the new Crown corporation. That is 
General Revenue money that will not be made available to the 
new land titles systems even though people who have used the 
land titles system have vastly over-funded it for many, many 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I was going to answer you simply 
until you added that last line. Basically over the years, the land 
titles system fees have paid for the system and provided some 
surplus to the General Revenue Fund. And that money that was 
somehow related to previous years — say 20 years ago or 10 

years ago — will not move forward into the new corporation as 
an asset. So that practically we’ll be starting in 1999 and 
moving forward from here. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, I understand that the Milgaard 
negotiations are at a delicate stage and so I realize that the 
minister can’t probably say too much on those at this time. But I 
was concerned the other day that the lead negotiator we’ve 
hired — I think you indicated to this House — has been paid so 
far about $50,000 and that so far no offer has been made to Mr. 
Milgaard. 
 
And so I have to ask the minister that surely the information 
that is needed to make an offer to Mr. Milgaard is all open and 
public, and it seems very difficult to imagine that there’s more 
information to be gathered in order to come to what the 
government believes to be a fair offer to tender to Mr. Milgaard. 
And so I guess I’m just having some . . . I’m not asking the 
minister to divulge what the figure might be, but I do have to 
ask the minister, why are we not in a position now to place a 
figure before Mr. Milgaard? What possible further information 
could be required here before we give Mr. Milgaard a figure 
that would then at least bring the negotiations to a conclusion in 
the sense that the Government of Saskatchewan has made a 
definite, final, binding offer to him, that then I guess he either 
accepts or takes what other remedies he may be inclined to 
take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — All I will be able to say is that active, 
productive negotiations are ongoing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — When will we be placing an offer before Mr. 
Milgaard? Can the minister indicate that? One, has an offer 
been given to Mr. Milgaard, and if not, when will an offer be 
placed before him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What I would say, if the member wants to 
listen, is that active negotiations are ongoing right now, and in 
that process there are many discussions that go back and forth 
around how you come to a solution, and those discussions have 
been ongoing for a long time. 
 
But what I would say is that active, productive negotiations are 
ongoing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Those negotiations included you, first of all, 
taking the position that it would be inappropriate for you to 
meet with members of the Milgaard family and then after the 
Prime Minister agreed to meet with them that you decide that 
you could also meet with them. Can you tell us what led you to 
change your view? Was it the fact that the Prime Minister of 
Canada was more accessible to the Milgaard family than 
yourself, or what had led to your reversal on that point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that what I would have to say is 
that, under the process that we have arranged between the 
federal government and the provincial government, is the 
provincial government ends up taking the lead in gathering the 
information and attempting to get a solution, and we have been 
doing that. And in that process it was quite clear that the 
lawyers would do that work. 
 
When the request came from me to meet with Mrs. Milgaard, 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1999 

then I responded in a positive way. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — You mention that it is the province’s 
responsibility to gather the information, but I guess that comes 
back to my initial point. Does the minister believe that there is 
still further information to be gathered, or does the minister 
agree with me that there can’t possibly be anything more to be 
found out that hasn’t already been found out in the decades this 
case has been going on and the review layered upon review 
layered upon review that this case has been subject to? Is there 
anything more . . . any further information possibly to be 
gathered in this matter that has not already been gathered many 
times over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our answer is simple. We would never 
close our eyes and ears to further submissions that the Milgaard 
family may wish to make. But active, productive negotiations 
are ongoing, and there’s an assumption there that we have 
enough information to have active, productive negotiations. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Does the minister anticipate that at some point 
in time an offer will be placed before Mr. Milgaard, and then it 
will be up to him, which he must either then accept or take 
whatever legal remedies he may have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member is asking for some 
information that is part of the active, productive negotiations, 
and that is all I’ll say at this time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Can the minister indicate how much has been 
paid to Howard Morton, Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel) for his work 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m making the assumption that the 
question around the payment to Howard Morton was for his 
involvement as Crown prosecutor in the prosecution of Mr. 
Kirkham, and in that particular situation the amount paid to Mr. 
Morton was $121,700. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — May I ask if that includes the investigation he 
did prior to the prosecution or if that only includes the 
prosecution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think it’s for the whole thing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — May I ask if the minister considers that the 
engagement of out-of-province legal services is something to be 
undertaken for exceptional circumstances or if this is to be a 
regular custom of our department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is that it would only be 
under exceptional circumstances and in situations that require 
some out-of-province assistance. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — May I inquire as to whether there are any other 
ongoing circumstances now other than the Milgaard and 
Kirkham situations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are no other criminal law matters. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Civil then, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The only other situations involve some of 

the trade issues involving the cattle countervail, and then in the 
Milgaard case. Those are civil matters. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On something quite different, may I ask if the 
new Youth Criminal Justice Act meets with the approval of our 
Department of Justice and whether Saskatchewan is of the view 
that the federal government ought to proceed with the 
legislation as tabled, or is the minister of the view that it 
requires amendment and changes? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We appreciate the fact that the federal 
government has listened to some of the concerns that we’ve had 
around the Youth Criminal Justice Act. We’re now going 
through the Bill; some of our officials have been working with 
the federal officials around the actual Bill. There are a number 
of problems that are being identified. We’re trying to address 
those, but practically, there are concerns right across the 
country about the intervention by that Bill into the provincial 
process, the provincial justice administration and we’re trying 
to deal with those in a positive way so that some of the good 
aspects of the legislation can be upheld without creating more 
problems in other areas. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m aware of the issue of the 
funding of services required under the Act, but apart from that I 
wish to ask if the minister could outline or indicate whether 
there are any amendments to the Bill that are being sought by 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to ask the member whether 
he wants the two-hour lecture or the four-hour lecture? Because 
practically there are many concerns that we raised in the 
federal-provincial-territorial Justice ministers’ meetings in 
October here in Regina. Officials have been continuing to meet. 
There are quite a number of concerns in a number of different 
areas. We hold out hope that the federal government will listen 
to us before this Bill goes ahead so that we can correct some of 
these. 
 
But I think in this particular context, it would take a very long 
time to go through all of our concerns. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I ask you to 
recognize the clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:37 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


