





























































Hansard: December 13, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 129 
 December 13, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a substantial 
number of petitions that I wish to present today and I believe 
these represent the feelings of people all across this province 
and therefore I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to repeal the provision of the 
personal injury benefits contained in the automobile 
insurance Act and adopt a return to an add-on insurance 
system that would provide benefits on a no-fault basis to 
all victims without taking away the innocent victim’s right 
to seek compensation from a person responsible for the 
accident, but with appropriate modifications to reduce 
overall personal injury costs. 
 
And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, these come from all across Saskatchewan — 
from Prince Albert, from Lloydminster, from Saskatoon, 
Regina, Wynyard, and literally all across Saskatchewan from 
people from around this province. And it’s a petition that I think 
represents their attitude toward the no-fault problems. 

 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Therefore 
under rule 12(7) the following petition is received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
repeal the personal injury benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 11 ask the government the following question, and 
this is directed to the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and I read: 
 

What year was the Quebec task force on 
whiplash-associated disorders adopted by the SGI as a 
rehabilitation model to be used here and what other studies 
were used by SGI in developing its rehabilitation program; 
(2) what clinical studies were used by the government or 
SGI in making the decision to use the Quebec task force as 
a model for its personal injury protection plan; (3) has 
anyone at SGI or in the government studied the four 
different critiques that have now been published, arguing 
that the findings of the Quebec task force were faulty, and 
what is SGI’s view of these critiques; and (4) what role 
does or did David Cassidy play in the research study being 

conducted at the University of Saskatchewan and funded in 
part by SGI into no-fault insurance and rehabilitation, is 
Mr. Cassidy still working on this project, and if not, what 
are the circumstances surrounding his departure. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
11 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Sask Water: (1) how many 
appeals are currently awaiting a hearing before or a 
decision by the Water Appeal Board; (2) how many 
appeals have been concluded by the Water Appeal Board 
in each month of 1999; (3) of the cases currently awaiting 
a hearing before give the length of time that each has been 
waiting for a hearing. Thank you. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and to the Assembly, in your 
gallery, Mr. Tom Felsing. Tom is the vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Hemophilia Society, and we had a meeting this 
morning and he’s here to watch proceedings. I would ask all 
members to please welcome Tom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I have a 
number of introductions I’d like to make and they follow the 
petitions that I’ve just recently presented. There are three people 
with us today, one of them is already in your gallery and the 
other two will be joining them as soon as they’re through with 
the media interviews. These people represent all of the 
Saskatchewan victims of no-fault, and those three people that 
are here today representing the no-fault victims are Lorie Terry, 
Brenda Kienas, and Patricia Schryver. And I would ask for the 
rest of the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the House, a couple of 
individuals who are seated in your gallery. First, Mr. Terry 
Mountjoy, who is the manager of social development for the 
city of Regina, and Ms. Christine Deiter, who is a program 
co-ordinator with the north-central community society safety 
services program. I would ask all members to extend these two 
visitors a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you today and to the other members of this Assembly, a group 
of students from the Robert Southey School. They are seated in 
the east gallery. They have had a busy day today I understand. 
This morning they attended the U of R (University of Regina). 
They also were out at CKCK-TV and also at the Leader-Post. 
They are the media 20 class from Robert Southey School. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Ritter, and one of 
the chaperones, Mrs. Hoffman. 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there’s another individual I’d like to 
introduce to you this afternoon, and that is a former member of 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Dale Flavel. He’s seated in 
your gallery. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly a 
long-time friend of mine and a fine farmer and businessman 
from Marquis, Saskatchewan, in the east gallery, Mr. Chuck 
Guillaume. I’d ask the members to make him welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see 
someone else in your gallery that I should like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members. And I refer to Delora 
Parisian, who is a program co-ordinator with the Regina Action 
Committee for Children at Risk. I would also ask members to 
bid her a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, three 
gentlemen sitting in your gallery. Mr. George Godenir was the 
reeve of the R.M. (rural municipality) of Storthoaks No. 31; 
Roland Poirier from Bellegarde, and a neighbour of theirs from 
Manitoba, Murray, who are here to discuss some agricultural 
issues. And I would ask that the Assembly make them 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join the opposition Health critic in welcoming Tom 
Felsing to the Legislative Assembly. I’m no doubt looking 
forward to question period as is the member from the 
opposition Health critic. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If I may before we move on, I’d also like to 
add my welcome to everyone that’s here today, and also to my 
neighbour and former colleague of this Assembly. Welcome to 
everybody. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Internet Site for Agricultural Sector 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, this may be old news to many 
people in the province, but I was pleased to learn the other day 
that farmers and other members of the agricultural sector now 
have access to the latest information concerning their business 
— this by way of an Internet site operated by our Department of 
Agriculture and Food under the direction of Mr. Travis 
Asmundson. 
 
Computers and the Internet have become important tools for 
most business and it’s no different for farmers. They need fast 
information on commodity prices, input costs, and the latest 

news on the federal government’s inaction. The site can help by 
providing a wealth of information, and, Mr. Speaker, it can 
provide that information at any time of the day. Many of the 
15,000 hits a month come at 5 or 6 in the morning. 
 
This is just one more way our government is working with the 
agricultural community during this troubled time and all times. 
Mr. Speaker, this web site is a real help for the farmers in this 
province. The address is: www.agr.gov.sk.ca. I hope many use 
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Anderson Team Wins JVC Skins Games 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I would like to rise to bring notice on behalf of one of 
the constituents of Redberry Lake, and certainly one of the 
former constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sherry Anderson, curling out of the Saskatoon 
Nutana rink, this weekend won the Skins game in Thunder Bay, 
Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again one of Saskatchewan women’s curling 
teams has brought great distinction to our province and, more 
specifically, to themselves. Although the financial reward is 
significant, Mr. Speaker, what needs to be noted is that Ms. 
Anderson and her team won all except one skin at the 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating the team of Sherry Anderson, Kim Hodson, 
Sandra Mulroney, and Donna Gignac. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Credit Union 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have some 
good news that I’m happy to say is coming out of my 
hometown of Saskatoon. 
 
The Saskatoon Credit Union recently passed a resolution that 
flies in the face of the approach taken by the large financial 
institutions. Instead of announcing massive layoffs, the 
Saskatoon Credit Union has decided to offer its employees solid 
employment security and opportunities for personal 
development. 
 
Quite a novel idea in today’s business world. But the Saskatoon 
Credit Union knows that happy employees that work in a secure 
and positive environment will serve their members better. 
 
A recent focus group showed that members value personal 
touch and a high level of trust in the staff that help them above 
all else. So the credit union is giving members what they want. 
 
The Saskatoon Credit Union is 60 years old and has eight 
branches in Saskatoon and Warman. It employs over 200 
people and serves more than 50,000 members. 
 
The credit union is on the right track for building its own 
success, but also helping to build a stronger province. Please 
join me in my support for their employment security policy. 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moosomin Hospital 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well, 
just to add a little more to the member’s statement I gave on 
Friday regarding health services in my constituency. 
 
Attending the opening of the new medical clinic in Rocanville, I 
had the privilege of talking to a couple of the doctors who are 
quite involved in the operating room that is just being 
resurrected in the community of Moosomin. 
 
And certainly we have to say thank you as well. I think the 
minister is beginning to recognize that there is more than just 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And what I can say from the discussion, and not only with the 
doctors, but personnel involved in the operation of that 
operating room, is the fact that there are services available; 
people are using them. In fact in the local paper, I believe the 
comment was, rather than waiting for months at Moosomin 
right now, you can get the service within two weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what it does say, it just shows that people in 
Saskatchewan, if given the opportunity, can certainly provide 
the services that are needed; that health care can be delivered 
outside of our large urban centres. And again my hat goes off to 
the community of Moosomin and the medical staff and 
professionals for a service well-deserved, well-earned and I 
wish them well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

United Way of Regina 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to give 
my sincere congratulations to the United Way of Regina on a 
stellar performance in this year’s fundraising campaign. 
 
United Way, with the help of organizations and individuals, has 
raised over $1.9 million, surpassing the $1.85 million dollar goal 
they set. I am certain this money will be spent in good ways, and it 
is nice to see this kind of charity and kindness during the holiday 
season. 
 
I would especially like to thank our own provincial government 
employees who raised, collectively, $205,000 towards the United 
Way campaign. This includes the people in our government 
departments, agencies, boards and commissions who organized 
fundraising activities and then gave what they could. I think their 
success, and the effort of the entire campaign is proof of the 
generous and co-operative attitude of Saskatchewan people. In 
fact, it would be nice to see all of us acting like this every single 
day. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the United Way on its 1999 
campaign. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Native Healing Centres 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In health care 
today we hear a great deal about million dollar machines and all 
the high-tech gizmos which we realize make diagnosis and 
treatment quicker and more effective, and a little more 
expensive. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it’s also a fact that we should not lose 
sight of what’s traditionally made medicine and healing more 
human and humane. No matter how technologically advanced 
we get, we’re still mortal and much of healing is still a mystery. 
 
In recognition of this, the Regina General and the Pasqua 
Hospital have opened native healing centres. The opening at the 
General occurred last Friday. Both centres contain a circular 
area which provides space for cross-cultural training sessions, a 
sanctuary for families, a place for burning sweet grass and for 
holding healing ceremonies. Wasakaw Pisim Native 
Counselling Services, under director Lynda Francis, provides 
these services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hospital for any of us can be a confusing and 
frightening place. It’s important if we can improve the feeling 
of welcome and familiarity, that we do it. So I’m proud that our 
health system has the ability to recognize alternative healing 
methods and the courage to integrate them into the mix. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

No-fault Insurance 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
responsible for SGI’s (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
faulty, no-fault insurance scheme. 
 
Mr. Minister, your no-fault insurance system isn’t working, at 
least it’s not working for the people who need it the most. 
No-fault insurance is protecting common criminals who use 
motor vehicles to assault innocent victims. 
 
No-fault insurance is protecting large multinational companies 
from product liability. But no-fault insurance is not protecting a 
lot of people who rely on it for the coverage after a serious 
accident. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party tabled a petition signed by 
hundreds and hundreds of people who have had the unfortunate 
experience of dealing with SGI’s no-fault insurance system. 
They all say the same thing, Mr. Minister. The NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) version of no-fault insurance is a failure. 
 
Mr. Minister, where is the independent review of no-fault 
insurance? Why hasn’t the NDP established an independent 
body to review the no-fault insurance system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

legislation that created this personal injury protection plan for 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, a review process was set 
in place in the legislation. The review is to take place within 
five years after the introduction of the legislation which was 
January 1, 1995. 
 
We will be appointing that committee very shortly, within the 
next week. And in that time, that whole process will be set out 
in an independent way which will allow for those people who 
have concerns with the program to register them there. 
 
I know that SGI is quite interested in hearing about good things 
that can be done to improve automobile insurance for all of us 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, there are less than three weeks 
before the end of the year. Three weeks before the deadline for 
establishing a committee to review no-fault insurance. And still 
we get from the NDP lame excuses and hollow promises. 
Maybe you should consult your colleague, the NDP Minister of 
Education. 
 
A few months back when the member from Saskatoon, 
masquerading as a Liberal candidate, promised to scrap the 
no-fault insurance system. In fact, the Saskatchewan Trial 
Lawyers Association even made your Minister of Education the 
anti-no-fault insurance poster boy. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that the position of the NDP government? Will 
you be taking the position of your so called NDP-Liberal 
coalition partner and scrap the no-fault insurance program or is 
it just another Liberal platform promise that we can chalk up to 
meaningless Liberal campaign rhetoric. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this matter things are 
unfolding as they should. The review will be held at the 
appropriate time. It’ll be announced very shortly. 
 
I think it’s very important to note that when the legislation was 
created there was a built-in review because of the concerns that 
this is something new. What we do know is that, in the new 
government that we have here, we are working together with all 
of the information that we have from both of our coalition 
partners and we will continue to use that information after we 
have received the independent review from the committee that 
will be set-up. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I call for the next question, I’m just 
going to remind members to please address their questions 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan 
Party has been calling for an independent review of the no-fault 
insurance system as you know. We called for the review to be 
headed by a retired judge to ensure no government interference. 
We call for an extensive public consultation to be part of the 
review. And the Saskatchewan Party committed during the 

election to have the review report back to the government 
before the end of 1999. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit today to establish a fully 
independent committee headed by a retired judge to review the 
no-fault insurance system including a comprehensive public 
consultation, and will you make the commitment to have the 
review completed in time to report to the legislature on the first 
day of the spring session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the independent will be . . . I 
mean, the review will be independent and it will take place over 
the next number of months. We are going to be making sure 
that the matter will be dealt with in a fair, reasonable way that 
deals with all of the concerns of the members of the public 
because we want to improve what is a very good automobile 
insurance system and make it even better, and the only way we 
can do that is if we listen carefully to our report from the 
independent review as well as the comments from the public 
and as well as the information that we have as coalition partners 
in this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just want to remind the 
member to address your question through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your Minister of 
Education went to a rally during the election last fall. He 
promised to scrap the no-fault insurance system. But today 
when the same people came to the legislature with petitions 
opposing no-fault, the so-called Liberal leader didn’t have the 
courage to talk to them and refused to accept their petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it came time for the Liberal leader to stand 
up and be counted, he chose instead to tuck . . . to tuck his top 
between his legs and run. 
 
Is that what the people of Saskatchewan can expect from the 
Liberal-NDP coalition — broken campaign promises and 
ministers that run away from tough decisions? Mr. Minister, 
thousands of people have been devastated by the NDP no-fault 
insurance system. 
 
Want to make you a commitment . . . We want you to make a 
commitment that you actually will keep. Will you commit today 
to a fully independent review of the no-fault insurance system 
headed by a retired judge; and will you commit to have the 
committee report back to the legislature no later than the end of 
March? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there never has been any 
other plan than to have an independent review and that is what’s 
set out in the legislation to be dealt with. We are going to listen 
to what the people have to say through the independent 
commission. We’re also going to listen to all the concerns that 
we’ve received over the last number of years. We’re also going 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

to listen to all of those people who say that this new program 
has helped them in a better way than was ever possible before. 
 
What we want is the best insurance system for our people in 
Saskatchewan and we ask that all members of this House 
contribute to that. We look forward to any advice that you 
might have and we’ll look forward to all of the information that 
we get. 
 
Our plan in this government, Mr. Speaker, is to work together 
and listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We know that even 
some of the members on that side of the House have said that 
this new legislature should include the views of all of us. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for People Infected with Tainted Blood 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, many 
other provinces are now compensating persons who contracted 
hepatitis C from tainted blood before 1986 or after 1990. 
However, here in Saskatchewan, these tainted blood victims 
receive nothing. It’s another example of your two-tiered health 
care where people in Saskatchewan are treated like second-class 
citizens. 
 
Madam Minister, more and more provinces across this country 
are moving towards fair compensation for all victims of tainted 
blood. When is Saskatchewan going to do the right thing and 
provide fair compensation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government 
and the province of Saskatchewan, and in fact the majority of 
provinces in this country, agree that the most appropriate way to 
assist people infected with hepatitis C outside of the 1986 to 
1991 window is to properly ensure that they have access to very 
good medical services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support that position and we support 
continuing to work with the federal government to ensure that 
people infected have access to the very best services we can 
afford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
again for the minister. Madam Minister, you say that the 
provinces are all in agreement with the federal government’s 
position. That isn’t quite correct. 
 
Ontario has set aside $200 million to compensate hep C victims 
directly. They have already provided $10,000 for every victim, 
and that package is likely to increase to over $30,000 with full 
comprehensive benefits over the next few weeks. Quebec is 
providing $80 million to victims in that province. And 
Manitoba, your NDP neighbour, is moving towards 
compensation. Yet Saskatchewan is doing nothing. 
 
Madam Minister, there are only 50 people in Saskatchewan 

who require compensation. If you were to provide somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of $30,000, like Ontario is considering, it 
would cost one and a half million dollars. That seems to be a 
reasonable price to pay to ensure fair treatment for those victims 
of tainted blood in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, are you going to provide a fair compensation 
package for tainted blood victims or are you going to continue 
to treat them like second-class citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member knows 
financial assistance is available to people who were infected 
through the blood system between 1996 and 1990. It’s during 
those periods that some of these infections could have been 
prevented had the Canadian blood system been introduced, and 
introduced certain kinds of screening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to maintain the position, as do a large 
majority of the provinces and territories in this country, that we 
want to ensure that people infected outside of the 1986 to 1990 
window receive the very best health services that we can afford. 
And we anticipate that in the next several weeks, that the 
federal government and the provinces will have something to 
announce on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister. Madam Minister, where is the compassion of your 
department in this province? It seems as if everything is run by 
a bunch of bean-counters and everything has to boil down to 
absolute dollars and cents. 
 
But not everyone on that side of the House agrees with your 
position. The Education minister refuses to answer anything in 
this House but he seems to have no problem talking to reporters 
outside of it. And so maybe he will answer this question, even if 
it is about that, because he talks about it outside. 
 
(1400) 
 
Mr. Minister of Education, you promised that there’d be fair 
compensation for all tainted blood victims. You said the 
province has a moral obligation to treat all victims equally. You 
said you were going to help those people. Where are you when 
they need you? Are you going to provide fair compensation for 
these victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in September the people 
of this province sent a very important message, a very important 
message that they wanted their government to change in a 
number of important ways. They wanted all politicians in this 
legislature to listen carefully to them and to listen carefully to 
each other. They wanted a more open and more accountable 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing this. We have two separate parties. 
We’re finding common ground on a number of areas as we 
advance the cause of social justice in the province of 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re going through our budget 
process for the year 2000-2001, and I think that you will see 
real evidence which we certainly saw in the Throne Speech. I 
think we’ll see it in the budget when the coalition government 
takes its first budget to the people — the first budget of the new 
millennium, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Interim Rate Review Panel 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is for the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning the interim rate review panel 
recommended an increase of 9.1 per cent in SaskEnergy rates. 
The committee appears to have done a very thorough job in 
considering the date the increase will take effect — its effect on 
the consumers and on the cost of delivery and product for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Minister, while responding to questions from the media this 
morning, the interim committee chairperson indicated they will 
also be reviewing other rate increase proposals before a 
permanent committee is in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, what other utility rate increases are being 
proposed? And if this is the case, why will you not name the 
permanent committee immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working with the 
Saskatchewan interim rate review panel and I would like to 
publicly thank them for doing a good job in a very quick period 
of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We are using some of the information that 
we gather as this interim panel reviews various aspects of the 
public utility rates to form what we do when we develop a 
permanent body. 
 
As we have said before, as we have said in the Throne Speech, 
we will be bringing forward a report to the Crown Corporations 
Committee of this legislature so that the legislature can have a 
debate within that committee and then obviously, following 
that, when we bring forth legislation in this House. 
 
At the present time we are dealing with the SaskEnergy rate 
increase. We will be responding to other rate increases as they 
arise. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we just had the previous 
question not answered, but we also had some discussion on 
information that was presented by that particular committee. 
 
This interim rate review committee said they didn’t get the 
public response they expected during the consultation process. 
 

Mr. Minister, the committee held two public meetings in 
Saskatoon and Regina. They didn’t visit any other 
Saskatchewan communities. They received telephone calls, 
eleven written and eight e-mail submissions. They received four 
written reports from organizations. 
 
Mr. Minister, this lack of public response can be attributed to 
the public simply not being aware of how to access the 
committee and that they were welcome to give input. It is also 
because the public lacks confidence in that particular process. 
 
The committee stated this morning they want to look at how to 
make the process more open and accessible to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, how do you plan to ensure greater 
public access to this consultation process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for that question. Because what it does do is allow me the 
opportunity to say that we have set up an interim rate review 
panel which is independent. They set up their procedure on how 
they deal with these matters. I know that they are evaluating 
themselves what’s happened in this last review part. And they 
will, if another rate review comes forward, look at some of the 
concerns. 
 
If the hon. member or other members on the opposite side of the 
House have further suggestions about this, I would request that 
they direct them to Mr. Fiske as the Chair of that committee, 
and I’m sure that he will take their suggestions to heart and use 
them when they’re necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would hope that if 
this actually takes place, they would listen to all the concerns 
that were raised, not just some. Because if it’s some, we know 
who’s going to filter all the concerns. And that scares 
everybody in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this interim rate review committee has begun an 
important process, a process that should give the public most 
affected by the utility rate increases, more input before an 
increase is approved. A process which should instill confidence 
in the Saskatchewan taxpayers that the utility rates they pay are 
representative of the service they receive. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is no reason to delay the appointment of a 
permanent committee to conduct this important process. Mr. 
Minister, if there are other Crowns preparing to hike their rates 
and if we need to re-examine the consultation process, then a 
permanent committee should be named immediately. 
 
What purpose is this interim committee serving that a 
permanent one would not? Mr. Minister, when do you plan to 
appoint a permanent rate review committee. When? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government to say that there will be 
an announcement respecting the appointment of a permanent 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

committee as the minister has outlined already, repeatedly, in 
his statements. 
 
We have now the current approach undertaken under the 
SaskEnergy application. We are going to go to Crown 
Corporations Committee for their input, as the Speech from the 
Throne has indicated. So there’s no doubt about it that we’re on 
that track and we should be clear about that. 
 
I do want to, however, say before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, 
that in 1996 in a letter written to the project manager studying 
the Saskatchewan Crowns in this province, signed by . . . and 
I’m reading from a letter, so therefore, I’m not breaking the 
rules of the House . . . Bill Boyd, Leader of the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party, under a document entitled The 
Privatization Dividend. Quote: “The government immediately 
take steps to privatize SaskTel through a public share offering 
under the guidelines outlined in Section 3 of this . . . (section).” 
 
And that was followed . . . and that was followed . . . on March 
10, 1998, the Saskatchewan Party leadership candidates meet 
Kindersley constituency, quote, . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Next question. 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Highways. Mr. Minister, I recently received an e-mail regarding 
Highway 28, south of Radville. It’s from a school bus driver 
who is very concerned about the safety of the children. It reads: 
 

We travel alot of miles on this road and the children are 
scared . . . The dips and holes and bumps . . . (in) this road 
make it very hazardous. Not to mention, meeting another 
vehicle cause the bus to sway from side to side. If the bus 
sways towards a vehicle, it feels like we would collide. 
There are no shoulders on this highway, so it is impossible 
to pull over. We are very concerned about the safety of the 
children. We have had enough. What are you going to do 
about this?  

 
Mr. Minister, your highways are endangering lives. What are 
you going to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, of 
course, we in the Ministry of Highways are equally concerned 
of the safety of students as they ride the buses to school on the 
roads. Also, the highways budget has increased over the last 
number of years, and certainly, if we had the federal funding to 
put into the highways we would do considerably better on the 
roads that we have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, over the last ten years, the average 
contribution by the federal government to our highways has 
been $8 million a year. Obviously, if we had more money from 
the federal government we could do a lot more on roads that the 
member describes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a new issue. The 
former Highways minister who was from this constituency was 
told about the danger and did nothing about it. Mr. Minister, 
children should not have to fear for their safety every time they 
take the bus to school. Parents should not have to worry every 
time they put their children on a school bus. Yet that’s exactly 
what’s happening south of Radville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Highways. Mr. 
Minister, this is unacceptable; when are you going to fix 
Highway 28? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, I thank the member for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier answer, we as 
well are obviously concerned about the safety of the public and 
especially the school children if they’re riding back and forth on 
buses to schools. 
 
Again we’ll do our very best to ensure that the roads are safe. 
This past . . . about three weeks ago . . . we announced the 
winter highway projects tenders, I should say, at least three 
weeks in advance. That tender included $44 million which of 
course will go to the improvements of roads. 
 
We’re doing our very best with the budget that we have, but as 
I’ve said often in many speeches that I’ve given, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has more roads than Alberta and Manitoba 
combined, with barely a third of the population. It’s a huge 
infrastructure to maintain for a very small population and tax 
base. We’ll do our very best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Yesterday the Premier asked why the Saskatchewan Party is so 
concerned about the coalition government. It’s because your 
deal to buy off the Liberal means four more years of the same 
unacceptable government Saskatchewan people voted against 
on September 16. The Liberals promised to spend every dime of 
fuel tax on highways, but the NDP platform contained no new 
money for highways. And it’s the NDP platform that won the 
day. 
 
Mr. Premier, you said you wanted a serious question. Here’s a 
serious question: how much longer do parents have to fear for 
the safety of their children when they put them on the school 
bus to Radville? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to underline the 
words said by the Minster of Highways, who I think very 
responsibly has indicated the task which is facing us. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have more highways in Saskatchewan 
than the province of Ontario at 11 million people. We have 
more highways than Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick, and P.E.I. put together. 
 
This is an enormous task and we understand how the history of 
this arose. And we’re repairing highways in a very, very 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

top-notch manner — in the best manner that we can afford with 
respect to the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I noticed something about this session, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the so-called Saskatchewan Party. If you take a look 
at the questions that have been advanced by the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party, they have tremendous ideas to spend 
money on everything. On absolutely everything. And they have 
tremendous ideas not only how to spend money but how they’re 
going to give us more money by tax cuts. And I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it didn’t work in the 1980s and it isn’t going to work 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 206 — The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
item no. 6, Bill No. 206, The Protection of Children Involved in 
Prostitution Act now be read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1415) 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, 
The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, 
The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999, now be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read the first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, 
The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
1999, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 

Saskatchewan Pension Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 5, The Parks Amendment Act, 1999, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Mentally Disordered Persons 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to introduce a 
motion to establish a special committee of the Assembly to 
address and to make recommendations on the issue of the abuse 
and exploitation of children through the sex trade; and I would 
ask for that leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Child Sexual Abuse 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will repeat what I have said many times before, and 
that is that we cannot allow the sexual exploitation of children, 
some as young as nine years old, to continue on the streets of 
our cities. 
 
As a government we have taken a comprehensive approach to 
this problem, which I believe is sound, and which is based upon 
the advice and opinions of those who know best the problems 
these young people face and how they might most effectively 
be addressed. I am referring, of course, to youth themselves, as 
well as those who are directly involved with them on a daily 
basis. We have listened to their advice and we have acted on it. 
 
In 1997-98, the government introduced a five-point strategy to 
fight the exploitation of children and youth on our streets. We 
amended The Child and Family Services Act to enable us to 
better protect child victims of sexual exploitation and increase 
penalties for offenders. These amendments will be proclaimed 
early in the new year. These changes, along with changes to the 
Criminal Code, have strengthened our legislative capacity to 
address this issue. 
 
Over the past three years, we have contributed nearly $1 million 
to outreach services for street youth and those whose are 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

sexually exploited on the street. Services were developed at the 
local level by community agencies involved in working with 
these children and youth. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, as promised in the Speech from the 
Throne, we will be appointing an all-party committee of this 
House to provide further guidance to the government on this 
very serious issue. 
 
As I said a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, considerable consultation 
and work has already been done by individuals, community, 
and professional groups working in partnership with the 
government. 
 
In meeting the challenge which is put before them, the members 
of the all-party committee will build upon that valuable work. 
We believe the way to end the exploitation and victimization of 
our young people by those involved in the sex trade, Mr. 
Speaker, is to work together to find solutions. 
 
Our children count on us, all of us, regardless of our political 
ideology, to protect them from those who would take advantage 
of their age and vulnerability. To this end, the government, we 
look forward to receiving the recommendations of this 
extremely important all-party committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move: 
 

That the members Julé, Prebble, Harper, Jones, Yates, 
Toth, and Draude be constituted a special committee to 
address and to make recommendations on the issue of the 
abuse and exploitation of children through the sex trade, 
and to consider and report on: (a) consultations with 
stakeholders that have an interest in this issue to determine 
the work that has been done to date by community 
representatives and service providers and seek their input 
on next steps to be taken by community and government; 
(b) the strategies employed by other jurisdictions and the 
effectiveness of their approaches; (c) reasons why children 
end up on the street in the first place and supports that may 
be necessary to help communities effectively deal with the 
sexual exploitation of children; (d) such other consultations 
that may be germane. 
 
And that the committee have the power to sit during 
intersessional period and during the legislative session, 
except when the Assembly is sitting; and that the 
committee have the power to send for persons, papers, and 
records; to examine witnesses under oath; to receive 
representations from interested parties and individuals; to 
engage such advisers and assistants as are required for the 
purposes of the inquiry; and to hold meetings away from 
the seat of government in order that the fullest 
representations may be received without unduly 
inconveniencing those desired to be heard; and that the 
committee be instructed to submit its first report to the 
Legislative Assembly in the spring of the year 2000. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker; seconded by the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased to stand today to second the motion put forth by the 
Minister of Social Services regarding the establishment of a 
special committee to deal with the subject of sexual abuse and 
exploitation of our children here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is such an important committee because 
it is referring to the need our children have to be free from 
exploitation. Children are subject to exploitation, Mr. Speaker. 
And they are just that, Mr. Speaker. They are children. They are 
not clients; they are not short criminals or sexually promiscuous 
youngsters. They are God’s children. And the commercial 
sexual exploitation of children is a form of child abuse and 
slavery. 
 
Governments, communities, and society as a whole are 
responsible and must be held accountable for the sexual 
exploitation of children and youth. And, Mr. Speaker, it is in 
my view that existing strategies that are in place — be it the 
government has put some in place that they felt necessary and 
would work — it is my view that these strategies are not 
working effectively enough. There are gaps in the system that 
need to be addressed or our children will continue to be 
exploited. 
 
A comprehensive agenda for action must be developed and 
recommendations implemented, because without all of the 
pieces in place, Mr. Speaker, children and youth in 
Saskatchewan will continue to be robbed of a normal childhood 
and will also continue to suffer sexual exploitation and its many 
interrelated consequences and detrimental impacts. 
 
It is my greatest hope that the work of an all-party committee 
will result in bringing forward a comprehensive action plan to 
protect sexually exploited children and youth in Saskatchewan, 
to protect them from further violation and to assist them in 
healing on their journey through life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — First of all, congratulations to you, Mr. 
Speaker, on taking on the challenge of the Speaker’s Chair. It’s 
a difficult job; there are times when all eyes are upon you. It 
requires a professional attitude. I know that you’re up to it 
because you’ve shown your respect for this institution. And 
you’ve shown respect for democracy, you’ve shown a respect 
for the parliamentary system, and you’ve shown a respect for 
rule of law. 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that you will follow the 
tradition of your predecessors and it’s my hope, not only that 
you will perform competently, but that you will enjoy your new 
role as Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s good to be back. I’m kind of pleased about 
being back. And, Mr. Speaker, when I think about it, I think 
everybody in this Assembly should be pleased to be here. All 
the Saskatchewan Party people should be pleased. Because, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and they should be happy because they got more 
seats than they were expecting and anybody was expecting 
them to get. All the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, should be happy 
because they got more influence in government than anybody 
expected them to have. And, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats 
should be happy too because to come back for a third term into 
government, that’s an accomplishment in itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute to 
thank my family and my friends and my supporters back in 
Prince Albert Carlton for their continued support. For me this is 
my fourth election. It doesn’t get any easier, Mr. Speaker, as 
you go into it. Every election has its own challenge. But I do 
want to mention that people that have stuck with me for four 
elections, and some new people that were added, I am very 
grateful. 
 
I particularly want to thank for support my wife, Olesia, and our 
two daughters, Lisa and Laura. As you know, Mr. Speaker, 
when one enters a political arena, there’s considerable 
adjustment on the part of a family. And the family has to learn 
to live with having a family member in politics and the fact that 
they have to accept that there’s a father or a husband or a 
relative that is a politician. And I do have to say that I’m 
grateful for that and I’m glad that we have been able to make 
these adjustments. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about several items that arise from 
the Speech to the Throne. I want to talk first about jobs and the 
economy; secondly, about a couple of items about agriculture 
which is a very prominent part of Saskatchewan politics these 
days. And if time permits, to go on to issues regarding taxation, 
health, perhaps a bit about post-secondary education, and 
education. 
 
Starting with jobs, Mr. Speaker, and the economy. When I was 
on the election trail, this was one of the topics that was most 
often spoken about and addressed and people were commenting 
on. People, first of all, liked our general approach because in 
our city and particularly, in particular in my constituency, they 
felt that the pressure on job availability had been . . . has 
improved. More people in Saskatchewan are working ever . . . 
more people than ever before are working in Saskatchewan; 
certainly more people than ever before are working in Prince 
Albert. 
 
We have had an economy that is more diversified than ever, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re diversified into mining and oil and 
manufacturing and processing. Forestry is diversifying and our 
service industry is very, very well-developed. And that’s good, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are blessed with natural resources; we are 
blessed with a work ethic. And what we need to do is to 
combine our strengths and our skills with the capital of 
investors to go on further, Mr. Speaker, and to make this even a 
better place to live. 
 
I want to spend some time talking about the forest industry as 
an example of what’s happening in our province, as it pertains 
to jobs. If you sort of take a look at the overall picture of our 
Saskatchewan forests, what you see there is a natural resource 
that’s available, more so maybe than in other provinces at this 
time. 
 
What you also see is a lot of people living there that don’t have 
jobs. There’s labour that’s available. And we also have found 
out that there are investors who are willing to form partnerships 
with First Nations and to go in and to put these things together 
so that we can have jobs. 
 
Very recently in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 
decision by Weyerhaeuser corporation, who is a dominant 
corporation in Prince Albert, they are putting together a big 
expansion and a refit. They are setting up a co-generation plant. 
 
This is a plant which will generate power for their own 
consumption and own use. This will enable the company to be 
more efficient. It’ll also reduce some of the pressure on 
SaskPower, our corporation, to deliver power into the next few 
years. And besides that, it has environmental benefits because 
they will be able to burn up all of the big pile of bark and 
sawdust that are being stored in various parts of northern 
Saskatchewan, and certainly right adjacent to our city. 
 
So we really welcome this expansion. It’s an expansion that’s 
been in place now . . . the construction phase has been in place 
for about a year and a half. In fact anybody that’s driving to 
catch a plane about 6 o’clock in the morning on their way to the 
airport can get caught in a mini traffic jam because of all the 
construction and shift workers that are going out on the route to 
the pulp mill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are very pleased about that. And I congratulate 
Weyerhaeuser on choosing Saskatchewan as a place to expand, 
and we look forward to working with them. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the congratulations to Weyerhaeuser goes 
further than that. Because while they’re expanding their 
production, they have also relinquished some of the rights to 
trees in their FMLA, their forest management lease agreement. 
And they have relinquished these rights because it’s forests 
excess to their needs, and as a result there are other expansions 
that are bound to happen within that area and throughout 
northern Saskatchewan using our forests. 
 
We’ve already got two new saw mills in Prince Albert. 
Together they employ about a hundred people who live right in 
town, and that’s not counting the people that are involved in the 
logging and the hauling, in the road building, in servicing, and 
in reforestation. 
 
This summer we had a local volunteer group, together with our 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

chamber of commerce and the alliance, what we call the 
economic alliance in Prince Albert, sponsored a forestry 
exposition. This is something that could be called parallel to an 
agribition, where suppliers bring all of their equipment, various 
supplies, and show off the technology that’s available for 
forestry. It was a first for Prince Albert; it certainly was a first 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
And they’re planning another one in a couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker. Anybody who has an opportunity, I think, to take a 
look at that or come to that in the summertime would find that 
it’s quite a learning experience. It also shows that companies 
are interested in what is happening in Saskatchewan in the 
forest industry. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 
committed in the Throne Speech to plant 25 million trees per 
year over a period of four years, minimum of a hundred million 
trees. 
 
Good forest practices are important, Mr. Speaker. What we do 
in these areas now is we have the systems that can assess what 
type of reforestation is best — whether it requires planting, 
whether it requires scarification, or whether other methods, 
whether natural regeneration will take place. And with a 
commitment to use some of the money that comes from 
stumpage fees to go directly back into the forest, we’ll be able 
to make this whole industry renewable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, along with that, there is a commitment to 
increased forest harvesting and to increased forest wood 
product development. And so many may ask, well how is this 
possible? How can you all of a sudden get more out of the 
forests than you were getting before? 
 
It amounts to, Mr. Speaker, better utilization of the forest 
products that are available. In the first place . . . which starts 
really with the pulp mills. When the pulp mill in Prince Albert 
was first developed, we were bringing in logs of all sizes. True, 
there were a lot of the logs were first taken — the bigger logs, 
the bigger spruce logs were taken to Hudson Bay for the pulp 
. . . to the plywood mill, and they were peeled there. But there 
were still many logs that were . . . large logs, of a large 
diameter, that were put through and chipped for a pulp. 
 
But what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is we found that you can 
get more value out of a log if the first thing you do with it after 
you peel it is you put it through a saw mill. So pretty well all 
softwood logs are now aimed for a saw mill first where the high 
value product is taken out, and then after that, the scraps and the 
slabs are put into chips. The chips are transported to the pulp 
mill and as a result of that, you can get more value out of the 
product and you can still have enough supply for the mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other new technology that has evolved, of 
course, is that pulp is now not made only out of softwood, but it 
is also made out of hardwood. So, Mr. Speaker, the pulp mills 
in Saskatchewan are able to use what was once a weed, the 
poplar plant, for making into good pulp. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also new technologies, such things as 
finger joints which . . . finger jointers, which can put together 
short pieces of wood, glue them together strongly and use them 

for things like window frames and door jambs. 
 
Ms. Speaker, I mention these things because while we’re in the 
process of expanding this industry, we’re also being very 
cognizant of the fact that conservation of that industry is very, 
very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I love trees. I plant a tree or several trees every 
spring, and I like to see them grow. I don’t plant them 
commercially, but I understand what people say and what 
people mean and what they feel like when they say it’s 
important not just to cut off everything and leave it to waste. 
 
What I don’t like, Mr. Speaker, is I don’t like burnt forests. I 
think it’s a waste. I like forest renewal. I know forests can be 
renewed. I like to see grasses growing; I like to see shrubs 
coming up, and new trees coming through. And so I’m . . . I 
know I don’t like to see, Mr. Speaker, a forest that’s just left, 
because if it’s left, here’s what happens. Forests grow, then they 
rot, sometimes they burn. 
 
What we have to do is stop the burning and reduce the amount 
that’s rotting. And if we manage it properly and we have a 
department and we have personnel in Saskatchewan now which 
have worked on management processes that we can . . . they tell 
us that we can do these things and get much more out of our 
forest and get much more employment out of our forest. 
 
It’s most important to understand that forests cannot be frozen 
in time. We can take a picture of a forest and then later on come 
back and take a look at the forest and it will not represent the 
forest, much like you can take a picture of a wheat field or any 
kind of field in southern Saskatchewan. They are not static, Mr. 
Speaker. They continue to evolve and they continue to grow 
just like our southern prairies do. That’s natural. 
 
It used to be natural for the prairies, Mr. Speaker, to have fires 
coming through, but farming has changed that. There’s very 
little burning now. In fact we’re advised that burning is harmful 
in many cases. In forestry, I think burning is a waste. Good 
regeneration is not necessarily guaranteed after a fire, and 
regeneration can be enhanced after a good forest harvest. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if anybody from the House or from the 
general public wants to see various phases, there’s a model 
forest set up north of the city of Prince Albert in the Anglin 
Lake district. And you can see forest development in various 
stages and various types of cuttings and get a good feel for 
exactly how it is that forests over . . . you can get a capsule of 
what happens over a period of 70 years by just driving through 
there, and it might take 15 minutes to half an hour. 
 
I want to mention one more thing, Mr. Speaker. Our current 
annual cut of forestry is actually less than one-tenth of one per 
cent of all of the forested land in Saskatchewan. That’s how 
much is cut annually right now. 
 
By comparison, about one and a half per cent burns annually. 
So the objective now is to set up a system where you’ve got 
better fire control and therefore you’ll be able to cut more of 
that one and a half per cent that burns and increase the annual 
cut and still have margin for the future. 
 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to speaking a little bit about 
agriculture. But before I do, I want to congratulate the minister 
of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), and the successive ministers of SERM really, 
that have developed the new plan for forestry in Saskatchewan. 
And I want to congratulate all of the employees of SERM for 
the work that they are putting into this. 
 
Because I know that northern residents in particular will benefit 
from it and I know that the taxpayers in general will benefit 
from it. And the spinoff industry will be felt not only in Prince 
Albert and Meadow Lake and Hudson Bay, but it’ll be felt 
through to Saskatoon and further south. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes and talk about 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. One thing that’s happening is 
I’ve felt that things on the farm, we know that they’ve been 
changing. But I think that more recently they’re changing faster 
than ever. 
 
What’s happening is the farms are becoming larger faster. 
They’re producing more, whether it’s grains or livestock. 
There’s more value added. But if you take a look at the overall 
conditions of farmers, we know that there is a crisis in 
Saskatchewan in farming right now. It really comes down to the 
fact that commodity prices are too low and the costs are too 
high. And as a result, there’s no net from which a farmer can 
produce an income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is getting grave. There are farmers 
who have gone to their bankers to have their loans extended, 
only to have a sentence come at them to say they want . . . that 
the bankers want more money and they want it now, because 
the prices have gone down and there’s a sort of a . . . and the 
farm, the value of the equity in the farm is going down. That’s 
like getting hit by a double whammy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
I spent some time with some friends of mine who are in farming 
from the district that I grew up in, Mr. Speaker. And I try to 
keep in touch with what’s happening there. And we just sort of, 
sitting around the table, did an assessment of where is this 
particular farmer at, where is that farmer at, and what kind of 
shape is this guy in, and this fellow. And in all we armchaired, 
we armchaired 42 farmers, Mr. Speaker — 42 farmers in a 
district the circumference of, well, maybe 10 miles across by 
maybe six or seven miles the other way. 
 
And out of those 42 farm families, it was our sort of conclusion 
that within three to five years, 17 of those farm families will not 
be there — three to five years. They won’t make it, Mr. 
Speaker, under current conditions. Nine have already sold or are 
in the process of selling. And there’s eight that maybe would 
sell or have a very difficult time making it that may have to end 
up selling or doing something else in the near future. That’s 
within the next three to five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Seventeen out of 42 comes out to about 40 per cent — 40 per 
cent of those farmers will likely not be there. 
 
There are another 25 of those which we assessed probably 
would survive. Four of them because they’re into livestock 

quite heavily; 10 of them because they have off-farm income 
and are able to subsidize their farm operations with their 
off-farm income; and 11 of them who can probably survive for 
three or four years because they are big enough and they have a 
lot of assets on their farms and their land has been paid for. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our assessment was that this trend that we see 
there is probably generalizable across three-quarters of our farm 
population across the Parkland belt, sort of across from Yorkton 
on the east through to Lloydminster on the west in the Parkland 
area. And I’m not sure just how it would work in the further 
part of Saskatchewan, in the southern part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Though we know that if this happens, Mr. Speaker, the overall 
effect would be that the communities would be depopulated, 
and also that the farm service sector will also be . . . will suffer 
as a result of that. 
 
In order for a person who maybe have been on a farm at one 
time and has a difficult time understanding how is it that a 
farmer who has the equipment which looks expensive, farmland 
which looks expensive and is expensive . . . (inaudible) . . . how 
is it that you can get into this kind of trouble? What is it? 
 
And if you’ve been on a farm, Mr. Speaker, you can understand 
what the words fertilizer, and fuel, and chemical means. I asked 
him this question, let’s take a look and let’s look at what a 
typical farmer’s up against. And they said, well for example, a 
typical farmer: fertilizer, $40 per acre; fuel, $20 per acre; 
chemicals, $20 per acre — and that’s cheap, that’s going the 
low end, Mr. Speaker — freight, $30 per acre; harvesting, $16 
per acre; taxes, property taxes, about $6 per acre; insurance, 
about $5 per acre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that comes out to very close to $140 per acre right 
there for input costs. And it’s not taking into account anything 
about rental costs or interest costs or upkeep of the farm. And 
that’s $140 already. 
 
And then if you take what you can produce off of that acre in 
wheat. Let’s say you grew a darn good crop, 50 bushels per 
acre. How much is a bushel of grain worth today? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Probably about two-fifty. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Two-fifty. Let’s make it even $3, Mr. 
Speaker. If it was $3, you’d get, for 50 bushels of grain . . . 50 
bushels of wheat, you’d get $150 — maximum nowadays, 
maximum. 
 
So there you have for one acre of land, Mr. Speaker, operating 
costs — $140; and your profit and your costs, your what you 
could make, would be $150. So you’re working with a margin 
of $10 on that wheat. That’s under ideal conditions. If you add 
to that rental costs or interest costs, then the cost of production 
will exceed. I mention these things, Mr. Speaker, just to kind of 
help bring to a more concrete example of what a typical farmer 
might be faced with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if a farmer has a thousand acres of land, just to 
take this one step further, and he’s able, in order to make a 
living, to say earn $30,000 in a year off of his farm, you would 
need a $30 break or profit. And, the example that I gave you 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

shows that in this year, that’s completely impossible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what happened? Why did this happen all of a 
sudden when we had a fairly good farming situation not a few 
. . . not too long ago? It comes down to two big items. First of 
all the loss of the grain transportation subsidy, and to the 
average farmer that could be 20 to $30,000 a year, just what 
they need to make or break it . . . make it right now. And the 
second thing is, Mr. Speaker, was the reduction in grain prices 
due to the international trade wars, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 
two big problems. 
 
So what is it that can be done? And what is it that we’re 
attempting to do here? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that there was an all-party 
agreement in this House . . . that came into this House to back 
the farmers of rural Saskatchewan, to back rural people in 
Saskatchewan, to back the service, farm-service industry, in 
Saskatchewan and passed a motion here requesting one more 
time from the federal government that they consider providing 
the aid that’s necessary in the interim until things change in 
some way or other. 
 
And we needn’t be shy, Mr. Speaker, about asking for a billion 
dollars. We need that in order that the farmers can use that 
money, either to diversify or get new jobs, or do whatever is 
needed to be done to keep farms viable into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, what else can government do? 
Our government sent the minister to represent us at the World 
Trade talks. I’m very pleased he was able to make some 
contacts there, Mr. Speaker. The people in the House have 
heard about that. There are several initiatives that are listed 
right in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the initiatives is to withdraw from AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) and send that money directly to 
farmers. We’re looking at ways to extend the payment terms for 
crop insurance. We’re looking at ways to . . . at extended 
leasebacks. And we’re looking at ways of working on the 
property tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to mention though that these things are over and above 
what the taxpayer already does. The taxpayer of Saskatchewan 
is committed to $299 per capita to Saskatchewan farmers. 
That’s more than any other province . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s more than twice as much than any other province does for 
their agricultural scene in their situations, and it’s something 
that the taxpayers, through the Government of Saskatchewan, is 
putting in. I believe we will have to continue to put it in. We 
should continue to put it in, Mr. Speaker, but nobody should say 
that the taxpayer is not contributing as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution for a more permanent situation, other 
than the billion dollars right now . . . In my mind one of two 
things has to happen: either the freight subsidy, which I would 
say varies between 20 and $30,000 for the average farmer, 
needs replacement in some form. If that’s a problem then an 
alternate method of payment needs to be made regularly to 
farmers to make up for the trade . . . unequal situation in trade, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to close by congratulating first of all the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Department of Agriculture for keeping and 
for making this a priority in Saskatchewan right now. I want to 
encourage anybody that has time, has a pencil and paper, or is 
on Internet, or has even got a telephone to take some time to 
contact the Minister of Agriculture federally, tell him what you 
understand about the farming situation because this is not just a 
problem in this legislature, it’s not just a problem for 
Saskatchewan farmers, it’s a problem for all of us here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several other items in this Throne Speech 
which I would like to address. I don’t want to take up too much 
time so I think what I’m going to do is I’m going to cut it down 
to one or two more other items. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech addresses health 
care which is something that I have heard a lot about while I 
was on the campaign trail. When I was going door to door, 
actually this was one of the most often-raised issues. I found out 
that people have a tremendous, tremendous loyalty to medicare 
in Saskatchewan. It has just been reaffirmed every time you go 
out on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a great concern that we maintain our medicare system. 
They appreciate the services that are available and they 
particularly asked us to take a look at things like waiting lists. 
There’s concern there. They’re concerned about the need for 
front-line care, bedside care, right at their home . . . at home 
hospitals, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite phenomenal, Mr. Speaker, just 
to take a look at one or two statistics about what happens in 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
For example, in Saskatchewan there are 35,000 residents served 
daily through our hospital system — 35,000 residents have 
some contact, some type of contact with our health care system. 
If you look at another example, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got hip 
and knee replacements; they’re not rare any more. There are 
1,900 hip or knee replacements in Saskatchewan done annually. 
And cataracts — I think we break all records there, Mr. Speaker 
— over the last year they did 10,500 per year. 
 
So you can see how important this is, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
health care, how important it is for us to maintain services. And 
actually there’s a big demand for services. And this is one of 
my fears, Mr. Speaker, is that the demand for health care 
services will exceed our ability to pay for the services that 
we’ve got. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened is that the 
percentage of the budget that the health care uses is now up to 
about . . . it’s approaching 40 per cent, close to it. 
 
Now there’s going to be one of two things are going to have to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. Either there’s going to have to be a cap 
put on this eventually and some things would have to go by the 
board, or we’re going to have to ask the federal government to 
take a look at this and what is happening across the nation, 
because this is not a unique Saskatchewan problem, and take a 
look again at what they’re doing with their health and social 
transfer funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if you go to any province in the country 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

you’ll find that they’ve got the same commitments to medicare 
that we have here in Saskatchewan. I think you’ll find the same 
increases in demand for services, and I think you’ll find that the 
demands on the treasury are increasing at a faster rate in every 
province than their revenue is for health care. 
 
So I say to the federal government, Mr. Speaker, take a look at 
this again. Put this on your agenda as well as agriculture for 
Saskatchewan because this is where we need the help. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn now to the issue of taxation. I am very 
proud, Mr. Speaker, of the record of this government when it 
comes to attacking the taxation issues. Mr. Speaker, we set out 
several years ago with a commitment that as soon as the budget 
was balanced, that we would take a portion of the surplus and 
we would move it into reducing taxes. And we have done that, 
Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the income taxes to some extent. 
We’ve reduced the PST (provincial sales tax). That’s probably 
the one that most people know about. Manufacturing tax has 
been decreased, business tax for small business tax has been 
decreased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I went door-to-door, the people said keep up 
the good work and go further, and go further. And some people 
said, well I’d like to see property taxes reduced, other people 
said, well I’d like to see the PST reduced another cent, but most 
people said to me, reduce the income tax, that should be your 
next step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that here in our Throne Speech 
that there is commitment to reduce the income tax and to work 
on that in the next budget. And I am expecting to see that in the 
next budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in mentioning that, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate a 
former minister of Finance, the current Minister of Finance, and 
the entire cabinet for the way they set up their priorities. To set 
it up so that we do have continued growth in Saskatchewan to 
enable us to reduce the income tax in the next budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the work that they’ve done shows that 
they were doing it in a very thoughtful manner. I am reminded 
of a little parable that was used in a life skills class, it’s used to 
apply to setting priorities in life, but I think that it applies very 
much to this government, Mr. Speaker, and the parable goes 
something like this. 
 
There is an instructor who has got a bowl in front of him, a jar 
in front of him, and he’s got a little pile or rocks there beside 
the jar. And he takes one rock from the pile and puts it into the 
jar until he can no longer get these rocks into the jar. And then 
he asks his students if the jar is full, and quite often the students 
will nod yes. So then, at that stage, from underneath his desk, 
he pulls out some gravel. And he takes those little, wee stones 
and he tinkles them in amongst the rocks, and he says to the 
students, well is it full? Well, they’re getting a little wary, but 
they say, well, we think so. And then he pulls out some sand 
and he pours it in there. Of course by now they’re wise and they 
say no, it’s not full, because when he pulls out the water and 
fills it up, then they say okay, now it’s full. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the lesson of course in there is that they 
should set up . . . that when you’re making your decisions on 
life is to make sure that you get those rocks in there first. And I 
have to congratulate the government and the ministers of 
Finance, when they’re planning the budgets over the last few 
years, congratulate them for getting the ingredients into that jar 
and getting them in there in the right order so that we are able to 
progress and sustain our tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — There are other items, Mr. Speaker, that I 
want to talk about, but I also think that they would be quite well 
. . . I could address them equally well during the Throne Speech 
debates. So what I’m going to do is I’m going to take my seat 
after I make one more, one more comment. And that is the 
comment about the new . . . about working together in a 
coalition and working together for a brand new day as is 
mentioned here in the Throne Speech. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan elect a 
government to a minority situation that it requires some 
rethinking and some new thinking and new ways of governing. 
And I’m pleased that this Throne Speech mentioned several 
new things that we, certainly in the time that I’ve been here, 
have not done before. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, towards the end of the Throne 
Speech there is a commitment to set up several committees, 
all-party committees. One was put into place today, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was an all-party legislative committee to deal 
with the sexual abuse of children through prostitution. There’s 
another one that was put in place a day before or two days 
before, Mr. Speaker. It’s an all-party committee on tobacco 
control in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a permanent body being set up to review 
our utility rates, and another thing which was . . . formed part of 
a question period today, and that is a full and independent 
review of SGI’s no fault insurance. 
 
Some new things, Mr. Speaker, new ways of looking at things, 
new ways of involving members. And when you put together 
the membership on those committees, I think you will see 20 
additional private members on these committees who will now 
have direct influence on some of . . . or more direct influence 
and responsibility for the governance on certain laws within this 
province of Saskatchewan. And I think that’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan elected him for and I’m glad to see him move in 
this direction. 
 
And I close, Mr. Speaker, then by quoting from the Throne 
Speech paragraph on the very last page. It says this: 
 

The people told us on September 16th to set aside the 
rancour and discord of the election just past; to stop 
shouting at each other and past each other; and to work 
together to better serve the people who elected this 
Legislature. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that statement is worth repeating more than 
once. It’s a good reminder, I think, to all of us sitting on both 
sides of the House, a good guideline as we get into further 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

debates in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, in through the term of 
office. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to rise in the Assembly again 
after the provincial election held on September 16, and to speak 
on behalf of the people of Canora-Pelly. But more importantly, 
to speak on behalf of all the people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to begin by congratulating all members in this Assembly. 
I know that of course at the moment we have 56 out of 58 
members present here in the Assembly. But I want to 
congratulate each and every one of those 56 for their election or 
their re-election. And I know that it’s a trust that has been 
placed in our hands and it’s an honour that I think each and 
every one of us holds very, very dear to our hearts. 
 
I want to especially congratulate the members sitting on my 
side of the House. Mr. Speaker, we have 25 members who have 
been elected for not the first time under the Saskatchewan Party 
banner because that honour is held by my colleague from 
Cypress Hills who actually was elected back three months 
before the election as the first elected member of the 
Saskatchewan Party. But now, Mr. Speaker, we have 25. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Twenty-five members who have been told by 
the people in their constituencies: we heard you; we heard you 
speak during the campaign; we liked what we saw in your 
platform; and we believe that we must do something different in 
this province. And as a result, the Saskatchewan Party picked 
up 40 per cent of the popular vote, Mr. Speaker — more than 
any other political party in this last election. 
 
And I think that . . . that’s a message that the people have 
delivered not only to us, Mr. Speaker, but to the government 
opposite. They said to the government opposite that their efforts 
over the last eight years — or maybe, Mr. Speaker, a better term 
would be their lack of effort over the last eight years — was not 
something that they supported, that they wanted to see a 
change. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, that is what the 
Saskatchewan Party would like to see happen — change to 
improve the position of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, as the campaign was called, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
each and every one of us back on August 19 was at some other 
function or doing something different than actually preparing 
for an election. And I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I heard 
throughout the campaigning that farmers were not pleased with 
the calling of the election. 
 
I recall travelling to many farmers’ yards and the very first 
thing that a farmer would indicate to me was: why were we 
having an election in the province of Saskatchewan for the first 
time ever in the month of September? They couldn’t understand 
that. They felt that the government was indeed slapping them in 
the face by calling an election for September. And there was not 

a lot of respect for the Premier. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the one person who I think was . . . 
was the most, most concerned and most upset with the calling 
of the election was indeed my wife. And I’ll have to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that on August 19 my family was headed to a 
family wedding in British Columbia, in the Shuswaps, Mr. 
Speaker — our first opportunity to attend my niece’s wedding. 
And you know what happened, Mr. Speaker. That very day 
when the Premier called the election, my daughter continued on 
to that family wedding, and my wife and I travelled back to the 
Canora/Pelly constituency to begin that campaign. And while I 
understood and had to get to work, as far as the campaign, I 
don’t think my wife still has forgiven the Premier for calling 
that election and missing out on that . . . on that family 
wedding. 
 
But you know, during the campaign, Mr. Speaker, one other 
thing came through very, very clear . . . in that in the last 
election, you know, Mr. Speaker, I had the distinction as being 
the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) elected with 
the smallest plurality. My margin of victory back in 1995 was 
50 votes. Not a large landslide but in some of the coffee shops, 
Mr. Speaker, they did indeed refer to that as a landslide victory. 
But you know what happened in this last election, Mr. Speaker, 
has given me a great deal of confidence in representing the 
people of Canora-Pelly, for after the election that we just had on 
September 16, my margin of victory is in excess of 2,300 votes. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I want to thank those people of Canora-Pelly, 
who indeed saw that I would represent them to the best of my 
ability, that I would represent all the people in my constituency. 
And that indeed the Saskatchewan Party, and of course all the 
members now that you see sitting with me, would be able to 
represent their best interests much better than the government 
that you see opposite. 
 
I want to thank all the volunteers, all the people who were 
affected in the campaign and who helped. But most importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t only want to thank those people who voted 
for me. I want to thank the 7,815 people who came out to vote. 
Because for the first time we had an election in September in 
this province, and I believe that the government was feeling — 
or maybe the Premier was feeling — that people wouldn’t turn 
out to vote and indeed that was going to assist the NDP in 
returning to power. But over 7,800 people came out in 
Canora-Pelly to elect me as a representative of the 
Saskatchewan Party and for that I am extremely grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank my family. I’ve mentioned my 
wife Gail. I think as we sit in this legislature and I’m sure its 
true for yourself who is a family member, to understand that to 
do the job of the position that we hold, to be a member of the 
Legislative Assembly, I think the most effect is felt by our 
families. And I know for people that live a greater distance 
away from Regina than what I do, I’m sure that the effect on the 
family is even greater than mine. But I want to publicly thank 
my wife Gail and my son Bryce and my daughter Lindsay for 
helping, to be there for me, to support me, to encourage me, and 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

to do all the things that are necessary to keep the family home 
back in Invermay functioning. 
 
You know, in the last number of days, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard a lot about the election platforms: the platform of the 
NDP Party, the platform of the Liberal Party and the 
Saskatchewan Party. I think what we saw on September 16, Mr. 
Speaker, was the election of a minority government. And the 
very first thing I heard about that election result, Mr. Speaker, 
was that people felt that there was an opportunity to have 
different things done, to have maybe some better things done. 
 
And I recall immediately on September 17 or 18 where people 
felt that the Liberals were dealt an extremely positive card . . . 
that that card would be the balance of power in a minority 
government. And there were quotations in the paper that said 
that this was a great position to be in. I had people phone me 
and said: you know, this might be something good for the 
province, how will you react? And I said: well it will be 
something that we’re going to watch and we’re going to be able 
to assist in developing the kinds of things that we stood for 
during the election and the kinds of things that we need in this 
province to see it grow. 
 
(1515) 
 
But you know what we’ve heard lately is that the promises 
made in the Liberal platform were just political rhetoric. They 
were put into a platform to encourage the people to vote for 
something like that. And in the end all it was was rhetoric. It 
wasn’t there to develop policies., It wasn’t there to provide 
better opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. It was 
there to get elected. And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the 
agreement — the agreement signed between the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan and the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan — I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, also that a 
number of students in my constituency have contacted me for 
the copies of this document because they’re doing class 
projects. They’ve found this so interesting — and they’re not 
even of eligible voting age yet — but they found this to be so 
interesting that they want to understand it. 
 
Two of the paragraphs or two of the points, Mr. Speaker, in this 
document when people read it, they’ve highlighted them for me. 
And they say: how is this going to work; this is an NDP 
government, this isn’t a coalition. And those two points — and I 
quote directly from page 3 of the document, Mr. Speaker. Point 
number 1 says: 
 

To adhere to the position of the Government on all matters 
before the Legislative Assembly. 

 
That’s what the two parties have agreed to. So is there two 
entities here, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think so. People are saying 
this is the NDP; this is definitely the NDP. 
 
Second paragraph says: 
 

That the Members of the Legislative Assembly, who are 
Members of the Parties to this Agreement, shall not 
support policies advanced by a political party that is not a 
Party to this Agreement, or by a private member . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard so much of this brand new day. 
About doing things differently. What this is saying, Mr. 
Speaker, is that for any private member, even if it’s the best 
idea to come along, it cannot be supported by any one of those 
members who have signed their name to this agreement. 
 
That sounds like old-time politics. You know and, Mr. Speaker, 
for two years, I listened to the Premier and the Deputy Premier 
talk about a deal in the dead of night. And that finger continued 
to wag over the last two years about the deal in the dead of 
night. 
 
Well, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is worse that a deal in 
the dead of night. This is taking away from the people of 
Saskatchewan. The people who voted for a minority 
government, and in the end, a deal was cooked in the 
backrooms. A deal was cooked to not only put two members 
who were elected as opposition members, but to put them into 
cabinet. I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan want that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I dare say, the very next election, there will be a 
change. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we see in the Throne 
Speech have highlighted some of the things that have been 
missing for the last three or four years. One of the things that 
we really were surprised at, and my colleague the critic for 
Highways mentioned that, that in the Throne Speech, we don’t 
see a mention, hardly a mention of highways. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, is it little wonder that the provincial 
infrastructure program with the federal Department of 
Highways or the federal Transportation department says that the 
funding for Saskatchewan over a three-year period for highway 
improvements is zero, zero, and zero. 
 
That’s the kind of respect that the federal government has given 
us. That shows the people of Saskatchewan that we haven’t 
been doing our job as a government. That this government has 
not been in Ottawa to get better results for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that also leads to last week, Mr. Speaker. We had an 
excellent presentation here on agriculture. We had our 
agricultural minister attending a very, very important meeting in 
Ottawa. 
 
But you know, when the Finance ministers of all the provinces 
of Saskatchewan were meeting together with Paul Martin as the 
federal Finance minister, where was the Saskatchewan Finance 
minister? Sitting here in the legislature and touring around 
Regina. At a time, Mr. Speaker, when we should have been 
sending the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, and the 
Minister of Finance. We’re trying to tell Paul Martin and the 
Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Chrétien, that this is important. 
That we want a billion dollars worth of assistance. And when 
the Finance ministers meet, Saskatchewan Finance minister 
chooses to send a deputy minister. 
 
I don’t think that’s the kind of picture that we want to have 
happen in Ottawa. We want the federal government to consider 
a billion dollars. We want it to recognize it that this is the most 
important thing that’s happening here in Saskatchewan. And 
our government chose not to do that. 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to a couple of areas that have 
affected people in my constituency. And the first one I want to 
talk about is the area of health. Over the last four years, Mr. 
Speaker, I think by far the largest number of concerns that have 
come into my office, either in Canora-Pelly or my home or here 
in the Legislative Chamber, have been concerns about health 
care. 
 
You know, and I listened last week when, I think it’s the 
member for Regina Northeast said, during campaigning, he 
couldn’t find a name. He couldn’t find anyone who had a 
problem in the health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will not mention those names today but I 
can provide for the minister the exact names of the very 
individuals that I’m talking to you about today. And they’re not 
. . . this is just the tip of the iceberg. 
 
But I do want to tell him about a few concerns because we have 
heard about waiting lists. We have heard about the fact that the 
level 3 and 4 homes across this province have limited spaces 
and there is a greater need. We have heard that the funding, of 
course, for level 1 and 2 has been totally eliminated and there 
was a need for that kind of care for level 1 and 2 patients. 
 
But I want to specifically deal with individuals. I want to tell 
you about a gentleman, Mr. Speaker, from the community of 
Foam Lake, an elderly gentleman who was placed on the hip 
replacement surgery waiting list on August 19, 1998. And he 
waited on that list and he contacted my office late last fall. His 
son contacted my office. And I phoned his doctor and I phoned 
people in Saskatoon to encourage them to move this person 
forward because his condition was deteriorating and that there 
were other complications developing. 
 
This continued throughout the entire winter, Mr. Speaker. And 
when this House adjourned back in May, I contacted the 
gentleman and he still had not had his surgery. The patient was 
in a great deal of pain; there were other complications, and still 
no surgery. 
 
I talked to the individual this morning, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
happy to report that his surgery took place on November 26 of 
1999 — 15 months after being placed on that waiting list. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? That individual, 
according to his son-in-law is . . . emotionally he is, he’s feeling 
great. He’s showing tremendous signs of recovery. And all that 
the family wonders is: why did it take 15 months? This man 
was in pain already for the last eight, nine, ten months, and it 
took until November 26. This cannot be something that I’m sure 
the government opposite or any one condones. And it has to be 
rectified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you about another individual who had an 
emergency attack — a person living right here in Regina — and 
was taken to the Pasqua Hospital on a Wednesday evening, 
supposedly a gallbladder attack. But because it was such a 
serious attack and because there were no beds to be placed, the 
person remained in the observation bed in the emergency room. 
And I’m sure you’ve seen those — they’re very public areas — 
remained in that bed Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday. 
 

Not till Saturday evening was there a bed for the person to be 
moved upstairs. And then finally Sunday afternoon the 
gallbladder surgery takes place, and the gallbladder is removed. 
Four days of waiting in an observation bed while there is a 
waiting list for a room. Hardly acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other person I want to talk to you about is an individual in 
my constituency who, back in June of 1996, had a mild heart 
attack. And after a number of tests that took place over the year 
there was a conclusion that bypass surgery was needed. It was 
reconfirmed in September of 1998 that the person would require 
surgery and should be done as soon as possible — that’s 
September of 1998. In the spring of 1999, in June, in fact 
specifically June 22, an angiogram was done and said surgery is 
necessary and should be done as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that person was transferred from the Canora 
hospital to Regina on September 30 — pardon me — on 
September 30 for surgery on October 1. When the person 
arrived, Mr. Speaker, on September 30 by ambulance, they 
found out that indeed the operating room time had been booked 
and there was the ability for the surgeon to perform that 
surgery, but there wasn’t further bookings upstairs, and there 
was no bed available. 
 
So the individual waited basically on a stretcher, and thank 
goodness that the ambulance people waited as well. And then 
she was put back in the ambulance and she was taken back to 
Canora hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family members had already booked time from 
their employment to be here for their mother’s surgery. And the 
surgery is not held because there isn’t a communication 
between the operating room and the beds necessary for 
recovery. 
 
You know, what really also indicates how silly this is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the individual has been sent an ambulance bill 
for $1,072.50. And you know what also has happened, Mr. 
Speaker, since that surgery, which was supposed to be on 
October 1, 1999? The condition of the individual has worsened 
to the point now . . . where the doctor has concluded that 
surgery is not probably something that the patient will make it 
through. 
 
From 1997 to 1999, surgery is supposed to be done, and it 
doesn’t happen. The patient is transported at a cost of $1,072 
and sent back, because there was a communication breakdown. 
 
This is typical of the health system that we work in, Mr. 
Speaker. And for the member from Regina Northeast to stand in 
this House and say he can’t find anybody who has had a 
problem with the health care system, he better wake up to 
reality, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is that this is occurring all 
over the place. 
 
There are people that need specific surgeries and are not getting 
them. There are people who are sitting on waiting lists and 
further complications develop. This is not acceptable. And for 
the government to say that everything is fine and that thousands 
of people are using the health care system. Of course; what do 
they expect? But we are not moving in a direction to alleviate 
the concerns, Mr. Speaker. 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about education. I want to talk about 
education because, you know, a lot has happened in this area. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the lack of 
programs from this government, the member opposite has just 
highlighted something that doesn’t require money. It requires 
improved communication, it requires leadership — leadership 
that this government has not shown, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
this requires. 
 
You know, in education over the last number of years we’ve 
seen a tremendous amount of downloading, and we see many 
examples of how this has affected people. We see school 
closures. We see grade discontinuance. We see program 
eliminations. And on top of that now, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
seeing tax revolts. Because, Mr. Speaker, since this government 
took office in 1991, tremendous amounts of money has been 
taken out of the education sector. 
 
And I want to highlight some numbers, Mr. Speaker. Because 
when you take a look at the whole picture, I think it’s easy to 
understand why the public has already come to the point of 
understanding that the property tax is the only way that 
education is being delivered; that the government’s 
commitment to education has been totally decreased. 
 
(1530) 
 
In 1991, Mr. Speaker, the capital and operating money that this 
government provided to school boards was $452 million, a 
significant amount of money, Mr. Speaker — 452 million. Of 
that 452 million, Mr. Speaker, 70 million was in the area of 
capital. 
 
Along came the election of the NDP. And now we see that in 
’92 that number of 452 million was decreased to 436 million. 
And it continued to go down and down and down. This very 
year, very fiscal year that we’re in now, the total commitment 
for capital and operating is $416 million. That’s a drop, still a 
drop of 24 million from 1991. 
 
Now let’s look at capital. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, 70 
million in ’91 for capital; this year’s budget is 30 million, a 
decrease of $2 million from last year. 
 
Now everyone knows that operating costs, newly negotiated 
contracts, inflation, utility rate increases — all of those things 
that have happened over the last decade have driven education 
costs up. What has happened? All of that has been picked up by 
the people of Saskatchewan at the local level. 
 
You know, and having been a member of a school board and 
having been a teacher in the education system, we want to have 
a quality education system in this province. But it’s very, very 
difficult for school boards to try to balance their budget when 
all they’re getting is political rhetoric. 
 
Political rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. Because you know . . . I read 
with interest, I read the Throne Speech over and over again. 
And I looked at the section on education, and it says: 
 

My government will introduce a plan to place our K-12 . . . 
system on a sound . . . sustainable footing by, over time . . . 

 

That’s the words used, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, three years ago I heard that very same thing. It 
wasn’t quite the same words, over time. What it said back then 
was, as time permits. 
 
I’m sure you recall that phrase, Mr. Speaker, when the 
government said that the presentation from the school trustees 
association and the teachers’ federation and all of the people in 
Saskatchewan that said we’re funding education in entirely the 
wrong way; the government is not committing as much as it 
should. And the cabinet and the minister of Education said, we 
recognize that. We understand, and we’re going to, as time 
permits, move to change that. Political rhetoric for four years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other comment, it says that — and I mention the numbers 
in capital because it says, my government will provide financial 
support for school construction and renovation projects. It 
doesn’t say, will provide additional financial support. It doesn’t 
say it will provide financial support for every project. It says . . . 
will provide financial support. 
 
You know well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this year’s capital 
money is $2 million less than last year. Is the government 
providing financial support? Of course they are, but they’re not 
going to address the concerns that are out there in the province. 
There are hundreds of projects waiting to happen. But the 
government has, over time, backed totally out of funding those 
projects. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has happened in 
a very, very positively way in the Canora-Pelly constituency, 
and I believe that it is a positive move and I think that it showed 
that indeed the people were willing to look at another 
alternative — and that was an amalgamation of two school 
divisions. The Canora School Division and the Timberline 
School Division have amalgamated and have formed the 
Crystal Lakes School Division. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, many years ago before I entered this 
political life, we were part of that. I was part of that and we had 
the opportunity to meet with a number of other school divisions 
to look at a better delivery of services and a better way of 
ensuring that children received the most comprehensive 
education possible at the best possible dollar. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, what has happened in the Crystal 
Lakes School Division, is that even though amalgamation has 
taken place, as I mentioned this to the Education minister of the 
time, the difficulty in negotiating a new local agreement still 
hasn’t taken place. There is extreme difficulty in actually 
getting a new agreement in place. 
 
The areas on the borders of this new school division . . . those 
concerns have not been addressed because the government 
refused to provide leadership in addressing the boundary 
problems. So while the amalgamation concept is a good concept 
and is moving ahead, there are things that the government 
should have been involved with, could have been involved with, 
and chose not to. And as a result, we have bickering and we 
have problems that are occurring in those areas. 
 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn for a few moments to 
post-secondary education. And I observed with interest back 
during the campaign of the NDP promise and the Liberal 
promise for dealing with the ever increasing cost of a 
post-secondary education. It almost seemed like it was a 
bidding war. Somebody was going to provide a thousand 
dollars and somebody was going to provide a free year of 
education and on and on. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, what we have to really look at, 
that providing a scholarship of a thousand dollars is not the 
answer if you don’t provide any additional monies to the 
universities or the technical schools. Everyone understands that 
those costs of operating are real and if the university doesn’t 
receive any money, how will it balance. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, one of the sources of revenue 
for those institutions is tuition. So providing a thousand dollars 
as I had many students come up to me during the campaign 
said, when they looked at those plans, they said this is 
ludicrous. I’m going to get a thousand dollar scholarship and on 
the other side the university or the technical school is going to 
increase my tuition by $1,500. So who’s further ahead? 
 
What we have to see is we have to see a plan in place that 
shows our commitment, that shows our commitment to the 
publicly funded institutions that we do have, to ensure that that 
cost is at a specific amount. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, back a number of years ago — and I 
was surprised, it is a number of years ago — the Student 
Assistance Task Group Report, a public document that was 
delivered to then Minister Mitchell, Bob Mitchell received this 
document. It’s dated June 1997, and it recommends a number of 
things with dealing with student funding, with dealing with 
tuition fees, with dealing with students who of course have to 
travel to a new place from their homes to receive their 
education, hundreds of recommendations. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how many of these 
recommendations have been implemented. People are still 
waiting. They’re still waiting for a lot of good things that were 
recommended to happen. And I think the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education has to definitely take a look at this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a little bit of time on agriculture, 
something that of course is very, very important to the people of 
Canora-Pelly and to all of Saskatchewan. And I listened with 
interest to the member from Prince Albert Northcote talk about 
a real situation, and I think that is what we have to do more and 
more often, Mr. Speaker, especially when we look at what 
happened last Tuesday with the presentations made by 17 farm 
groups — excellent presentations talking about what is reality 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, not what someone in 
Toronto thinks or someone in Vancouver hears in the media, 
but what is real to the farmers and the people of this province. 
 
And you know I have a number letters from various groups and 
I have one from the Foam Lake Chamber of Commerce who 
state very emphatically in the letter: 
 

This is not a farm crisis; this is a Saskatchewan crisis. This 
is not a rural problem; it’s everyone’s problem. 

That’s the kind of effect that they see the agriculture crisis 
having. 
 
The example that the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
cited in his comments is a very real example, and I did the very 
same thing this morning. I phoned the elevator back in my 
home community and inquired, because you know I thought I 
do still farm one quarter of land even though I’ve rented my 
other property out. And from that one quarter of land, Mr. 
Speaker, I grew a crop of barley. And I thought I had grown a 
pretty decent crop this last year. It was 55 bushels more or less 
per acre. So I thought well I’ll find out from my elevator agent 
exactly what I would receive for that product grown. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How bad was it? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — It was really bad. You know today’s price on 
the open market for feed barley, Mr. Speaker, is $1.40 per 
bushel — 1.40 per bushel. At 55 bushels an acre, Mr. Speaker, 
that translates . . . If I sold my crop tomorrow, that would 
translate into $77 per acre. That’s what I would receive. 
 
You know over the last while I’ve kept an accurate record of 
exactly what it cost me to put that crop in, to ensure that it had 
insurance and sprayed, and all those kinds of things that the 
member identified. And while that member identified some 
other costs that were relevant, I did not include the freight costs 
because my price of $1.40 has already the freight deducted. But 
you know, Mr. Speaker, my costs, including taxes but not 
allowing anything for principal, my costs are $95 per acre. So if 
I sold my crop tomorrow, I will receive $77 per acre and my 
costs are 95. 
 
And I know the member from Prince Albert Northcote tried to 
make . . . or made that very same example. That’s what’s real, 
and I think that’s what we have to have more and more 
individuals do is to explain not only to people outside of 
Saskatchewan but also to some people who live here in 
Saskatchewan in the urban centres, to understand the dilemma 
and the problems that are facing our farm families. It’s not that 
our farmers aren’t working hard. It’s not that they’re not 
efficient. It’s not that they’re not incorporating the newest 
technologies. It’s the fact that the price, no matter how good a 
crop they grow, the value for that product will not enable them 
to even break even, never mind make a profit. 
 
So you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, if you took my one single 
example of one quarter of barley, if you expanded that to eight 
quarters or ten quarters, they’re not making any more money. 
You may be able to save a little bit on some of the efficiencies 
that I described, but not very much. You will still be losing 
somewhere between 15 and $20 per acre — no money set aside 
for the cost of living or providing for a family. That’s what is 
facing our farm family. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had, during the campaign and 
subsequent to the campaign, I’ve had the opportunity to talk to 
many people about what has happened in agriculture. And the 
best example that I can use is my own example, Mr. Speaker. I 
entered the teaching force in the early ’70s. And back then my 
salary was somewhere — and it’s a gross salary — of about 
$6,000. In 1972, a gross salary of $6,000. That same salary 
today, with in excess of 10 years of experience, that salary 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

would be $48,000, gross as well. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the farm example that I just described. 
In 1972 the price for a bushel of barley was about $1.40, the 
same price as the elevator agent quoted to me this morning, 
$1.40. Now if $6,000 was the correct salary for someone or any 
other starting individuals in 1972-73 and today they’re 
receiving 40, 45,000, which is a salary that is multiplied by 
seven or eight, if that is accurate in all of the other occupations, 
what happened to $1.40 per bushel for barley? That should be 
somewhere in the area of 6 or 7 or $8 a bushel. And that’s what 
is facing our farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s not only barley. You can look at the oats price today, 
Mr. Speaker. Do you know that oats today can be purchased for 
$1.01 a bushel? Many farmers grow an 80 or a 90 bushel an 
acre crop. And people who don’t understand farming hear 80 
bushel per acre production and they think, wow, that’s a 
tremendous amount of grain grown. And it is, but at $1.01? 
You’re receiving $80 per acre. Costs probably for growing oats 
— also in that area of 95 to $100 per acre. They’re losing 
money. 
 
And that’s what has to be dealt with very, very quickly. I think 
we have to look at a plan. We had the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program in Saskatchewan that was the 
revenue insurance program. And I think that’s what farmers are 
looking for. You have to be able to produce something at a cost. 
Everyone does that. Businesses look at the cost of production of 
a particular article, and then determine the price that they must 
charge to have a return on those costs. 
 
Farmers can’t do that. Farmers produce a product, and hope. 
And they’re losing hope, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure, as 
indicated by the member, we’re also going to be losing many, 
many farmers. 
 
A document that I received this morning, Mr. Speaker, is 
written by Rose Olfert and Jack Stabler and it’s a document of 
agrifood innovation Saskatchewan . And in this document . . . 
it’s relevant to the east central area, our area of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, where it talks about the economic restructuring 
necessary in east central region. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I want to quote one paragraph, Mr. Speaker, to help people 
understand what is happening in the agriculture sector. And this 
is a quotation, as I said, from this document by Olfert and 
Stabler . I quote: 
 

More recently as prices have fallen, it is clear that 
additional, major restructuring will be required, as the 
current situation is not sustainable. Although the price 
nature of these changes cannot be accurately predicted, the 
range of possibilities can be enumerated. Some 
combination of the various alternatives is likely. 

 
And here’s the alternatives, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A decrease in land values. Changing the type of production 
by moving to now relatively more profitable types of crops 
and rotations. Increasing farm size to realize economies of 

scale. Some conversion to forage and livestock. Exits from 
farming from the rural areas and from the region. More 
commuting. Businesses in small communities closing as 
they lose critical market size. Smaller communities 
declining more quickly. 

 
That’s a very depressing paragraph, Mr. Speaker, because when 
you start to look at those comments made and how these two 
people perceive the eastern side of the province dealing with the 
agriculture crisis, those are not things that I think businessmen 
want to see in our region. Those are things that farmers don’t 
want to see. But if we don’t address the concerns that we’re 
seeing, we’re going to see the kinds of things that are now 
starting to affect the non-agriculture community. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, I understand as early as last week IMCC 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) 
Ltd.) in Belle Plaine and Esterhazy has laid off dozens of 
workers; they’ve been let go because sales have declined and as 
a result, they have to restructure. That’s the kind of effect that I 
think we’re going to see beyond the agriculture community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few moments on a few, very 
specific things that are occurring in my constituency. I want to 
commend, first of all, I want to commend the council of the 
town of Canora. Canora is the largest community in my 
constituency and for a number of years they’ve struggled with 
the quality of water, the actual drinking water that the town 
residents consume. They have initiated a very large project — 
in excess of a million dollars — where they’re going to be able 
to have water piped in from a aquifer just out of Canora. And 
it’s moving along and it’s a matter of maybe . . . maybe it’s 
even occurred today, Mr. Speaker, but that system’s going to be 
up and running. 
 
But you know I want to highlight one of the concerns that the 
town officials raised with me. And the concern is that when 
they started this project a number of months ago, Mr. Speaker, 
they inquired with SaskTel about running a direct line from the 
wellhead to the town of Canora. And the reply was that SaskTel 
says, and I quote from a letter to myself dated November 22, 
1999, it says: “the price for such an installation at that time 
would have been $492.” And this was early in the spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since then we’ve had a revision in SaskTel 
regulations and controls. And on March 1, this new pricing 
policy came into effect, and this is again a quote from this letter 
and it says: 
 

Under this new policy, SaskTel charges $1,300 per mile 
for installations. The cost to provide a monitoring line to 
the Canora wellhead site, which is seven miles from the 
rate centre, is therefore $9,100, plus the standard $92 
network access fee, for a total of $9,192 plus taxes. 

 
Four hundred and ninety two this spring and now we’re at 
9,192. Well, my colleagues indicate that that possibly is 
inflation. What that is, is a disgrace for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Because now the people of the town of Canora, 
who looked at this project, who were encouraged by this 
project, suddenly are looking at an additional almost $9,000 bill 
because of a change in policy. 
 
So you know when we talk about how this government has 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

balanced this budget, it’s been balanced by doing things like 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The community of Foam Lake, Mr. Speaker, has had a number 
of concerns. And Foam Lake is a very vibrant community; a 
beautiful community hall that was done there by the people of 
the area. But their major concerns over the last while, Mr. 
Speaker, have centred in probably three areas. One is in the area 
of health care. And they’re very concerned that the Jubilee 
nursing home — which is a very fine facility — will have 11 
bed reduction at a time when a waiting list exists and there are 
six people waiting to be admitted into a level 3, 4 home — and 
we’re seeing bed reduction. And the people of that area just 
can’t quite understand that, Mr. Speaker, as to why you would 
be reducing beds when you have a waiting list. 
 
One of the other concerns that I have raised in this House 
before, Mr. Speaker — and it has not been dealt with — is the 
fact that the Fishing Lake, which is a body of water located 
north of Foam Lake, has had tremendous flooding occur in 
there. And in fact this last summer the estimate is somewhere 
between 100 and 125 cabins were unusable. But you know the 
economic spinoff of that, Mr. Speaker — and I fully didn’t 
understand that last year, with that many residences being 
unoccupied — it’s not for the people that actually live there, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the people that visit. It’s the people that come 
to those cabins with families to spend time with relatives or 
friends, and as a result they go to Foam Lake or they go to 
Wadena to do some shopping. And the tremendous economic 
loss has been felt by that entire area because of that flooding 
problem that has occurred, has occurred at Fishing Lake. 
 
So the people of that area, of that Foam Lake area, want to see 
something happen. They don’t want Sask Water to continue 
monitoring and studying and monitoring and studying, they 
want to see some action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the communities in my area is the town of 
Norquay. One of the changes made by this government, and 
highlighted by of course the fine work of the people at SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), was dealing 
with policing costs because policing costs have been a 
tremendous problem to many, many communities, especially 
those communities that were just over 500 people, and Norquay 
was one of those. They had a population of 502 people, and 
they paid tens of thousands of policing . . . of dollars in policing 
costs because they were just over 500. Neighbouring 
communities that has less than 500 didn’t pay any. 
 
So as a result, with the changes made by this government, we 
see a little more of a sharing of policing costs. There have been 
some other problems created, but on the whole we see that 
policing costs have been dealt with. 
 
Norquay was one of those initial places where a closure of a 
hospital occurred — one of those 52 original hospitals that 
closed — and that fear is still there, Mr. Speaker. The fear that 
indeed that health centre that exists right now, with one doctor 
providing that care, is not going to continue forever. And there 
is always concern in a community of 500 people that that health 
care facility be maintained. 
 
One of the concerns that they’ve raised, Mr. Speaker, though is 

how can communication be improved because there is a great 
deal of distance between facilities. And they have asked 
SaskTel to consider a cellular tower because that is an area that 
is not served currently by cellular telephone. And the response 
has been: well until we see a demand for it, we don’t think that 
that’s a possibility. Well how do you have demand if you don’t 
have a tower. You know, it’s the chicken and the egg kind of 
thing, Mr. Speaker. And the people of that area would like to 
see those kinds of things happen. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I could mention a lot of communities 
in my constituency who are very concerned about revenue 
sharing. Communities of Preeceville and Theodore and 
Invermay are concerned that this government has cut back on 
revenue sharing and as a result, communities have had to pass 
on additional costs to their taxpayers. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter whether you talk 
about Whitebeech, or whether you talk about West Bend in my 
constituency, everyone is dependent upon farming and 
agriculture. And we need to see this government take 
agriculture very, very seriously. We need to see that indeed 
we’ve pushed the federal government to ensure that there is 
assistance to our farmers and so that we can grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by indicating that it has been an 
honour, of course, to represent the people of Canora-Pelly and 
Saskatchewan over the last four years, and I hope to continue to 
be able to deal with the concerns that are brought forward to my 
office by every individual in Canora-Pelly. I’ve taken a look at 
the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and it is lacking. It is lacking 
very, very much and for that reason I will not support the 
Throne Speech, and I will be supporting the amendment put 
forward by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Before I do that, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, I want to, 
on behalf of my family, extend to all of my colleagues, and to 
all the people in Saskatchewan who may be watching today, a 
very Merry Christmas and all the best in the New Year, in the 
new millennium. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, and members of this House, 
first let me offer congratulations to all members, especially 
those who are participating in this debate for the first time. I 
have enjoyed listening to the maiden addresses of many of the 
members, Mr. Speaker, and trust that this is the first of many 
contributions that they will make to debate in this House and in 
public debate in the province generally. 
 
Listening to the members reminded me of my own introduction 
to this House. When I was being introduced to the Speaker as 
the member for North Battleford, proceedings were interrupted 
by one member from the other side who interrupted by yelling 
out, he’s only the temporary member, he’s the temporary 
interim member for North Battleford only. This shocked me 
because I had previously been on the North Battleford city 
council and nothing of this sort ever happened to interrupt our 
deliberations there. Well I think you know the sequel to the 
story. I’m back and the member who shouted that I’d be thrown 
out at the next election, is not. 
 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

But seriously, I now realize that the former member with the 
strong lungs was right. I am a temporary member. We are all 
temporary members. We are here for a brief time and must 
some day make way for other members and other voices. All 
we can hope is that our time here, however long or short, will 
be to the credit of ourselves, our constituencies, and our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’ve enjoyed, Mr. Speaker, the comments 
of many Saskatchewan Party MLAs to the effect that their good 
showing on September 16 shocked the pollsters and pundits. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the so-called political experts of this 
province have been unanimous and unrelenting in predicting 
my early death. My own theory is that if the day ever comes 
when the political commentators of Saskatchewan predict that I 
am headed for a landslide in North Battleford, that’s when I’ll 
know I’m all washed up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, no, 
the hon. members opposite say there’s no chance of me being 
all washed up in North Battleford. That is a very, very wise 
observation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — And as long as they keep attacking me 
for working too hard for the people of North Battleford, they’re 
certainly helping me, and I congratulate them for their efforts 
on my behalf. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, shortly after the September 16 vote, I 
accepted an offer to join the Government of Saskatchewan. In 
so doing, I became the first Liberal cabinet minister to be sworn 
into office in more than 30 years. 
 
Why did I do it? To understand that, one has to look at the 
options faced by my colleagues and myself. Well we could have 
simply defeated the government and triggered new elections. I 
don’t think the people of Saskatchewan wanted a new election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did not choose a minority legislature. The 
people of Saskatchewan chose a minority government. But it is 
up to us — now that we have been selected — to make this 
legislature work in the best way possible for the people of 
Saskatchewan. In my view, it would have been irresponsible to 
simply defeat the government and force new elections. 
 
(1600) 
 
We could have supported the government on a case-by-case 
basis. And I have to tell you in all honesty that this had 
considerable attraction for me. But I now realize that this would 
necessarily have resulted in early elections as well. 
 
As we have seen in this House in the past few days, the Liberals 
would have been inundated by the Saskatchewan Party and by 
the media with persistent demands that we defeat the 
government unless it could instantly produce a level of public 
services previously unknown this side of paradise. And 
furthermore, and furthermore, that those services all be financed 
with one-half the taxes and managed by one-quarter the number 
of civil servants. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — And I think the hon. member who just 
spoke before me I think did an excellent job of presenting a 
multi-million dollar shopping list that should be immediately 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan while cutting taxes in 
half. 
 
The Liberals, of course, could have supported the Saskatchewan 
Party and made the member for Rosetown-Biggar the premier. 
Well I have to, in all honesty, say that some of the people who 
voted for me would have preferred that. I respect those who 
would have liked to have seen the members opposite form the 
government of this province. I respect the view of those who 
would prefer a Saskatchewan Party government, but I do not 
share it. 
 
I accept that the reason for the display of the bad temper on the 
part of Saskatchewan Party MLAs during your election as 
Speaker last week is because they had hoped we would join 
with them. I thank the hon. members opposite for their kind 
invitations for us to join them but I think we all know that’s not 
where I belong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I will always regret that my 
former colleagues, whose friendship I appreciated when they 
were Liberals, decided to leave the Liberal Party and form a 
new party. I disagreed with their decision but I respected it. 
What is more difficult for me to accept is that after begging me 
to also leave the Liberal Party, they condemn me for joining the 
coalition, saying it is a betrayal of the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the Saskatchewan Party wanted 
me and you to betray the Liberal Party and sit with them. Now 
they claim to be upset because, in their view, we betrayed the 
Liberal Party. I don’t understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, they accuse us of having no 
political loyalty. They have even produced The Respect for 
Constituents Act, a tactic they think will embarrass us. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I refuse to be embarrassed over my record of 
loyalty by a group of men and women who have no more 
respect for political loyalty than an alley cat has for marriage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, whenever I get discouraged 
by accusations made against me about loyalty, I remember 
those noble and inspiring words of the hon. member for 
Melfort-Tisdale: I was elected as a Liberal; I will serve as a 
Liberal. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was elected as a Liberal and I am 
serving as a Liberal in the coalition Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I accept that 
members opposite are still stinging that they are not the 
government. However, for those members of the Saskatchewan 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

Party who still nurture the belief that they will be the 
government of this province any time soon, I have only this to 
say: Elvis has left the building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, may I, at this point, thank 
hon. members opposite for being so quiet and respectful; it’s 
my new colleagues I’m having a bit of difficulty with. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we could have stayed in opposition and 
promised to support the NDP, however I was unwilling to 
commit to support policies and budgets which had not yet been 
prepared and which I would not have a hand in preparing. There 
has been a lot of talk the last few days about: did something 
come from this party’s platform or that party’s platform. Mr. 
Speaker, this talk, we all know, is nonsense. Events have a habit 
of quickly overtaking any party platform. The challenges which 
face any government are rarely known at election time. All the 
people can do is to select men and women who can be trusted to 
make the proper decisions as the issues and challenges arise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — So, Mr. Speaker, I accepted the challenge 
to become part of this government, to be part of decision 
making, to bring my perspective to the table. I concede that the 
challenge of bringing light and reason to the NDP is a daunting 
task. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party is up to the 
challenge. 
 
It is true that by becoming a member of the government, I thus 
became bound by cabinet solidarity and confidentiality. 
However, the fundamental question remains: would I, would 
the Liberal Party have had more influence had we remained as a 
small third-party caucus? Would my constituents have been 
better served by my sitting in a tiny caucus in a legislature 
likely to implode at any moment? I don’t think so. Neither does 
my mechanic, Mr. Speaker. It was my mechanic who said to me 
recently, Jack, all this talk about youse guys having the balance 
of power, the way I figure it, you had a gun with one bullet in it. 
 
Another constituent of mine . . . Mr. Speaker, may I continue, 
please. Another constituent of mine whose views I respect, 
intervened for me when someone accused me of having placed 
the interests of my constituency and my province above those 
of the Liberal Party. We must remember, he said, that all 
political parties exist only as vehicles through which we attempt 
to serve the public interest. That statement hit me very hard 
because I think all of us who are partisans have to admit that we 
have been guilty of losing sight of that basic truth from time to 
time, and I was thankful for my friend to again remind me of it. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I regret cabinet 
confidentiality and I regret it for this reason — the people of 
Saskatchewan are not able to see the interaction and the 
chemistry of our cabinet. And I think that if they did, they 
would agree with me that there is mutual respect for all of the 
members of the cabinet, that all have the chance to honestly 
place their views before their colleagues. And what emerges, 
Mr. Speaker, is not her view or mine, this party’s or that 
party’s, but a new synthesis attempting to bring together the 
best ideas of all of the group. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well the hon. member for Canora-Pelly 
says 2 are always outnumbered by 17. And I say that’s why I 
regret, in a sense, that cabinet discussions are confidential. 
Because he isn’t able to see that it is not the math of 2 versus 
17, it is the math of 19 individual men and women all bringing 
their best ideas and their commitment to this province, to the 
cabinet table, and being shown respect by their colleagues. 
That’s the way the system is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I believe firmly — I believe 
firmly that the coalition is good for Saskatchewan and good for 
the Battlefords. If I did not believe this, I wouldn’t be here. If 
others wish to compare me unfavourably to Judas Iscariot, they 
can go right ahead. For myself, I haven’t lost an hour’s sleep 
over my decision to join the coalition; my conscience is clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hear some 
discussions about signs up in North Battleford. They’re chirping 
about signs in North Battleford and some people who frankly 
don’t agree with me. 
 
Well there are signs in North Battleford. One says, “For sale — 
Jack Hillson,” and a big sold across it. And another one says, 
“Stab in the back, Jack.” The media sitting in Regina says these 
signs are proofs that everybody in the Battlefords is mad. For 
once, they’re right. As the people of the Battlefords prepare for 
Christmas, they are angry at the defacement of our community 
with signs that are cheap and tasteless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, those signs demean not me, 
but the people who put them up. Those signs offend not me, but 
the people of the Battlefords. 
 
Well what of my personal priorities as a member of this House, 
and of this government. I said before the election that I wanted 
to work for a Saskatchewan where our young people will have 
open access to quality education and training, and where after 
getting that education, they could stay to live and work, and 
build their lives. 
 
I was committed to that goal before joining the coalition; I still 
am. I said that Saskatchewan is a province whose resources and 
people are second to none in this great country we call Canada. 
We do not need to feel inferior to our friends in Alberta or 
anyone else, no matter how many times the Saskatchewan Party 
tells us we ought to. 
 
We can stand proud for who we are, for what we are, for what 
we’ve accomplished, and for what we will accomplish as a 
province and as a people. I believed that before I became a 
cabinet minister; I believe that now. 
 
I said prior to the election that I believed it is the work of 
politics and politicians to try to bring us together as a people — 
rural and urban, men and women, Aboriginal and 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

non-Aboriginal. Politics is at its best when it reaches out to all 
individuals and groups, and it is at its worst when those seeking 
public office do so by attempting to drive a wedge between 
peoples. I said that before the election; I repeat it now. 
 
I said many times in this province that we cannot afford to have 
a taxation level far out of step with that of our neighbours if we 
wish to attract people and investment. Have my views changed 
since becoming a part of the government? They have not. 
 
(1615) 
 
I said many times in this House that we needed meaningful rate 
review for our Crown utilities. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting 
it. 
 
As an MLA I promised the people of the Battlefords that I 
would work for improved health care. I said I wanted the 
Battlefords Union Hospital to become a regional hospital with 
renal dialysis and CAT scan services. That is what I promised 
the people of North Battleford I would work for if they 
re-elected me. The promise stands. 
 
I said if I was re-elected I would redouble my efforts to improve 
the highway eastern entrance to North Battleford and to move 
quickly on the twinning of the Yellowhead highway. I said that 
the twinning of the Yellowhead must proceed along the existing 
route. 
 
My constituents, you see, Mr. Speaker, were very concerned 
because they knew the Saskatchewan Party wants the 
Yellowhead to bypass the Battlefords. In fact the mayor of 
Spiritwood, who is now a member of that caucus, got a council 
150 kilometres away from the Battlefords to pass a motion 
saying that the Yellowhead should bypass North Battleford. 
 
Well I promised, I promised the people of the Battlefords that 
the only way the Yellowhead would bypass North Battleford 
was if the bulldozers ran over my dead body. Well, tempting as 
that is for hon. members opposite, I say that was my 
commitment before the election; that is my commitment now. 
Fortunately, the twinning of the Yellowhead through North 
Battleford will have been long since finished before the next 
election, so I don’t think I’m going to have to worry about 
making good on my promise to allow Tory bulldozers to run 
over my dead body. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — The Saskatchewan Party, bent on its 
agenda of bypassing Saskatchewan’s most scenic community, 
will not get the chance they want to destroy our viability. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was quoted in the North Battleford 
News-Optimist recently . . . I was quoted in the North Battleford 
paper as saying that I knew a community which would be an 
excellent place for business to locate. The opposition got all 
upset. I was accused of pork-barrelling because I said the 
Battlefords was a good place for business to locate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not apologize. I was right. I do know a 
community with history, with natural beauty, with 
transportation links, and with hard-working, intelligent people. 

Why the Saskatchewan Party wants to bypass the Battlefords is 
to me unfathomable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I can only assume none of them have 
ever visited there. If they had, it would be the last community in 
the province they would want to bypass. It would be the last 
community they would object to having businesses locate in. 
 
Well, they may accuse me of working too hard for the 
Battlefords and being too interested in the Battlefords, but let 
me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is unlikely to be a charge that 
will ever be levelled against the MLA for Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, finally, Mr. Speaker, in the last election I 
said that Saskatchewan farmers are among the most efficient 
and productive in the world. On a level playing field, they can 
compete with producers from any country in the world, but they 
cannot be left to compete with the combined treasuries of the 
United States and the Europeon Community all on their own. 
 
I said it was unfortunate that for the first time in Saskatchewan 
history, an election was being held during harvest. I said the 
election call sent the wrong message. The NDP agrees with me. 
 
I was proud, Mr. Speaker, to be part of the farm trek to Ottawa 
last month. I was also proud to be part of our province’s 
delegation to the recent World Trade talks in Seattle. The 
importance of fair world trade is not diminished by the 
unfortunate incidents which took place there. Trade is vital to 
this province and its producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our farmers are so productive that if we were not 
able to export, then every man, woman, and child in this 
province would have to consume, every single day of the year, 
68 loaves of bread spread with 21 litres of canola margarine and 
washed down with 60 bottles of beer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last time, for the first 
time in our history, farm leaders addressed us from the floor of 
this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, allowing citizen delegations to 
come and address their elected leaders from the floor of the 
Assembly is common in the United States. It was something our 
new Lieutenant Governor advocated when she was a member of 
this House. I think the idea has merit. 
 
Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks 
about my new department. My career has been made easy by 
the support of those who have worked with me in my 
constituency office in North Battleford and now in my 
department. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has referred to the public servants 
of this province as scums. I do not share his views. He and his 
colleagues wonder why I haven’t fired half my department. Let 
them wonder. Like so much of what they think and say, the 
wheel is turning but the hamster is dead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s long been a passion of mine that we as a 
province must end the marginalization of our Aboriginal 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

peoples, both First Nations and Metis, if we are to have a 
prosperous and harmonious future. Assimilation is not the goal. 
However, we share a common land, we share a common 
destiny, and I am proud to be associated with one of the 
departments most engaged in the evolving new partnerships 
with Aboriginal people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Also as Intergovernmental minister, I am 
pleased with the initiatives by our federal government over the 
issue of clear question, clear majority. We must not allow this 
country to be lost in chaos, muddy confusion, and doublespeak. 
If there is ever to be another referendum in Quebec or 
elsewhere, the people must know they are voting on nothing 
less than whether or not they wish to remain Canadian. Those 
who say we should not be interested in matters such as national 
unity would do well to consider whether the breakup of this 
country would help them or hurt them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan will be 
delivering a more formal statement on the clarity legislation 
posted in Ottawa last week within the next few days. 
 
Finally, and I do mean it this time, I am pleased that my 
department is the one which liaises with the office of Lieutenant 
Governor. Last Monday was the last Speech from the Throne by 
His Honour Jack Wiebe. The next Speech from the Throne will 
be delivered by Her Honour Lynda Haverstock. I am proud to 
count both among my personal friends. This province is grateful 
for the work of both of these gracious and dedicated 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do I support the Speech from the Throne? You bet 
I do. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, and fellow members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I am very proud and honoured to rise in 
the House today and speak on behalf of the great people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency whom I consider it a 
privilege to serve. Today I’d especially like to thank the 
dedicated people in Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who 
believed in the Saskatchewan Party and who worked tirelessly 
to make the win on September 16 possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been many events and many people 
throughout my life that have played a significant part in making 
it possible for me to be here today. The person most responsible 
is a very special person in my life — my father, Darwin 
Lackey, who more than any one else gave me the background 
and drive to become involved in the political process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our home, politics was not an option — it was a 
way of life. My dad taught me the value of a strong work ethic 
and he taught me that next to faith in God the most important 
thing in life is to be free, and that to keep that freedom we must 
be willing to do our part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency has vast 
acres of farmland and ranchland. It encompasses the city of 
Weyburn and many small towns. There is a sense of community 

where people depend on one another and have a spirit of 
volunteerism and of working together for the common good. 
 
The people of Weyburn-Big Muddy are proud, hard-working, 
salt of the earth, prairie folk who believe in doing an honest 
day’s work and who ask only in return, to be able to keep a fair 
share of what they earn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our constituency has many natural wonders. 
Weyburn is situated in the heart of the Williston oil basin and 
the Weyburn oil field has more than 1,000 wells capable of 
production. The oil industry and the spinoff jobs it provides are 
vital to the progress of Weyburn and district. We have fertile 
farmlands and rolling grazing lands of the Big Muddy badlands, 
truly one of the great wonders of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new committee called the Deep South Economic 
Development, has been struck representing the towns and RMs 
in and around the Big Muddy with the purpose of enhancing the 
economy and promoting tourism in this area. I’d like to 
commend those enterprising people and wish them every 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the historic Saskatchewan hospital in its 
own picturesque grounds in the city of Weyburn. This facility 
has served our community well for many decades, often being 
used for various purposes, but its primary focus has always 
been health care. There is a concern that this structurally sound 
landmark will be closed and possibly demolished. My 
commitment to the people of Weyburn is that I will work with 
any and all groups, associations, or individuals that have ideas 
of how we can utilize the Saskatchewan hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a great need in southern Saskatchewan 
for an in-patient drug and alcohol treatment centre. The 
Saskatchewan hospital would be a perfect location for such a 
centre. The Weyburn Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse has 
been working and lobbying for some time because they 
recognize the value and need for in-patient care. I believe in 
their cause, and hopefully, by working together with the 
community, we can bring this valuable service to the city of 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency also 
proudly claims the first inland terminal built in 1976 by 
entrepreneurs who had foresight, determination, and who dared 
to make their dreams a reality. 
 
We are also the home of the Weyburn Red Wings, and one of 
our colleagues, Don McMorris, was once a proud member of 
this team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have another group of entrepreneurs in 
our constituency who too have a vision and a plan. But to date 
they have been denied the right to go ahead with their dream 
because the Government of Canada and the Government of 
Saskatchewan choose to support the Canadian Wheat Board, 
who have a monopoly in this province, instead of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan who want to start value-added businesses. 
 
The proponents of the prairie pasta plant are only asking for 
what a great many other farmers are asking for — the 
opportunity to sell their grain where they want, when they want, 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

and to whom they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — We have the most efficient, productive farmers 
in the world. Farmers who want the freedom to grow their 
crops, sell them for the best price, and ask nothing of 
government. Yet our proud farmers have been forced to beg on 
bended knee, not for a handout, but just for a fair price for their 
grain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this crisis has crept into every community and is 
rapidly spreading across Saskatchewan. As Christmas draws 
near, we think particularly of the families and of the children. 
No one seems to be left untouched by the devastation. 
 
But our farmers have had enough. And when you take enough 
away from people so that they feel they have nothing left to 
give, they will decide to get involved and to fight for their 
values, their principles, and their very way of life. 
 
And that is why we have seen farm rallies across the province 
and a growing number of tax revolt meetings. And that is why 
the Saskatchewan Party swept rural Saskatchewan on 
September 16. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The people in rural Saskatchewan wanted to 
send men and women to this legislature who believed in 
farming and who were determined to find a way to keep farm 
families on their farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last blow to our farming community came 
when the NDP called the election at harvest time, thinking that 
the farmers would stay in the field and not vote. The farmers in 
the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy and across this 
province said: if the NDP think I am not going to vote they are 
dead wrong. And the farmers kept their word and on election 
day they were lined up bright and early waiting to cast their 
ballots. 
 
On September 16, the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy spoke 
clearly of their frustration with this government and they were 
determined to be heard. The Radville rural poll, Saskatchewan 
Party 145 votes, the NDP 23; the Bengough poll, the 
Saskatchewan Party 105 votes, the NDP 9; the Big Beaver poll, 
the Saskatchewan Party 108 votes, the NDP 6. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is how the people of rural Saskatchewan felt 
about this government and they have every reason to because 
this government has systematically destroyed rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province voted on September 16 
for a chance. They voted for a chance to turn their province 
around because it is the people of this province who have the 
ideas, the energy, and the vision and it is this government that is 
standing in their way. 
 
This government has broken the will of people of Saskatchewan 

with ever-increasing taxation. They are driving our young 
people from the province because of high taxes and no jobs. 
This government is forcing seniors to leave their homes in 
smaller communities to move to the cities so they can have 
access to a doctor and a hospital. This government has allowed 
our highways to deteriorate to hazardous levels. They have 
off-loaded on municipal governments, and they refuse to 
address crime. This government has failed our farmers many 
times over, and now we have a situation where we have more 
people on welfare in Saskatchewan than we have farmers. 
 
The NDP has brought our health care system to a crisis level. 
Very few, if any, have been left untouched by the injustices, the 
lack of compassion, the waiting lists, the loss of doctors, the 
unacceptable levels of service. And let’s not forget about our 
nurses who are overworked, short-staffed, and stressed to the 
breaking point. Last spring this government vilified our nurses, 
and then used them and the sick and the elderly for their own 
political gain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to walk with the nurses on the picket 
line in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy because most 
nurses were out there not because of union issues, but because 
they believe in the people of this province and they care about 
their patients and about the level of service they can give them. 
 
The people of this province have become mere numbers in a 
game of budgets and beds. And in southern Saskatchewan, the 
closing of the Plains hospital tells more about this government’s 
mismanagement and how they have deceived the people than 
any other single issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are tired of an 
out-of-touch government who doesn’t know nor care what the 
peoples’ priorities are. This government has its own agenda and 
has refused to listen to the people. The people of Saskatchewan 
sent this message to the NDP on September 16 when more 
people voted for the Saskatchewan Party than either of the other 
two parties. But the NDP showed once again their disregard for 
the voice of the people and overturned the election with an 
underhanded, manipulative move. 
 
I’ve told you some things about the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, but there is one more thing they are known for and that 
is their long memories. And believe me, they will remember 
this the next time they have the opportunity to vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the constituency that I represent 
is the birthplace of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation). The majority of people in my constituency now 
realize that socialism does not work. It is a false philosophy that 
sounds good but leads only to failure and dependence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy are away 
ahead of this government and that is why they voted for the 
Saskatchewan Party. The people believe in the Saskatchewan 
Party because it is giving a voice to the majority of 
Saskatchewan voters who for years have been drowned out by a 
ruling minority. They are just ordinary people like you and I 
who for far too long have been ignored. 
 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

The people believe in the Saskatchewan Party because it is 
about common sense, good management, listening to the 
grassroots, and keeping your word. 
 
The people believe in the Saskatchewan Party because it is 
committed to quality health care system for all people, no 
matter where they live in this province. The Saskatchewan 
Party believes health care dollars should be put back into 
front-line service so that patients and their needs become the 
first priority. 
 
I believe in the Saskatchewan Party because it is committed to 
respecting our tax dollars. Most of us have been wisely told by 
a father or grandfather, look after the pennies and the dollars 
will look after themselves. The people of Saskatchewan deserve 
nothing less. 
 
Several years ago I heard Senator Gramm from Texas speaking 
on TV and he told the story of Dicky Flatt. I never forgot that 
story because it was so simple but so true and it tells what the 
Saskatchewan Party is really all about. I phoned Senator 
Gramm’s office and asked if he would give me permission to 
use his story. A short time later I received a copy of his story 
and permission to use it and so I’d like to tell you the story of 
Dicky Flatt in Senator Gramm’s words: 
 

The day I offered the Reagan Budget in the U.S. House, I 
was walking down the steps of the Capitol and a reporter 
came running up to me and said, “Congressman Gramm, in 
a 1,300-page budget how did you decide what programs 
ought to be cut and what programs ought to grow?” I 
thought for a minute and said, “I’d use the Dicky Flatt 
test.” And not being from Mexia, Texas, she didn’t know 
Dicky Flatt or the test, so I explained it to her. I said, “I 
looked at every program in the Federal budget, and then I 
tried to think of some real, honest-to-God, flesh-and-blood 
person who lives in my district, and that brought to mind a 
printer from Mexia named Dicky Flatt. And I thought 
about him because he works hard for a living.” 
 
Dicky Flatt and his wife were in business then with his . . . 
(mother and his father), his brother and brother’s wife. 
They were open ‘til 6 o’clock every week-night, and ‘til 5 
o’clock on Saturday. And whether you saw Dicky Flatt at 
the PTA or the Boy Scouts or the Presbyterian church, try 
as he did he never quite got that blue ink off the end of his 
fingers. 
 
And I said, I looked at every program, thought of Dicky 
Flatt, and asked a simple question: “Will the benefits to be 
derived by spending money on this program be worth 
taking the money away from Dicky Flatt to pay for it?” 
And let me tell you something: There are not a lot of 
programs that will stand up to that test. When we apply the 
Dicky Flatt test, there won’t be a deficit in the federal 
budget. In fact, when we apply the Dicky Flatt test, we’re 
going to be able to cut taxes for working families, rebuild 
our economy and the American dream in the process. We 
are going to let families spend their money instead of 
government. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Like Senator Gramm, the Saskatchewan Party 
believes people should have ownership over their lives, that 
they should have a reason to get up in the morning and press on 
to their dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a proud sixth generation Canadian. My great, 
great, great, great grandfather came from Ireland to fight in the 
War of 1812. At the end of the war, they were given a choice of 
passage back to Ireland or 100 acres of land in Ontario. He 
chose to stay and, in later years, his grandson made the trek 
west with many other pioneers and through hard work, 
determination, and unwavering will, they made a better way of 
life and built strong, vibrant communities. Mr. Speaker, we 
need to renew that spirit of enterprise in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A book that has inspired me to never give up and has shown me 
that one person can make a difference is a book by Cal Thomas 
entitled, The Things That Matter Most and I’d like to quote 
from that book now: 
 

The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. 
The redemption of a great nation can begin with a single 
and powerful decision by one ‘ordinary’ person that 
influences others to make similar decisions because they 
perceive how right and good that decision is. 
 
The hour may be late, but the choices remain for each of 
us, and the benefits to those who choose wisely will affect 
not only they themselves, but generations to come. 
 
The promises for the future, rooted in a new birth of 
spiritual, political, and economic freedom, can and must be 
kept. 
 
We owe it to those who have gone before. 
 
If we fail, we will be held accountable by those who are 
yet to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it took the courage of eight MLAs to take the first 
step. Many thousands quickly followed. And on September 16, 
over 160,000 people from all across the province joined in the 
march. The next time the people of Saskatchewan have the 
opportunity to vote, there will be a stampede. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I want you to listen closely and I think you will hear 
in the distance the sound of thundering hooves. And they are 
getting louder and they are getting closer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have 
come in out of the rain. They have caught a glimpse of a 
brighter future, a better tomorrow, and for a fleeting moment 
they have felt the sunshine on their face. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they are not going back — not now, not tomorrow, not ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment. And, Mr. Speaker, I would now make a 
superseding motion. I move, seconded by Glen Hart: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item 1 under the 
private members’ public Bills and orders. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:43 p.m. until 4:51 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas —24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays —29 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Kasperski Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Jones Yates Higgins 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Wartman Addley  
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a privilege to 
give my first address to the House seeing that I have such a full 
House to hear my address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — And I thank the members opposite for coming 
forward to hear the words that I have to say this afternoon. It is 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I would very 
much like to hear the member’s maiden speech, as I’m sure 
other members of the Assembly would, and it is a courtesy to 
the member. So I’d ask, please, order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you. It is indeed an honour and a privilege 
to represent the good people of Last Mountain-Touchwood, 
arriving with a long political awareness, and to have the people 
place their trust and confidence in me as their elected member 
of this Assembly. And for that, I thank them. 
 
Last Mountain-Touchwood is a rural constituency that lies in 
east central Saskatchewan, bounded on the south by the 
Qu’Appelle Valley, on the west by Last Mountain Lake, on the 
north by the Quill Lakes, and on the east by No. 35 Highway. 
Towns such as Cupar, Lipton, Southey, Strasbourg, Raymore, 

Kelliher, and Wynyard lie within the riding boundaries, with 
Wynyard being the largest with a population of approximately 
2,200 people. 
 
Agriculture is our major industry, Mr. Speaker. Most of our 
people are directly or indirectly affected by the devastation that 
is currently wreaking havoc on rural Saskatchewan. Is it any 
wonder then that of the witnesses that appeared before the 
Standing Committee of Agriculture last Tuesday, three of them 
came from Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency. 
 
There are a number of areas of concern that I would like to 
address today, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, agriculture is the 
most important industry in our constituency. We have a diverse 
mix of agricultural production in the constituency and it is a 
testament to the talents of our producers. Our unique location 
gives our producers the opportunity and the challenge to grow a 
wide variety of crops, and our producers have answered the 
challenge. 
 
Crops such as chickpeas, lentils, field peas, beans, herbs, and 
spices; specialty oil seeds such as soybeans and sunflower, are 
grown throughout the constituency. Our livestock production is 
a diverse mix of traditional enterprises, along with specialty 
production units of white-tail deer, bison, elk, and fallow deer. 
We also have a thriving poultry industry centred around the 
town of Wynyard which is home to the province’s only 
eviscerating plant. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that our farm managers have 
diversified and adopted the latest technology in order to be as 
efficient as possible. It is particularly irritating when I hear 
people say that farmers have to diversify and become more 
efficient. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is no industry 
in this country that could be profitable if forced to operate under 
current economic conditions that agriculture, particularly the 
grain and oil seed sector, operate under today. 
 
Answers must be found to solve both the long- and short-term 
problems. All possibilities and alternatives must be examined 
and nothing should be considered untouchable in our search to 
find these answers. 
 
All levels of government along with industry players must be 
part of the solution. We can no longer have the provincial 
government blame the federal government for inaction. As we 
heard last Tuesday from the farm groups, there are a number of 
things that this government can do to bring down production 
costs and improve the bottom line. 
 
It is time for this government to act. In spite of the doom and 
gloom, there are communities and individuals who are moving 
forward in making a better life in rural Saskatchewan. One such 
community is Kelliher who has worked for eight long years to 
raise money for a curling rink. Through tireless efforts by 
countless volunteers, they will be curling in Kelliher in the new 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — All of this money was raised by the local 
community with no outside help. The money spent in the local 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) in Kelliher is shipped to the 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

provincial coffers and none of it is returned. This has to be 
changed, whereby some of the VLT profits are returned for 
community projects such as rinks, halls, and other facilities, 
instead of merely swelling the government slush fund. 
 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, as all constituencies in this 
province, has a number of specially talented people and one of 
those people that I would like to mention this afternoon is a 
lady that works in . . . an artist, Ms. Jacquie Berting who 
practised the art of lamp work glass. Her best known creation is 
Glass Wheat Field, a salute to Canadian farmers, is made up of 
14,000 waist high glass wheat stocks, each individually hand 
cut and lamp worked. Her work has been shown across Canada 
and is the symbol of the hope dedicated to the farmers of 
Canada. 
 
It is people like Ms. Berting and her work that are often the 
only . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order. I recognize the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: —Please state your point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on the previous vote that 
was conducted, on the voice vote, clearly it was the opposition 
side that had the majority of the members in the House and the 
yeas clearly had the vote. I would ask that you review the 
circumstances and make a ruling to determine the exact 
procedures and rules on making the determination on a 
voice-count vote. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take that under consideration and come 
back with a ruling, if that would be okay, later on. It now being 
5 p.m., this House will recess until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 





 

 


