





























































Hansard: April 28, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 855 
 April 28, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan 
farmers. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of the farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Churchbridge and MacNutt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that will 
provide real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, in the petition are 
Langenburg, Wroxton and Calder. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present from citizens of Saskatchewan who would 
like to see very meaningful legislation put in place to prevent 
this child sexual abuse on the streets of Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to enact 
provincial legislation that would inject a stay-away order 
restraining anyone who interferes with the healing process 
of victims of child prostitution, anyone who threatens in 
any way the healing while it is taking place is subject to a 
large fine, and to provide police with the authority to 
search a place where they believe a child is being held by 
pimps and perpetrators of this crime for the purpose of 
engaging in child prostitution activities. 
 

The signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack 

and Oxbow, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of this province who are 
concerned about the terrible state of our highways. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe, reliable, and 
effective highway system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the good people from Melville, Yorkton, Killaly, and 
Fenwood have signed this petition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe highway system 
that meets their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from 
right across the province, including the areas of Willow 
Bunch, certainly Davidson, Craik, and all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned 
about the deplorable state of our highway system in this 
province. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come 
from communities of Rush Lake and Herbert as well as the 
city of Swift Current and the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with the 
colleagues in bringing forth petitions today regarding the poor 
state of Saskatchewan’s highways. The prayer reads: 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people that have signed the petitions are from 
Taber, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Swift Current, Shaunavon, 
Climax, Frontier, Ponteix, all the way over to Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an honour once again to rise on behalf of citizens who are 
committed to the appropriate education for some of our most 
vulnerable in the province. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide essential funding and ensure the delivery of 
scientifically proven, diagnostic assessment and 
programming for children with learning disabilities in 
order that they have access to an education that meets their 
needs and allows them to reach their full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition today, Mr. Speaker, 
are all from the fair city of Prince Albert. And I’m very pleased 
to present it on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order. Pursuant to 
rule 12(7) these petitions are hereby received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, we will recognize that we will 
be joined shortly by some award recipients of Aboriginal . . . 
Order, please. Order. We will be joined shortly by some award 
recipients of Aboriginal ancestry from our province. And when 
they join us, we will recognize them. 
 
I will ask the co-operation of the House. If they’re not able to 
join us before we move onto the next agenda item, then we will 
most conveniently return to introduction of guests at that time. 
 
With the co-operation of the House, the Chair would like to 
introduce nine visiting legislators who are here in the province 
of Saskatchewan from our neighbouring state, North Dakota. 
 
As hon. members will recognize, they’ve joined us earlier this 
day and will be with us for the next two days. They will be 
joining you in your caucus meetings, as well as engaged in 
private meetings on matters of personal concern to them, in 
which case they will be seeking to come to a greater 
understanding of the Saskatchewan perspective of those issues, 
as well as to develop some dialogue and common bonds in 

those areas. We will also recognize as well that they will join us 
this evening at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
annual meeting. 
 
And I would like to introduce them to you. They are all seated 
behind the bar. And I’d like to introduce them to you. I’ll ask 
them to stand as I introduce them, but if you would please 
reserve your welcome to them until we’ve introduced them all. 
 
Joining us is the Lieutenant Governor and President of the 
Senate, Rosemarie Myrdal. And also from the Senate of North 
Dakota, Senator Meyer Kinnoin and Senator Ken Solberg. 
From the House of Representatives, the Speaker of the House, 
Representative Francis Wald; and Representative Glen Froseth, 
Representative George Keiser, and Representative John Nelson. 
 
The delegation is joined as well by two officials who 
themselves are former members of the Houses of elected 
representatives in North Dakota, and we’re pleased as well to 
have join us Mr. Orlan Hanson, Clerk of the Agriculture 
Committee; and Mr. Clare Carlson, the Governor’s Legislative 
Liaison and Agriculture Policy Director. Hon. members, will 
you please extend a warm Saskatchewan welcome to these 
North Dakota legislators. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your west 
gallery I see an old friend up there today who is now employed 
by a wonderful institution of the Canadian Wheat Board, and I 
would like the Chamber today to welcome Tom Halpenny. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members in the 
Assembly a delightful young lady, Coreina Zaretski, who is 
seated right directly in front of Tom Halpenny. Coreina brought 
with her roughly 20 grade 11 and 12 students from O’Neill 
High in my constituency. Some are wondering why I single out 
Coreina. Coreina was a work practice student at my 
constituency office for six weeks, and this is in no small 
measure how I know she’s a delightful young lady and very, 
very competent. 
 
With the rest of the students there’s teachers Bill Allen and 
Curtis Kleisinger. And I’m looking forward to meeting with the 
entire group later on this day for pictures, refreshments, and an 
exchange of ideas and questions and answers. So please 
members join me in welcoming this great group from O’Neill 
High School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if I might be 
allowed to join you in your welcoming words on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus to the hon. members that are visiting here, the 
delegation visiting here from North Dakota. We look forward to 
meeting with them and having some meaningful dialogue with 
them. I welcome you here and look forward to meeting you 
personally. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly a number of 
guests seated in your gallery. And I’d ask members to just hold 
their appreciation until after I’ve introduced them. They are 
representatives from business, labour, and trainers who have 
worked hard to prepare the apprenticeship renewal legislation 
that we will be giving second reading to this afternoon. I would 
ask them to stand individually as I introduce them. 
 
First of all, Mr. Paul McLellan, who is the Vice-Chair of the 
Provincial Apprenticeship Board representing the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association — if you’d just remain standing. Mr. 
Ed Cowley, representing the Saskatchewan Provincial Building 
and Construction Trades Council. Mr. Gordon Forbes, 
representing the Saskatchewan Mining Association. Mr. Garth 
Ivey, representing the Canadian Federation of Labour, 
Saskatchewan Council. 
 
Ms. Valerie Overend, representing Saskatchewan Women in 
Trades and Technology. Mr. Vince Marcotte, representing the 
Mechanical Contractors Association of Saskatchewan. Mr. Bob 
Todd, representing the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. Mr. 
Al Parish, representing the Canadian Manufacturers 
Association. 
 
Mr. Mike Berkes, representing the Plumber Trade Advisory 
Board. Dr. Art Knight, of course, representing . . . as president 
of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology). Mr. Bob Guthrie, director of the Apprenticeable 
Trades Coordinating Group. Ms. Susan Pentelichuk, 
representing the Apprenticeship staff. Mr. Doug Muir, director 
of Apprenticeship and Trades Certification Unit. Mr. Wayne 
McElree, representing Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. 
 
I’d also like to recognize, Mr. Speaker, Mr. George Pellerin, the 
chairperson of the Provincial Apprenticeship Board 
representing the Saskatchewan Pipe Trades Association. 
Unfortunately George cannot be here due to a death in his 
family, but we want to extend many thanks to George for his 
leadership in this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and to everyone, I would ask to join with me in 
extending a warm welcome to our guests this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the members here this afternoon, I’d like to introduce a 
gentleman sitting in your gallery, Mr. Mike Fahey, a resident of 
the city of Moose Jaw, well known, well thought of in the city 
of Moose Jaw. He’s here today to view the proceedings of the 
House and to share with us some health care concerns. I’d ask 
everyone here to join with us in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also in your gallery, 
I’d like to introduce to all members a person who is no stranger 
to yourself, sir, that being in the person of Mr. Blair Klassen. 
Blair is a grade 12 student at Caronport High. Blair has been 
serving in a student placement in our constituency office and 
has served both our office and the people of Moose Jaw very 

well during that period of time. 
 
Beside Blair is another individual who has served the city of 
Moose Jaw very well for many years, that being Mr. Bob Piden, 
our constituency assistant. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome these two. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Well, hon. members, earlier today at 
Government House tribute was paid to Saskatchewan recipients 
of the National Aboriginal Achievement Awards and some of 
these recipients and their guests are with us in the Speaker’s 
Gallery this afternoon, and we want to recognize them in our 
legislative Chamber in our proceedings today. 
 
In just a moment I’ll invite the Minister of Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs, the Leader of the Opposition, and the 
Leader of the Third Party to make a few brief remarks. And 
then MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who 
represent the constituencies — that these recipients — in which 
they live will have opportunity to introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It has 
often been noted that Saskatchewan’s greatest resource is our 
people and no better proof can be given than the four people it 
is my honour to recognize in the legislature with us today, and 
five others who could not join us. 
 
These four outstanding individuals present with us are, and I’ll 
ask them to stand, and then they will stand again later. Dr. 
Howard Adams, Dr. Lillian Dyck, Theresa Stevenson, and 
Alika LaFontaine. They are the 1999 National Aboriginal 
Achievement Award winners who have come from 
Saskatchewan and who have made a difference in all of our 
lives and continue to contribute to this province. It was indeed a 
pleasure for me to host the luncheon today at Government 
House in their honour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The four recipients who could not join us today were Allen 
Sapp, the 1999 lifetime achievement recipient; Buffy Sainte 
Marie, the 1998 lifetime achievement recipient; Bryan Trottier, 
who was also recognized in 1998 for sports; Maria Campbell, 
the 1996 recipient for arts and culture; and Dr. Ahab Spence the 
1995 recipient for education. They will be forwarded their 
recognitions from the province later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
founded in 1993 by John Kim Bell recognize outstanding 
achievements by individuals of First Nations, Inuit, and Metis 
heritage. This year the awards ceremony was held in March at 
the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. 
 
For those of you who missed this spectacular event it will be 
broadcast to a national audience on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) on June 13. So I recommend you 
watch to learn more about these exceptional Canadians and 
these exceptional Saskatchewanians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also ask all members to join with me now 
in extending a warm welcome to our distinguished guests who 
will be shortly introduced by their individual MLAs. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the Minister of Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs in congratulating the four recipients who 
are with us today. 
 
My colleagues and I had the opportunity to attend the luncheon 
hosted by the minister where we heard tremendous 
accomplishments of those four individuals and of course the 
other five who are not able to be with us today. 
 
I want to congratulate each and every one of you on your 
accomplishments. As we heard today, there’s a tremendous 
need for mentors, for people that other individuals can admire 
and can look up to. And I think we have a classic example of 
that here today in our midst. 
 
I want to congratulate you on behalf of the official opposition, 
the Saskatchewan Party, and indeed on behalf of all people in 
Saskatchewan. You’ve done a great job. Well done. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of the Liberal caucus to those of the minister and the 
Leader of the Official Opposition. I just want to share with you 
the feeling of pride that we all feel, that I’m sure you must feel 
as well, and we want to share that pride with you. 
 
Congratulations to each and every one of you in your efforts on 
behalf of your communities, on behalf of this province, and as 
our leaders and people that we look forward to guiding us as we 
direct ourselves towards the future. 
 
Thank you. Congratulations again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
distinct pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, Dr. Howard Adams, 
the 1999 recipient of the National Aboriginal Achievement 
Awards for education. I ask the Assembly to give him another 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to urge that 
we don’t even think of labelling Alika LaFontaine. He was 
labelled some, oh, roughly a dozen years ago, as 
developmentally delayed. A few years later, he’s obviously 
proved his critics to be dead wrong on that. 
 
He’s actually now begun his first year of pre-med studies at the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. He arrived there after 
setting an academic record of his own that at 97 per cent, his 
mark in his school’s grade 12 native studies class was the 
highest ever recorded. And just for good measure he also 
chalked up a 92 per cent in biology. And that’s a course that 
will help him as he achieves his goal of becoming a cardiologist 
with an added speciality in cancer care. 
 

His award speaks for him, the 1998 Canada Youth Award, 
Canada Youth Award finalist, 1998 Rotary Club Service 
Award, and the same year, Sherwood Co-op Service Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. I won’t, other than simply to 
say that I’m about halfway through some of the achievements 
that Alika LaFontaine has had. And it is my distinct pleasure 
and honour to be the MLA that has the pleasure of not only 
introducing Alika LaFontaine, but to let everybody know that 
Alika LaFontaine really is the future of Saskatchewan. Please 
join me in welcoming Alika. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
truly blessed today and very, very moved to be afforded the 
opportunity to introduce to you, not only a neighbour but an 
exemplary Canadian, and to all of the members of the Assembly 
as well. And I ask Dr. Lillian Dyck to stand, please. 
 
Growing up in the Canadian West in the 1950s, one might say 
that Dr. Lillian Dyck had two significant challenges to face. 
Born to an Aboriginal mother, her father was Chinese — not 
exactly the easiest mix for the towns and villages of our 
province that she and her family moved throughout those years. 
They were poor and non-white. 
 
Lillian and her brother Winston, both members of the Gordon 
First Nation, found themselves placed in the slow room at their 
Swift Current school. What a mistake. A mistake however, that 
both overcame. A teacher, John Dyer, some of us most certainly 
know him well, took a special interest in both of them. He 
helped them excel and encouraged them to embark on 
university journeys, and they did. 
 
Years later a little girl is now a neuropsychiatrist, one of the few 
women in Canada and all the Aboriginal world to hold such a 
title. She has earned just about every degree the University of 
Saskatchewan offers, up to and including a Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy). The study of the brain simply appealed to her, she 
says modestly. 
 
Now a full professor at the University of Saskatchewan’s 
department of psychiatry, she is deeply into studies into 
Alzheimers and other diseases. Her academic publications in 
some of the world’s most learned journals are far too numerous 
to mention. 
 
She’s been honoured by the country’s House of Commons for 
her service as a role model to young girls and women 
considering careers in sciences. Dr. Dyck is a frequent speaker 
for Aboriginal young audiences and, as obvious today, a superb 
role model. 
 
Professor Lillian Eva Dyck is our medical pioneer, and she is 
also the 1999 National Aboriginal Achievement Award 
recipient in the category of science. 
 
Please give her a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

to members of this Assembly, it’s a pleasure again to introduce 
a wonderful lady who has done a lot for not only in this city, but 
certainly her community, Mrs. Theresa Stevenson. This lady is 
well-known for — and I’d ask her if she’d stand please — 
well-known for the program of Chili for Children. 
 
She’s been recognized before as a volunteer recognition award 
in this Assembly. And today we’re pleased, and I’m pleased, to 
present her as a recipient of the 1999 National Aboriginal 
Achievement Award for community development. 
 
Theresa is joined by her husband, and we welcome Bob as well. 
But, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in extending a special 
welcome to Mrs. Theresa Stevenson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
acknowledge the recipients. It is indeed, as an Aboriginal 
person, with great honour that I acknowledge a tremendous and 
outstanding level of achievement that each of you have been 
able to do. 
 
In Cree we say, Kinunaskomitinan Ki geechi guskeetanawau. 
 
We thank you. You have presented yourself with excellence. 
 
Haw egosi tape geechi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also join 
my colleagues in recognizing these fine Aboriginal folks. And I 
just wanted to add that the example and their perseverance, and 
certainly their intelligence and dedication to their cause and to 
their people is something that we all admire. I can say that as an 
Aboriginal member of this House that your continued support to 
the Native and the Aboriginal folks in general is very much 
appreciated and that you are now an inspiration to us all. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
welcome the Aboriginal Award recipients to the legislature. 
And in particular I want to welcome Howard Adams who used 
to teach in the College of Education when I was there; he taught 
philosophy of education, or ed. foundations. Howard then went 
on to teach at Berkeley and Howard has had an outstanding 
career as a professor of education not only in Canada but in the 
United States as well. 
 
And I also want to welcome Dr. Lillian Dyck, my former 
neighbour who lived right across the street from me. Lillian has 
been an outstanding contributor to women and science. What’s 
interesting about Dr. Dyck is that Dr. Dyck some time ago on 
the University of Saskatchewan campus, long before it was 
fashionable, was encouraging young girls and women to pursue 
the sciences. And I think that that should be acknowledged in 
this legislature this afternoon. So welcome to both of them. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to see Mr. LaFontaine dance and sing. 
He’s a creative young man. And the College of Medicine no 

doubt will be looking forward to him, and I hope he stays in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And Theresa Stevenson who has provided thousands of meals 
for Aboriginal children in the city of Regina is also welcomed 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, today is a day that we set aside as a 
day of mourning for workers that are killed or injured on the job 
in the past year. The day of remembrance of course began here 
with a private member’s motion that you yourself moved, sir, 
and now the day of mourning is observed right across our great 
country. 
 
In one sense it is a sad and an odd day, because today we’re 
commemorating our failure — our failure as individual 
employees, as employers, as legislators, and as a society. 
 
In Saskatchewan we failed 27 times last year, Mr. Speaker — 
27 workers lost their lives on the job because something went 
wrong that should not have. The consequences are tragic, not 
only for those 27 but for the families and the friends of those 27 
who’ve had their lives suddenly and irrevocably fractured. 
 
It’s little comfort to know that this year’s number is seven less 
than last year’s, because last year was five more than the year 
before. 
 
In a perfect society, Mr. Speaker, we would observe this day 
right out of existence. That we have not yet done so is a stain on 
our collective conscience. 
 
In a few moments, when the minister reads the names of those 
avoidably taken from us, let us remember them by preventing 
others from following. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the official opposition to as well just pause to 
remember and extend condolences to the families who’ve been 
affected as a result of workplace tragedies and accidents that 
this past year have taken the lives of a number of individuals. 
Certainly to those families, that’s a tragic and traumatic event. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I believe that in this Assembly, while we as 
elected members endeavour to bring forward regulations and 
guidelines that would bring some safety to the workplace, 
there’s no doubt that the workplace itself, as well as the owners 
and the managers, all in themselves, make every effort they can 
to ensure that they have a safe . . . the employees have a safe 
environment to work in. 
 
And while we do everything we can to ensure that, the 
unfortunate reality is that we sometimes cannot prevent some of 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

the tragedies. The least we can do is stand up and acknowledge 
the efforts that are being done and extend our condolences to 
those who are affected, and hope that we can build a better 
workplace in the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
add our words on behalf of the Liberal caucus to this sad day 
that we recognize here today in this great province of ours. 
Today honouring the memories of the 27 workers who lost their 
lives in the workplace. Today, Mr. Speaker, we mourn those 
who died, as well as those . . . we remember those who are also 
injured on the job sites. These were all preventable losses. 
 
We must remember not only on April 28 but also through the 
year, that we as a province must put people first — the health 
and well-being of our number one resource, the great people of 
this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. We urge the 
government to continue to work with labour and employers to 
build the safest possible province for the people of 
Saskatchewan to live and work in. 
 
And I’d also like to express on behalf of my colleagues, sincere 
condolences to those who have lost loved ones. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Forest Industry Expansion in Prince Albert 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, the 
Premier, the Minister of Economic Development, the Minister 
of Environment, and the Minister of Northern Affairs made a 
well received announcement about the expansion of our forest 
industry. 
 
This announcement is good news indeed for Saskatchewan and 
particularly for people in my constituency in Prince Albert. Ten 
thousand jobs, $850 million of investment — those are not 
numbers to sneeze at. Or more dramatically, Mr. Speaker, those 
are not numbers at which not to sneeze. 
 
But don’t take my word for it. Let me quote from a news 
release by the Prince Albert Regional Economic Development 
Alliance. An alliance of the P.A. (Prince Albert) city, the P.A. 
Chamber of Commerce, the P.A. REDA (regional economic 
development authority) and the Prince Albert and District 
Community Futures Development Corporation. 
 
Economic alliance Chair, Gerry Stroshein, said, I quote: 
 

With the creation of 10,000 new jobs, we are looking at a 
very vibrant economy for the northern half of the province 
for years to come. The alliance, he said, is even more 
enthusiastic about the announcement of a forestry centre of 
excellence in Prince Albert. 
 

A centre which will bring industry, academia, and government 
together to lead in research, development, and training for our 

expanding forest and wood product industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who make up the P.A. alliance are 
cautious, careful people. They are not enthusiastic without good 
cause, and here they have very good cause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Birth of Hannah Rae Mandryk 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take this opportunity to acknowledge that Saskatchewan’s 
population drain slowed slightly yesterday with the birth of 
Hannah Rae Mandryk, daughter of a gentleman who looks 
down on us every day from the press gallery, Mr. Murray 
Mandryk. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while Murray is a brand-new father, which I 
know can be a nerve-racking experience for anyone, I’m sure he 
feels well qualified to look after a young child after watching 
the antics of question period in this legislature for so many 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also point out that even at this young age 
the youngest Mandryk shares something with most of the 
people of Saskatchewan — she’s never read her father’s column 
either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness I’m sure all members of this 
House join with me in congratulating Murray and Shawna 
Mandryk for the blessing they have received and in wishing that 
health and happiness follow Hannah throughout her life. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kyle Small Business Loans Association 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday I 
had the privilege to celebrate a great success in Kyle. 
 
Kyle is an energetic community that’s previously demonstrated 
its success firstly through agriculture, more recently through its 
work with the provincial government in establishing the 
Saskatchewan Landing marina and attracting fisherman from 
both Canada and the United States to their annual Saskatchewan 
Landing walleye tournament, and on Monday through the 
achievements of the Kyle Small Business Loans Association. 
The Kyle Small Business Loans Association has created 41 jobs 
with the help of the Small Business Loans program. 
 
Yesterday I had the honour of presenting John Noble, the 
chairperson of the Kyle Small Business Loans Association, with 
a certificate recognizing this achievement. Local businesses 
helped by the SBLA include home improvement operations, 
food service ventures, and various retail businesses. 
 
I’m very proud of the Kyle area businesses that have helped 
create 41 jobs, adding to the 12,800 jobs created province-wide 
by the local SBLAs. This job creation is an excellent reflection 
of the Saskatchewan spirit of co-operation. It is just another 
example of Saskatchewan’s rural economic strength which 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

continues to grow. 
 
Congratulations to John Noble and the Kyle Small Business 
Loans Association for their efforts to help build Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spring Farm Safety Campaign 
 

Mr. Langford: — Today I am happy to tell members about the 
new partnership between SaskPower and the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council. This morning the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) announced 
the partnership will help build awareness of farm safety issues. 
 
Radio announcements, group presentations, and TV messages 
will remind farmers and farm families about safe farming 
practices. 
 
SaskPower will continue to work with the safety council to 
promote safe working conditions. The “Come Home Safe 
Tonight” message will also be used again this year. I too, would 
like to encourage farm safety for the upcoming season, and 
would like to congratulate SaskPower and the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council on their new partnership. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Sweater Recycling Program 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we approach the 
end of this month and move into the warm days of May, today 
seems a good time to recognize a significant and successful 
community program of one of our Crown corporations. After all 
if the program is recognized in Conrad Black’s national 
newspaper it is worth at least 90 seconds of our time. 
 
Yesterday’s National Post section on corporate social 
responsibility was prepared with the help of The Conference 
Board of Canada, a section that highlights the most outstanding 
companies in Canada in supporting their communities. 
 
On page 1 is a picture of SaskEnergy employees and their 
sweater recycling program. This program, Mr. Speaker, takes 
the off-hour time of over 200 SaskEnergy employees who work 
with more than 100 schools and community organizations. This 
year they collected 65,000 sweaters, more than triple the 
previous record. These sweaters are distributed around the 
province where they are needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations and their employees serve 
us in many ways in the marketplace and in the community. 
They are true leaders, and I join The Conference Board of 
Canada and the National Post in recognizing this one unique 
SaskEnergy program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Well, Mr. Minister, 
it finally happened. We finally found a farmer who qualifies for 
your AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. 
Robert Olson of Quill Lake filled out the forms and he qualified 
for assistance under AIDA. The problem is AIDA is only 
sending out 50 per cent of the cheque right now because 
apparently the federal-provincial agreements have not been 
signed. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that you have not yet signed the 
federal-provincial AIDA agreement which means the few 
farmers who do qualify are only going to get half of their 
money now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
federal/provincial . . . the technical signing . . . (inaudible) . . . 
been done for any of the provinces so that’s . . . we’re no where 
different than anybody else. 
 
And I know the member likes to blame the provincial 
government for this program. But I’ll tell you what the member 
doesn’t tell you. The member doesn’t tell you that the programs 
that he support cut $320 million of transportation subsidy, cut 
$80 million, $80 million of safety net money. It cut $105 
million through the deregulation promotion. It cut $125 million 
dollars from the two-price wheat system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we had the programs that that member 
advocated to cut — and succeeded — we wouldn’t need AIDA 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish just once the Minister of Agriculture would quit living in 
the ’30s, get with the ’90s and get behind the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, if you were actively trying to 
renegotiate this dismal program, it might make sense that you 
haven’t signed on the dotted line yet. But you haven’t been part 
of the negotiations since day one. You sat on the sidelines while 
Ottawa designed a program that wouldn’t work for 
Saskatchewan farmers, and now the few farmers who do qualify 
are only going to get 50 per cent of their cheque because Ottawa 
doesn’t know if you are in or out. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do? Do you have any idea 
how to deal with this farm crisis? Are you trying to renegotiate 
this program? Or are you just going to live with this dismal 
program? 
 
What are you going to do to help Saskatchewan farmers 
through this crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, what the member is trying 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

to do is say that this government doesn’t support the 
Saskatchewan farmers. Well let me tell them something. 
Saskatchewan, this government uses more taxpayers’ dollars 
per capital for agriculture than any other province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We use, Mr. Speaker, we support 
agriculture to the tune of $310 — $310 per capita. Our next 
closest is Alberta at 139. We’re four and a half times the 
average of all the Canadian provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that party leader has sat in the federal House in 
1995 when the federal Liberals cut out $250 million from 
agriculture. And the next year he advocated more cuts — more 
cuts. 
 
Now I want him and his leader to explain to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan why they promote that. Why in their policy 
manual they say no support to agriculture and yet they stand in 
this House day after day accusing us of not supporting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, shame, shame on our leader. He wanted to cut down 
the bureaucracy. He wanted to cut the bureaucracy down, 
something that your government couldn’t understand. You’d 
rather spend the money on bureaucracy instead of giving it to 
the farmers who really need it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, let’s just review your record 
in dealing with the farm crisis. First it took you months and 
months to figure out farmers were in trouble. Then you refused 
to go to Ottawa until the Saskatchewan Party motion forced 
you. Then you declared the farm crisis over and bailed out of 
the program. Then you bailed back in but it was too late to help 
design the program. 
 
Now the program’s failing so you’re asking farmers to spend 
hundreds of dollars to fill out the forms just to show you that 
the program doesn’t work. And the few farmers who do qualify 
are only going to get half of their money. 
 
Mr. Minister, if Saskatchewan farmers ran their farms like you 
run the Ag department, they’d all be out of business. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. The hon. 
member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask 
him to go . . . Order. I’ll ask him to go directly to his question 
now. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will 
you agree today to lobby the federal government to change the 
AIDA program for next year so we’re not stuck in this program 
for two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he says that his 
leader wanted to cut the bureaucracy. Well that’s fine, but why 
not leave the Agriculture budget alone? Just shift it around. 
Don’t cut it, don’t cut it. 

And then his leader went from November of 1998 saying, don’t 
put any money in — which he agreed with us — to December 
saying 70/30. Then his leader said in January, well just put your 
40 per cent in. And now they’re complaining about the 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the credibility on that side of the House is very 
small today. And I think the member over there has to explain 
their position of why they flip-flop around this agricultural issue 
when it’s convenient for them to do so. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Minister of 
Agriculture wants to talk about who’s cutting budgets, I believe 
in 1991 the Ag budget in this province was over a billion 
dollars. Today it’s about 240 million. Who’s cutting what, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, you told farmers you’d have a bankable program 
by last Christmas. Remember that, Mr. Minister? Last 
Christmas. Well it’s already spring seeding and farmers still 
don’t know what’s going on with your AIDA program. 
 
Mr. Minister, your NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
has betrayed farmers too many times. It’s probably too late to 
do anything with AIDA this year but maybe it can still be fixed 
for next year. But it’s going to take some big changes on your 
part, Mr. Minister. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Municipal Government in 
answering questions the other day mentioned that maybe the 
federal government is thinking of enhancing the AIDA program 
because it isn’t working for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Is the federal government looking at enhancing the AIDA 
program or the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
program on top of what we already have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite cannot 
get away with this and the public knows that. You can’t, you 
can’t be on all sides of the issue at all times. We went forward 
and the information that he puts forward, a lot of it is very, very 
semi-accurate, and they know that. 
 
For example, the budget to agriculture? It wasn’t the budget. It 
was . . . we administered the agriculture programs that you 
supported cutting, and it was a billion dollars we administered. 
And now you say it’s down to 240. Well thank you very much 
— you succeeded in taking that money away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been very clear from the outset on this 
agriculture program. We went into this program to again 
support Saskatchewan farmers from the attack from the US 
(United States) and the European treasuries because those 
national treasuries support the agriculture people. We are trying 
to do the same here from Saskatchewan in helping out. 
 
But you can’t be on all sides of the issues. I want you to explain 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan why you supported the removal 
of annual payments of $635 million to the producers of this 
province. 
 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Number of Graduating Nurses 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister may not know what to do with agriculture, but I can 
tell you that farmers know what to do. They know they can’t 
afford another year of NDP administration, particularly in 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question though is for the Associate Minister 
of Health. Madam Minister, as the former president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, you know that the critical nurse 
shortage in Saskatchewan is a direct result of decisions made by 
your NDP government — your government. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the quota set by the province this year 
for nursing graduates? How many nurses will actually be 
graduating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just for the information of the member opposite, he may know 
that the nursing education program or the NEPS (nursing 
education program of Saskatchewan) program, which is 
combination program between SIAST and the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Nursing, is moving to a four-year 
baccalaureate in nursing. We no longer in the province have a 
two-year diploma program. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have a three-year diploma 
program moving into a four-year degree program. The 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, along with all 
other registered nurses’ associations across the country, are 
calling for a baccalaureate by the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are in the midst of a transition between the 
diploma and degree program. The program has been 
fast-tracked, and in fact you can now get your degree after three 
and a half years. My understanding is that there will be degree 
nurses graduating in 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought 
perhaps the associate minister would actually like to answer. 
Perhaps she would have some of this information having been a 
nurse, but I gather not. 
 
Madam Minister, you should know that in 1990 Saskatchewan 
graduated 390 nurses from SIAST and from the university. And 
we are told that the College of Nursing at the University of 
Saskatchewan, the provincial government quota for nursing 
graduates this year is 180. That means that no more than 150 
nurses will actually graduate this year. 
 
Nurses at the University Hospital tell us there are 80 postings 
for vacant nurses’ positions in that hospital alone and that 
Regina has almost 200 vacant positions and that many rural 
health districts say they can’t find enough nurses either. Thanks 
to the NDP, most nursing graduates this year from school have 
already been recruited outside of the province. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to increase the number of 

nurses graduating in Saskatchewan, and what steps are you 
taking to keep those nurses at home here in Saskatchewan 
working in our hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the 
information of the member, in 1998, September 1998, the 
number of seats in the nursing education program was increased 
from 180 to 239 and we doubled the number of seats in the 
licensed practical nurse program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that even with the recent dispute we 
have a significant increase in the numbers of young people that 
are wanting to enter the nursing education program at SIAST. 
Our Post-Secondary Education department and SIAST and the 
College of Nursing, as I understand it, are presently determining 
what seats will be available for nursing education students come 
fall 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
may talk about 220 or so nurses potentially going into school 
but the quotas are still set at 180. 
 
And, Madam Minister, nurses may indeed be entering but not to 
work in Saskatchewan because nurses are leaving 
Saskatchewan for two reasons: the NDP are taking more than 
half of their income with the second highest taxes in this 
country. And the NDP has managed to create workplace 
conditions that are so brutal that many nurses have quit or are 
leaving because of emotional or physical burnout. If anyone in 
the NDP caucus understands these facts, it should be the 
associate minister. 
 
However, hospitals in Edmonton are offering nurses a $5,000 
signing bonus. Lower Alberta taxes mean that nurses keep 
thousands of dollars more in their pockets so it’s not hard to 
understand why nurses want to leave NDP Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, what specific measure is the NDP government 
taking to improve the working conditions for nurses and to keep 
our graduates at home here in Saskatchewan? And what 
evidence can you give us to show that you would rather keep 
nurses here rather than arrest them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 
opposite really doesn’t want to hear this but, you know, I would 
suggest that you might listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the nursing dispute the Regina Health 
District, as I understand it, hired 30 nurses in the Regina Health 
District. Let me tell you where they’ve come from, let me tell 
you where they’ve come from. They’ve come from the United 
States; they’ve come from Australia, Ontario, Alberta, British 
Columbia, Manitoba, and Newfoundland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you were to listen to those members, you’d 
swear that no one is coming here. Well contrary, au contraire, 
people are coming to this province who are interested in 
pursuing their work opportunities here. 
 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Now just for the information of the member, the Regina Health 
District, the Regina Health District has now hired over 100 — I 
think it’s 106 — nurses in the Regina Health District. Mr. 
Speaker, we are not into doom and gloom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are not into doom and gloom. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell the member that 18 of 
those are graduates from the College of Nursing program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Renal Dialysis Sites 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we have another 
case today that demonstrates the NDP priorities are wrong. 
Mike Fahey lives in Moose Jaw. Mr. Fahey needs dialysis 
treatment, hemodialysis treatment. He’s needed it since 1989, 
and for 10 years, two to three times a week, Mr. Fahey is up at 
5:30 so he can drive into Regina to receive dialysis treatment. 
 
Forty below zero, freezing rain — it doesn’t matter to him what 
the conditions outside are because, in Mr. Fahey’s words, you 
have to drive or be sick. You don’t have a choice. Rather than 
offer treatment in Moose Jaw, the NDP make him and about 13 
others drive into Regina to receive basic health care. 
 
To the minister, why are you forcing people who need this basic 
treatment to go through this for the rest of their lives when you 
could easily offer this treatment out of a regional hospital in 
Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that we have not 
yet reached perfection in the province of Saskatchewan, but 
what I can say to the member opposite is that we have now 
increased the number of sites for dialysis from Saskatoon and 
Regina to Lloydminster, P.A., Tisdale, and Yorkton. And in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, there is additional funding to fund — to 
fund, Mr. Speaker — additional renal dialysis sites. 
 
Now just for the information of the member, what is important 
is that we have seen an increase in renal funding in this 
province from 1997 to 1998-99 going from $10.5 million to 
$11.8 million. Mr. Speaker, the funding will be up in this year’s 
budget. We have some working groups that are identifying 
which locations — either North Battleford, Swift Current, 
Moose Jaw, Fort Qu’Appelle — can also add renal dialysis sites 
to their regional centres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Fahey used to be an emergency medical 
technician and a city police constable. His poor health requires 
that he live on Canada pension disability. He’s living on just 
over 9,000 a year; he’s calculated that it costs him about 8,000 a 
year just to drive to Regina every other day. That leaves him 
with just over a thousand dollars a year. 
 
To the minister, this man is a pensioner. He’s not a wealthy 
man, yet your NDP government forces him into poverty just to 
receive the health care that he needs to survive and that he has 

the right to deserve. Why are you forcing him into poverty just 
to receive the health care that he needs to stay alive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member raises 
an important point. For many, many decades, Mr. Speaker, 
people who required renal dialysis either had to go to Saskatoon 
or Regina. And that’s why it was so important for us to identify 
satellite sites, Mr. Speaker, in Tisdale, Yorkton, Lloydminster, 
and Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have money in this budget for additional sites. And I can 
assure the member, in order to have off-site dialysis you need to 
have the co-operation of the nephrologists in both Saskatoon 
and Regina. And we have money in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
We have money in this budget. 
 
And I somehow have to say to the member that I regret that he 
is playing politics with this when we have seen a significant 
increase in off location, Saskatoon and Regina, for dialysis 
patients. And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen an 88 per cent 
increase in kidney transplants performed last year in 
comparison to the year before. And we’re going to continue to 
support the people who have kidney failure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Faye is not alone. There are 
13 other people in Moose Jaw who are travelling to Regina to 
receive treatment. There’s also four nurses from the area who 
travel to Regina to work in hemodialysis. We also understand 
that another quit because she grew tired of having to do that 
commute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw has the need for hemodialysis 
treatment. It has the trained staff to do the work. The only thing 
that it needs is a government that cares. A government that 
thinks that looking after people like Mike Faye in their own 
community is a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why does she feel that it’s not a 
priority to have hemodialysis facilities in Moose Jaw when 
there’s clearly the need and the ability to do it right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in order for their to be 
off-site renal dialysis, other than Saskatoon and Regina where 
the nephrologists are located, you have to have the involvement 
of people who are nephrologists and very familiar with kidney 
disease and kidney failure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget which was announced by the 
Minister of Finance on March 26, we indicated that there was 
significantly increased funding to support renal dialysis in 
centres outside of Saskatoon, Regina, P.A., Tisdale, and 
Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order for that to occur, you need to have the 
nephrologists and the health districts working in co-operation. 
Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the member, I can assure the 
member that we believe that we need to decentralize services, 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

and we are doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen a significant increase in allocated 
funds for those people who have renal failure. To those districts 
we’ve seen a significant increase in kidney transplants in this 
province. And I can assure the member that we are going to 
make sure that we have renal dialysis sites in other parts of the 
province. And I’d just like to remind the member that it was his 
federal government colleagues that cut $200 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals have 
in their platform the belief that no matter the region, people 
have a right to expect medical treatment in their region. That’s 
why the Liberals have committed in their Priorities 1999, to 
give Moose Jaw regional hospital status. Under the Liberals, 
Moose Jaw will have a regional hospital that can provide 
enhanced diagnostic services and dialysis so people like Mike 
Faye can receive treatment in their community and not be 
forced into poverty by driving into Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, does she support the Liberal idea 
of making Moose Jaw a regional hospital with all required 
diagnostic treatment, or does she feel the money is better spent 
on NDP hacks and flacks. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know when 
that member wrote to the Prime Minister of Canada and Allan 
Rock asking for the federal government to return the $200 
million that was cut to this province in the area of health 
funding and post-secondary education. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The purpose . . . order, 
order. Order. The purposes of question period are not served by 
having hon. members shouting across the floor. And I’ll ask for 
the co-operation of all members to permit the Minister of 
Health to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1998 we didn’t get one 
renewed nickel from the federal government for health spending 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And in 1998, Mr. Speaker, on 
our own, the province of Saskatchewan funded renal dialysis in 
Tisdale and Yorkton without a cent from the federal 
government. 
 
But we have said in this year’s budget that we are going to 
increase the numbers of sites for renal dialysis. We’re going to 
continue the work that has been done in this province to move 
renal dialysis outside of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a working group of nephrologists, The 
Kidney Foundation, and the health districts working on this 
issue, and I can assure the member that we will be announcing 
where those sites are going to be located. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Announcement in Forestry Sector 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Economic Development. 
 

Mr. Minister, a couple of days . . . Madam Minister, a couple of 
days ago you announced a major initiative in the forestry 
industry and insofar as any of this is new, it is worthwhile but, 
Madam Minister, it seems that you keep dragging out the same 
projects and announcing them over and over and over again. It 
is indicated that there are $850 million only 300 hasn’t been 
announced once or twice or three times before. 
 
For example, how many times are you going to announce the 
OSB (oriented strand board) plant in Hudson Bay? You 
announced it before the ’91 election, the ’95 election, now 
we’re going to the ’99 election. 
 
How many times can you drag out these projects and 
re-announce them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start out by 
congratulating the members opposite on their valiant efforts to 
find a cloud behind every silver lining. And I’d like to thank the 
member for the opportunity to talk about the biggest job 
announcement in Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Ten thousand new jobs, $850 million in 
private sector . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now the Chair is having some difficulty 
being able to hear the answer being provided, and I’ll ask the 
co-operation for all on both sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote Paul Martin 
from CJGX Radio where he said, “This plan takes 
underdeveloped resources natural and human resources and puts 
them together, and it does it without spending government 
money.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, for the 
edification of those members, he says, “Now that’s what 
economic development is all about.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the 
Tory platform, I’d like to quote from the Tories platform on 
forestry. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I can’t because it doesn’t say 
a word about forestry in the Tory platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, all hon. members, I’m 
sure, will want to come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Bill No. 35  The Land Information 
Services Facilitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Land Information Services Facilitation Act be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Before orders of the day, I rise to ask 
leave of the Assembly to make a statement of importance to 
Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 
April 28, the day we set aside to remember and to mourn the 
workers who have died on the job. Today we also remember the 
workers who have been injured, disabled or become seriously 
ill at work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we reaffirm our 
commitment to the prevention of accidents, injuries, illness, and 
death in the workplace, not just today but every day. 
 
And it’s important to reaffirm our support for prevention 
programs and enforcement of health and safety laws. And we 
must remember it’s our obligation that health and safety come 
first. 
 
Since last April, 27 people have died on the job in 
Saskatchewan, and that’s 27 lives cut short and 27 families left 
grieving. And today we join those families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to read into the record for all to know and 
remember the names of the 27 people who died in 
Saskatchewan workplaces this year. And I’ll try to do them 
justice by reading out their names clearly. 
 
Grant Atkinson, Andres Beslisle, Walter Betker, Howard Bird, 
Michel Brazeau, Bruce Brown, Ronald Carson, Donald Deren, 
John Diagneault, Raymond Doka, Andrew Duncan, Donald 
Fathers, Robert Fotheringham, Daniel Haseloh, Matt Hnatiuk, 
Jason Hoffman, Michael Lacoursiere, Collin Laroche, Miles 
Magel, John Nash, Christopher Peltz, Verna Pottruff, Robert 
Reitenbach, James Rothecker, Bruce Steeves, Andrea Sylvestre, 
and Ardith Todd. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask that all hon. members rise to join me in 
observing a moment of silence. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests before orders of the day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a very 
important person in my constituency, a cattleman from the 
Arcola, Kisbey area, Mr. Don Lees. 
 
In 1991, Don was the Liberal candidate in the provincial 
election. In 1995 Don was the Liberal candidate in the 
provincial election, and for the upcoming election hopefully in 
1999, in June, Don will be the co-campaign manager for my 
re-election campaign. 
 
I ask members to welcome Don to the Assembly and I thank 
him very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Also before orders of the day the Chair tabled 
three reports. The annual report for 1999 by the Provincial 
Ombudsman, entitled Promoting Fairness; the 1998 annual 
report by the Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate entitled, 
childhood . . . entitled to special care; and the 30th annual 
report 1998 of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
outline the key provision of the proposed Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Act to all members. 
 
Last May, with our industry and training partners led by Mr. 
George Pellerin and Mr. Paul McLellan, both from the 
Provincial Apprenticeship Board, and of course Dr. Art Knight 
of SIAST, we announced our decision to create a new 
industry-led commission. The new commission will lead the 
renewal of the apprenticeship and trade certification system in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed legislation you see before you today makes this 
all possible. Responding to labour market needs and creating 
access to job opportunities for Saskatchewan people are key 
elements of the Saskatchewan training strategy, Bridges to 
Employment, announced in 1997. 
 
Apprenticeship renewal is an important part of the training 
strategy. Apprenticeable trades are a component of the 
workforce in 19 per cent of Saskatchewan businesses. One-fifth 
of our employer community in Saskatchewan relies on the 
apprenticeship system for training, certification, and updating of 
their skilled workforce. 
 
In 1998 there were 5,003 apprentices in the province, almost as 
many trainees as the full-time enrolment in SIAST’s certificate 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

and diploma programs. Provincial expenditures on 
apprenticeship this year are equivalent to our total operating 
grants to the regional college system. Apprenticeship is clearly 
a significant part of our provincial training strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department has worked extensively with 
industry over the past three years. This began in 1996 with 
industry-led consultations regarding the survival of 
apprenticeship in light of federal funding withdrawal from 
training. Over the course of two years of broad consensus of 
industry, trainers, equity groups, and the public has been 
established regarding the survival and renewal of the 
apprenticeship system. This new Act reflects that consensus. 
 
(1445) 
 
Public consultations were also held by the department this past 
fall on the new Act in nine communities: Regina, Saskatoon, La 
Ronge, North Battleford, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Estevan, 
Moose Jaw, and Swift Current. As well, the Northern Labour 
Market Committee was consulted. This was in addition to 
ongoing consultations with the Provincial Apprenticeship Board 
and all trade advisory boards. We wanted to be certain that we 
heard from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We did hear the people, Mr. Speaker, and this is what they said: 
they wanted a more responsive apprenticeship training system; 
they wanted improved access to apprenticeship training and 
trade certification for all residents; they wanted increased 
awareness by youth about good quality careers in the trades; 
they wanted a sustainable, vibrant system capable of expansion; 
and they wanted more direct industry involvement in decision 
making. 
 
What we heard is now being acted upon in this legislation, the 
new Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act, 1999. Mr. 
Speaker, this government is listening to its stakeholders and to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed Act would establish a new commission with an 
industry majority board as an agent of the Crown to manage the 
renewal of the apprenticeship system. This Bill will allow 
industry to lead the renewal process and manage the system. 
 
Through a new apprenticeship commission the system will be 
more responsive and innovative. Mr. Speaker, this is because it 
will involve those most directly affected by apprenticeship, that 
is business and labour, in decision making in partnership with 
government trainers and representation from those groups not 
now active in apprenticeship, such as Aboriginal people and 
women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the people who are the ones most in tune 
with quality assurance, productivity, and competitive needs of 
business. These are the people who know how apprenticeship 
best relates to skilled workers and their needs. And these are the 
people who can best determine how to engage underrepresented 
groups in the apprenticeship system. 
 
This commission will be responsible for renewing 
apprenticeship. The commission board will be mandated 
through this Act to firstly create a responsive and relevant 
training system; to increase access to apprenticeship training 

and to develop a more representative workforce in the 
designated trades; to form strong industry-SIAST partnerships; 
to ensure high quality responsive training to meet the needs of 
industry and apprentices; to increase promotion of 
apprenticeship as a quality career option for young people; to 
undertake human resource planning to meet industry skill 
needs; and to strengthen Saskatchewan’s reference to national 
and international standards as a means to ensure our workforce 
is recognized for its high calibre throughout North America, 
thus contributing to the competitive advantage of Saskatchewan 
companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will highlight some of the elements of the 
proposed legislation. 
 
Firstly, the new Act will establish the commission as an agent 
of the Crown reporting to the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training with an industry led board plus 
representation from government trainers and underrepresented 
groups. 
 
Secondly, it will authorize the commission to manage the 
apprenticeship and trade certification system. This includes 
designating trades for apprenticeship purposes; generating, 
retaining, and expending revenues; registering apprentices and 
journey people; monitoring their training and providing 
certification of skill levels achieved; determining and charging 
fees for products and services; entering into agreements for 
training delivery; and representing Saskatchewan on 
interprovincial initiatives. 
 
Thirdly, it will give the commission authority to make 
operational regulations to ensure the efficient and effective 
operation of the apprenticeship system and to meet the needs of 
industry effectively in a more timely manner. 
 
Fourthly, it will ensure a strong, dual accountability to both 
industry and government. Fifth, it will ensure a cost-effective 
approach to implementation through the transfer of existing 
operating and training funds to the commission. 
 
Sixth, it will demonstrate respect for employees by transferring 
apprenticeship unit staff to the commission while maintaining 
their full employee rights and benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposed legislation reflects the consensus of 
the people of this province. It increases the business and labour 
commitment to investing in apprenticeship training and a 
training culture. It ensures that trainers give priority to 
providing the most relevant responsive training needed. 
 
The proposed legislation increases access to quality 
apprenticeship careers for all Saskatchewan residents, and it 
will provide a better return on investment of the public funds 
provided for the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to our support for the commission, the 
commitment of the provincial government is also assured. This 
government invests heavily in apprenticeship. 
 
We have replaced federal funding withdrawal in apprenticeship 
training of almost $5 million on an annual basis. In addition we 
provided 555,000 in the year 1998-99, and another 1.5 million 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

in 1999-2000 in provincial funding to expand our training 
capacity to meet the increased demand for apprenticeship 
training. This provides technical training for about 3,000 
apprentices annually. This is an increase of almost 30 per cent, 
providing many more opportunities for young people than in 
1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new and innovative partnership of government, 
business, labour, trainers, and equity groups will ensure that 
apprenticeship training matches the skills needed for jobs and 
trades now and into the future. 
 
The proposed new apprenticeship commission will ensure the 
training and employment needs of all Saskatchewan people are 
met, including large and small employers, organized and 
unorganized labour, youth, Aboriginal peoples, and other 
under-represented groups and industry sectors. 
 
I am therefore, Mr. Speaker, very proud to move second reading 
of Bill No. 26, The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act, 
1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my opportunity and indeed an honour to be able to 
comment on the proposed Bill. 
 
Saskatchewan has been waiting for a change to its 
apprenticeship program for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve had the opportunity to talk with various leaders of 
businesses, of labour, of programs in fact of instruction at the 
SIAST. And for a long period of time we’ve heard from people 
that there was need to address the changes that were required. 
 
The minister has outlined that of course the federal government 
has withdrawn from the funding. And what I think this has done 
to Saskatchewan is allowed us, the province of Saskatchewan, 
to develop an apprenticeship program that meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of attending one of those nine 
public meetings that the minister indicated. And while I was 
somewhat disappointed I think in the number of people that 
were in attendance, I was pleased to see a cross-sectional 
representation of a number of people. 
 
There were representatives of businesses in Yorkton, there were 
representatives from labour groups, and most importantly 
though, Mr. Speaker, there were students who were in 
attendance at that public meeting in Yorkton and had an 
opportunity to raise some concerns. I understand from the other 
meetings that that was the general makeup of many of the 
meetings where there was tremendous amount of input and 
comments made by everyone. 
 
I think what this has shown — and in fact the minister earlier on 
today introduced a number of representatives, key individuals in 
the province of Saskatchewan who represent a wide 
cross-section — it was time for Saskatchewan to design an 
apprenticeship program, to design the Bill that would put in 
place an industry-led apprenticeship trade program. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have had a few calls, and I say a few — not 
very many in number — to our offices primarily from students 
who felt that the communication lines between the committee 
that was travelling around the province and themselves wasn’t 
good enough, that indeed students didn’t have the opportunity 
to have as great an input. 
 
And I know that’s probably true in many instances when we 
look at government or we look at businesses being able to 
ensure that everyone has had an opportunity to be involved. It’s 
not always possible. 
 
But I would like to assure the minister, from the comments that 
we’ve had from businesses, from individuals representing 
labour, that they’re pleased to see this apprenticeship program 
developed and in fact this Bill come forward today. 
 
We have a number of questions, Mr. Speaker, regarding very 
specific sections of the Bill that can be handled during 
Committee of the Whole and I see no reason for the Bill to be 
held up at this stage of its development. And I would indicate 
that that will be appropriate at the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 29  The Health Information Protection Act 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — On my left is Jim Engel; on my right, 
Duane Mombourquette. 
 
Clause 1 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and her officials here today. This is a very 
important piece of legislation, and I think a piece of legislation 
that most people in the province do not understand what 
implications it may very well have in their lives, both on the 
short term and on the long term. 
 
So before we get into this, Madam Minister, I wonder if you 
could explain a couple of the terms under the interpretations of 
the Act where it states commissioner, and deals with a 
commissioner that will oversee any requests for information 
that it will be . . . means the information and privacy 
commissioner appointed pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom 
of Information Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
I wonder if you could outline for us and for the people who are 
watching this today with some concerns about this particular 
piece of legislation, how that commissioner is selected. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. The Information and Privacy 
Commissioner is appointed as an officer of the legislature. He’s 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

already appointed and we will be using him. As he’s already 
there we’ll be using him. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister. I’m 
aware that the commissioner is already in place, but I was 
wondering if you could identify for the public that are listening 
in just how his selection process works. 
 
Is he appointed by the Premier? Is he appointed by the 
Assembly? How does this person come to hold this position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Minister of Justice moves a motion 
and then they’re appointed through the legislature. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, then from your 
understanding of the process, this person is chosen by the 
Minister of Justice to fulfil this role. And what impartiality is 
there to ensure that this person will be looking after the interests 
of the public, that their private information is indeed kept 
private, and not for some other purposes that anyone might 
envision this information being useful for? 
 
If it’s simply an appointment by the Minister of Justice, I think 
it’s open to some concerns. But, Madam Minister, I think what 
should happen here is that the selection process — and I believe 
in all likelihood this may very well be more appropriate — that 
it be dealt with in a manner similar to what we did with the 
appointment of the electoral officer. 
 
An all-party committee should discuss, debate in committee the 
selection process and be a part of the selection process and be 
able to choose from amongst the qualified people whose names 
have been put forward and seek the person who would be 
impartial . . . knowledgeable, impartial, and be able to render 
fairly for the people of Saskatchewan on decisions requiring 
privacy of information and that it simply not be an appointment 
by the Minister of Health. 
 
Now I think perhaps that process has been used in the past, even 
in this particular area as the Privacy Commissioner, that it was 
done in consultation with other members of the House and not 
simply done by the Minister of Health. And I wonder if you 
could give an indication that you would support and encourage 
that this be done through an all-party committee and brought to 
the floor of the Assembly by the Justice minister, but that the 
recommendation of the Justice minister come from an all-party 
committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, as he is appointed now through the process that 
it is done, and he is also . . . is in place, is an independent 
officer and not appointed by the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — No, I recognize he’s not appointed by 
the Minister of Health, Madam Minister. You said the 
appointment was by the recommendation of the Minister of 
Justice. And that it would come to the floor of the Assembly for 
approvals same the as . . . what I’m suggesting is it should come 
to the floor of the Assembly for approval the same as the 
electoral officer did — the Chief Electoral Officer — that we 
just did here not that long ago. 
 
I think that process worked out very well. There was no 

disagreements at the end of the day with the parties as to who 
that person became; and I think in this process, a similar 
process of that fashion would be beneficial to the comfort levels 
of all the people involved. And so I’m asking that you give 
some consideration to that. 
 
Madam Minister, part of this legislation talks about the health 
services number and that the health services number should not 
be used for any other thing other than health. I wonder if you 
can confirm that, and whether or not you support that motion 
that the health services number be used strictly for health 
information. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Act actually specifies that — that no 
one has to give their health services number for other than a 
health service. So that is what the Act is actually enshrining. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What do 
you propose to do then with other pieces of legislation and other 
government forms that demand the health services number to 
access those programs or those applications? And the one that 
immediately comes to my mind is the province’s hunting 
licences, which have . . . you have to have a Saskatchewan 
health services number on that hunting licence to actually get a 
hunting licence. 
 
So are you proposing to make changes in that area so that the 
health services card is directly related to health services and not 
to a myriad of other government services that are not related in 
any way, shape, or form to health? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Act as it reads gives more substantial 
force to the fact that you do not have to have your health 
services number for anything other than a health service. Your 
particular point that the collection of the health service number 
for the big game draw, that it does allow the government to 
verify Saskatchewan residency, but it doesn’t give access to any 
health information. And the big game draw will not have access 
to SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network), and will 
not have therefore any access to any health records. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, once our health 
numbers are out there and about in various and sundry forms, 
people with computers seem to do marvellous things these days, 
and if they have access to our numbers they may very well have 
access to our files. And I think there’s a great deal of concern 
out in the public about that very fact. 
 
If these health services numbers are strictly to be used for health 
purposes, then there is absolutely no reason why they should be 
used for such a thing as hunting licences. And it’s in your 
legislation even that they are to be used just for these services. 
 
So if we can say no to allowing that health services number to 
be used in other areas, as you’re suggesting, then you’re going 
to have to change the other legislations that use the health 
services numbers for whatever purposes they may be using 
them. 
 
So will you be approaching the other ministers to change their 
requests, their information forms, and their legislation so that 
the health services card number is used strictly for health 
services? 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Right now there’s no limit to who can ask 
you for your health service number. This Act puts in limitations 
exactly stating what you can be asked for it for. 
 
There is no other way in Saskatchewan to determine residency 
other than your health services number. So this legislation is a 
balance between what we require for non-health services that 
will have no access to your health records. And what we still 
need to verify, things like for student loans and for the big game 
licences. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, we have driver’s 
licences which could be utilized for that purpose. Not everyone 
in the province obviously has a driver’s licence. But we have 
other . . . we recognize people simply by their locations and 
enumerations when it comes to vote and to pick the 
representatives for this province to speak in this Assembly. 
 
We don’t ask them whether they have a health services card 
number and take it when we are allowing them to vote, which I 
think is probably the most important privilege we have. And yet 
we don’t have to have a health services number to do that. So 
we don’t need that health services number for all the other 
things that government wants to keep track of us for. 
 
So I think the health service number, Madam Minister, should 
be used strictly for the health services. 
 
I’d like to ask for another clarification. The term trustee — 
when you use the term trustee, does that mean institutions, 
government institutions in Saskatchewan, or does it encompass 
people outside of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Government institution where we’re 
referring to as something like Saskatchewan Health. And 
provincial legislation only has jurisdiction over provincial 
institutions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Will this information then be available 
to someone other than provincial institutions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d just ask you to clarify what information 
you’re asking — what will be available. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Any health information collected and 
stored on this program . . . under this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I just wanted to clarify that this Act covers 
all information stored on paper, on files. It doesn’t just cover 
the electronic network that is proposed for an electronic 
information manager like SHIN. This covers everything — 
paper records, everywhere we store files in every format that we 
store them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well that’s good to know, Madam 
Minister. But does . . . when you say trustee, does it include 
anyone outside of this province that may have access to any of 
the health information collected from any patient in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically what this legislation does in its 
broadest sense is determine the use of the information when it’s 
been collected. So that if you are collecting it only for the 

specific purpose to deliver a health service, then it doesn’t 
preclude that that health service could be delivered outside the 
province, and then that information would have to be disclosed 
to an institution outside the province. But the same onus is on 
the trustee, that the information is only to be used and disclosed 
for the delivery of a health service. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So Madam Minister, none of this 
information could be used outside of this province for any 
reason other than to provide an immediate service to a particular 
patient. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Disclosure always has to follow the rules 
that are implied or put into place in this Act for a trustee to 
disclose. So any disclosure has to follow all the rules in the Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister, do any of the 
rules in this Act allow any of the information collected under 
this Bill to be used by any person, corporation, entity outside of 
this province other than for the particular immediate health 
provisions to an individual patient? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The answer is generally no. There are 
some circumstances where the information may be having to be 
shared because it’s not directly a health service. It might be for 
the protection of someone’s safety, for example. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well someone’s safety is pretty general, 
Madam Minister. Is it their imminent safety? Is it a broad 
category that someone may, at some point in time, come down 
with some disease, therefore we need to have access to 
information to carry out research to prevent that disease from 
ever happening; therefore it’s for a person’s safety. I mean 
that’s pretty general, Madam Minister. 
 
So when you’re talking about the information being made 
available outside of the province to someone operating . . . an 
individual or a corporation of any sort, I think you need to be a 
lot more specific than a person’s safety. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Well you have a copy of the Act, I 
presume, and there is . . . very specific in the Act. I’ll read 
(4)(a) on page 13 under “Disclosure,” section 27: 
 

A trustee may disclose personal health information in the 
custody or control of the trustee without consent of the 
subject individual in the following cases: 
 

(a) where the trustee believes, on reasonable grounds, 
that the disclosure will avoid or minimize the danger to 
the health or safety of any person; 

 
That’s what I was talking about. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Are there any other reasons, Madam 
Minister, why some of this information may be transferred to a 
trustee outside of this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think basically what has happened is that 
this Act sets the parameters of why you can disclose, not so 
much as where you live if I’m disclosing to you for example. 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

Because there’s provisions of care, there’s the one I just read. 
There’s express consent — a person can consent to have 
information sent anywhere that they want. So there are several 
situations that are covered in explicit sections of the Act that 
will cover off almost every scenario. 
 
But it is generally in the Act that . . . the Act covers or puts the 
onus on a trustee to only disclose for certain reasons and they 
are specifically listed here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, does this Bill 
supersede all previous legislation that would deal with the 
collection and distribution of health information either 
identified or de-identified? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’ll just draw your attention again to the 
Bill, that the Act prevails, on page 5 and 6 of the actual Bill, 
subsection 4. Would you like me to read them all or can we just 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can give me the paraphrase on it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Well there’s several Acts that it does 
supersede: 
 

(a) The Adoption Act or The Adoption Act, 1998; 
(b) Part VIII of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act; 
(c) section 16 of The Cancer Foundation Act; 
(d) The Child and Family Services Act; 
(e) The Mental Health Services Act; 
(f) The Public Disclosure Act; 
(g) The Public Health Act, 1994; 
(h) The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979; or 
(i) any prescribed Act or regulation or any prescribed 
provision of an Act or regulation. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, those are the 
things it does not apply to. So that leaves a fairly broad area that 
this Act does not apply to, particularly when it says any 
prescribed Act or regulation, or any prescribed provision of an 
Act or regulation. It leaves it pretty broad for the disclosure of 
information. 
 
Madam Minister, does your department and does the SHIN 
health information system have any agreements of information 
sharing with any other jurisdiction, including the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — For SHIN, the answer is no, they do not 
have any agreements for reciprocal sharing. The Department of 
Health does have some agreements for sharing with some of the 
registrations for some of the data in the systems. Like for the 
Canadian Institute of Health Information, they do have 
reciprocal agreements to share for those federal programs, 
federal institutions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So how does our privacy legislation 
then deal with CIHI (Canadian Institute of Health Information) 
when they have the information that’s available. I’m assuming 
the information they have available is identifiable. It’ll say a 
particular person’s name and here’s their health information. So 
how does our privacy regulations and how does your Bill 
control access to the information that CIHI might have? 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — This legislation actually sets the rules for 
what we can share and when we can share it. This is very clear 
about what we can and can’t share. And this sets it for the 
department as well as for SHIN. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The information though that you have 
shared with this Canadian Institute of Health Information, once 
they have that information what controls do you have over the 
use of that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Currently we have a binding contract with 
CIHI that says that they cannot disclose without our consent 
any of the information that we’ve given them. This will further 
reinforce that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well perhaps you could give us an 
indication of who the Canadian Institute of Health Information 
is; who else participates in this organization? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is just a general overview of CIHI, 
which is a non-profit organization arm’s length from the federal 
government. It has federal-provincial representation on it as 
well as representation from StatsCan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Does it have any involvement or 
representation from any of the health industry pharmaceuticals, 
anyone else other than government agencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There is no representation on CIHI from 
the commercial sector. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What is 
the information that is sent to the Canadian Institute of Health 
Information used for. What’s the purpose of its collection and 
what does it do with the information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I would like to ask the Chair how far we’re 
going to go into what CIHI (Canadian Institute of Health 
Information) is as pertains to this Bill. If you give could give 
me an indication of how far we’re going to go here. 
 
The Chair: — If the subject matter is not in the Bill, then I 
would ask the minister to . . . or the member to rephrase his 
question to what’s related in the Bill. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, any of the 
Saskatchewan health information that is being distributed to 
other entities, including the Canadian Institute of Health 
Information, to what purposes will that information be used? 
And why does that agency collect this information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Generally, information gatherers like CIHI 
monitor and evaluate health services outcomes and disease 
patterns, and it’s a federal-provincial type of process, with 
participation from those agencies, federal and provincial. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, will any of the 
information from Saskatchewan Health services and patients 
that is collected through this program and distributed through 
trustees to other agencies such as the Canadian Institute of 
Health Information Services be used or transferred in any 
fashion for data studies, for examinations of procedures, or any 
of such types of studies that may be carried out by medical 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

services, by pharmaceuticals and other corporations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Generally speaking, information is shared 
into the non-profit provision of health services. If you want to 
talk about use and disclosure for research, which is, I think, 
what you’re leading up to, there is a provision in the Bill on 
page 16 — it’s section 29. I would refer you to that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, any of the information 
that is transferred from Saskatchewan Health services, is it 
transferred to other trustees in an identified form or in an 
unidentified form? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Do you want to clarify if you’re asking 
that for general purposes or for research? Are we on research, or 
what are you actually asking for? Then there’s two answers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, maybe I need to 
ask the question twice if there’s two answers. I want it both for 
general services and for research. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Okay, there will be two parts to the 
answer. For research, it’s basically de-identified information 
that’s used. And this Bill reinforces that it’s the minimum 
amount of information for the purpose which it’s collected. For 
health services it is usually identified information. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, the information that 
would be transferred, de-identified for research purposes, to 
whom does that information belong? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Section 29 sets the parameters for what 
information that’s gathered for research can be used for. But if 
you’re talking about who owns personal health information in 
the general sense, the Supreme Court has decided that in a 
doctor-patient relationship, the doctor owns the paper 
information but carries it in trust for the person that he’s 
collected it from. And that is what is implicit in the Act about 
ownership of information. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Would any of this information or could 
any of this information ever be transferred for research purposes 
for which the province of Saskatchewan through any agency 
would be compensated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The department doesn’t sell information, 
de-identified or otherwise. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Can you give us a personal guarantee 
then, Madam Minister, that none of this information will ever 
be sold or transferred for any monetary or other considerations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Act itself is the guarantee of what will 
happen to people’s information. There is no charge for . . . or 
selling of information, or no intent to have information become 
a commodity. There is some provision where, if you want 
access to your information, you may have to be charged the cost 
of the photocopying. That would be it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, information is 
very much a commodity these days, and particularly health 

information. In fact there is a big debate going on right now in 
Iceland over this very subject as to who owns the health care 
records and the informational records of all of the people of 
Iceland, because they have some very unusual genetic traits that 
is of very important interest to the pharmaceutical industry. 
 
And what you’re putting together here is a collection of all of 
the statistical data on all of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
I’m sure it would be of value to some people if they could 
access that unrestricted. And that is a grave concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan and to us in the opposition, Madam 
Minister. 
 
The information that you’re transferring to agencies outside of 
government agencies in this province including the Canadian 
Institute of Health Information. Is that information being 
transferred identified or is it being transferred de-identified? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think what we’re missing the point here, 
this is a health information protection Act. We’re not discussing 
SHIN or any other electronic information system. We’re 
discussing a health information protection Act that in effect will 
give us better protection of our health information than we have 
right now. This sets out what we can and can’t do when we 
collect it, and how we use it and how we disclose it. 
 
You have to separate the fact that this is not SHIN we’re talking 
about — we’re not talking about an electronic record. We’re 
talking about The Health Information Protection Act. This sets 
down specific guidelines that are far better than what we have 
now in our system and will protect our information far better 
than it does now, and give us rights as individuals to do certain 
things and to say certain things about where our information 
should go. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Indeed it does, Madam Minister, but the 
SHIN program which — this is information on the SHIN 
program — is part of this program, gives a much easier access 
to the information than is currently available. When it’s on 
paper in a doctor’s office in Arcola or in a doctor’s office in 
Choiceland or in Meadow Lake, it’s difficult to access it and 
use it on a statistical basis. 
 
But once that information has been collected and gathered onto 
one database — which is happening with SHIN — then that 
information becomes valuable, it becomes accessible, and 
desired by a good many people in the health research field. 
 
And that’s why it’s critically important, Madam Minister, that 
when you’re bringing this in as a Crown corporation that we 
have the utmost in assurances that this information will be used 
solely for the benefit of the patients from whom it was gathered, 
that this is not an asset for sale by the government of 
Saskatchewan, by the Crown corporation that this Bill is 
establishing. 
 
The Supreme Court, as you have already said, has indicated that 
a person’s personal health information file belongs to that 
person for whom that file is related. The paper copy — the 
paper on which that information is stored — or the computer on 
which that information is stored, is owned by the person: (a) the 
doctor who wrote on the paper; or (b) the corporation that owns 
the computer. But the information itself belongs to the patient, 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

to the individual. 
 
And if there is even the remotest opportunity that you will sell 
that information through this Crown corporation, then those 
monies collected belong to that individual patient whose 
information you transferred. 
 
Madam Minister, I know you want to scoff at that idea, but 
those are the facts of what’s happening around this world. That 
information is very valuable. And the people of Saskatchewan 
have a right to have control of their own personal health 
information and not having the government distribute it around 
the world either identified or de-identified. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I didn’t hear a question there, but I will 
say that SHIN does not own any of the information they will 
collect on behalf of the trustees. And I did explain what the 
onus is on a trustee for ownership of the information. 
 
And again back to my comment about the Act — enshrining in 
an Act that will protect our information far better than it is now 
in whatever form we have it at the moment. But I do want to 
reinforce that SHIN does not own any of the information nor 
will it be selling the information, as we do not as a Department 
of Health. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. But you 
transfer that information to other agencies that do in fact use a 
monetary means to measure the transfer of information. 
Canadian Institute of Health Information I’m told charges a fee 
for the distribution of its information. That, in essence, is the 
sale of that information. 
 
So, Madam Minister, while your department may not benefit 
from it directly, that information is later used in the transfer of 
information in which there are monetary considerations given. 
 
So, Madam Minister, part of the Bill talks about implied 
consent. I wonder if you could give an example and definitions 
of implied consent, expressed consent, and non-consensual. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Expressed consent is pretty much 
self-explanatory. You would give your consent in writing or 
verbally. Implied consent is if I’ve gone to a doctor and had a 
referral; by going to the physician or the specialist that I’ve 
been referred to, I’ve implied consent that my information can 
follow me along that track. Without consent there are specific 
places where you can withdraw your consent. You can not 
consent to have your information on any information network; 
and you can also be unconscious, if you’re coming in, and then 
you are not giving it with consent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, when you say that you 
can deny your information to certain areas, or not have your 
information on the system, can you designate access only to 
certain trustees and not to others on the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Bill allows people to withdraw their 
consent for having their information stored anywhere. How it is 
applied when it is up and running as a system, whatever system 
we do see it running as, that is an implementation issue of how 
it will be applied rather than how the Act pertains to it, that you 
can or cannot . . . what you do consent to, implied, express, or 

without consent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Would it be possible for an individual to 
give consent for hospitals and doctors to have access to that 
information but that nursing homes and home care and mental 
health don’t have access to that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Technically you could do that. How 
feasible it would be for an information manager to do it, would 
be what we would see with whoever picks it up as an 
information manager, how their systems would allow that to 
happen; but technically the Act does allow that to happen. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Perhaps 
before we got into all of the other debate, I should have asked 
you the question of what the purpose for this collection system 
and distribution really is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think back to my previous comments. 
We’re talking about a health information protection Act and I 
think what I’m gathering is you want to talk about SHIN which 
is not where that conversation should be held. This is about The 
Health Information Protection Act. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, SHIN and all of 
the other information gathering systems are being lumped 
together under this protection Act. The access to the 
information on those programs is being dealt with by this Bill. 
 
I have a concern that once this information has been gathered 
and is being distributed, how that distribution is going to take 
place both in the province and out of the province. And I’ll deal 
now with in the province though . . . is how that information 
will be distributed and the purposes to which that information is 
then put. 
 
One of the concerns that has been raised to me is that this could 
be used as a system to track, say, doctors’ prescription habits. 
Are certain doctors providing certain prescriptions for certain 
illnesses? You could track that and determine that 80 per cent of 
the doctors prescribe drug A for this particular ailment but 20 
per cent prescribe B, C, and D. 
 
So then the possibility arises that the bureaucracy or the 
managers of the information could come back and say to doctor 
A, why are you prescribing drug C when 80 per cent are 
prescribing drug A, and you start to standardize the diagnostics 
of the doctors because you have statistical means to track their 
habits and what they do within their own offices, even though 
the people who are managing this information have never seen 
the individual patients. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Again I’m not sure what the question was, 
but I did get a point at the beginning about tracking drug and 
prescribing habits, which we have a drug plan that we do have 
the capability of doing that as we have the system in place at the 
moment. 
 
What I do want to also mention about this Act is that there was 
extensive consultation as it was being developed over the 18 
months or 2 years that it’s been out in the public and in the 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

stakeholder community. And the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) has quite comfortably said that this Act meets all 
their needs and addresses all their concerns. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, the SMA last 
year, when this Bill was initially discussed — not brought in 
but discussed — the SMA had a great deal of concerns. 
 
Have all of the items that they were concerned about been 
addressed and they’re now satisfied with the Bill in its present 
form? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, I can assure the member that that has 
happened. This Act is significantly changed. All the concerns of 
the SMA have been identified and addressed in this Act and 
they are very comfortable with this Act as you see it before you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, last year the proposal for the gathering of the 
information that this Bill is designed to protect the information 
distribution of was . . . the SHIN Bill was proposing a $40 
million computerized health information network. Are those 
costs still in place or have they grown since the Bill that we 
now have before us was held up from last year. Has that 
changed the amount of money that it’s going to cost to collect 
this information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think again this question would probably 
be better addressed during the finances in Health department. 
This is again about a Health Information Protection Act that 
we’re discussing at the moment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Indeed it is, Madam Minister, but there 
is always costs associated with the collection and protection of 
information. The protection of the information, you’re going to 
have to have costs associated with that in the computer 
programs, in the paper files, to make sure that the distribution 
does not go awry. So there are costs associated with this. And 
are those costs that are associated with that being included in 
the $40 million that was proposed for SHIN, or is the cost of 
this protection agency going to be over and above that cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Again, I’m not sure about the intent of the 
question. If we’re talking about finances, we could talk about 
that when we talk about Health finances. But if you’re talking 
about the Office of the Commissioner, I’m not sure exactly 
what you’re asking. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, all this 
information that you’re proposing to protect under this Act and 
to distribute under this Act will take a monetary consideration 
to ensure that that protection is in place. Hopefully the 
protection that you’re talking about is not simply the Privacy 
Commissioner sitting in an office in a tower in Regina as the 
sole source of protection for this information. 
 
We hear almost on a daily basis of someone who has accessed 
information illegally through computers. Your Act was 
supposed to be protecting us from that happening to our 
medical information. 
 
So there’s got to be some costs associated with that. Now what 
are those costs going to be? 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if I might 
have the leave of the committee to make an introduction? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I notice that seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery is a very distinguished visitor to our 
gallery and to Saskatchewan. This is a person who will be 
well-known to all of us in political circles, but I think to all of 
the people in Saskatchewan and Canada as having made a 
significant contribution to public life in Canada and, I think, 
continues to do so. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the Hon. Don 
Mazankowski. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Health Information Protection Act 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Health Information Protection Act is 
about protecting information. It does not address the costs of 
that. If we want to talk about the costs, we will have to talk 
about them in Finance with the Department of Health or 
wherever we end up having information stored if it’s on a 
Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you’re setting 
up a Crown corporation to administer this Act. If there’s no 
costs involved, what’s the point of setting up a Crown 
corporation to do this? Why simply don’t you administer it 
through the Department of Health? Surely there’s going to be 
somebody involved in this Crown corporation; it isn’t just going 
to be the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
So, Madam Minister, there’s going to be some costs involved 
here. There’s going to be some costs in ensuring that that 
information is made secure in some manner. 
 
What are you doing to make sure that the information stored on 
the computers is actually secure, and that no one other than an 
authorized person can actually access it? When you do that, 
there’s some costs associated. What are those? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I just want to clarify that SHIN as the 
Crown corporation is not the administrator of this Act. This is 
an Act of the Legislative Assembly that will be administered, I 
would assume, by the Department of Justice. 
 
So I think this is, again, we’re straying from our conversation 
about The Health Information Protection Act into SHIN, which 
is another conversation entirely. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Minister, it’s interesting to see a Bill such as this coming 
forward at this time. However, I am happy to see it. 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

Somehow it seems to me that this particular Bill, because of the 
progress that you’ve made with SHIN, should have probably 
been before this House six or seven years ago. But somehow 
that doesn’t surprise me that that hasn’t happened. 
 
I do have some concerns, however, regarding the Bill and the 
privacy to clientele information that is covered by this Act, and 
I’d like to ask you a few a questions regarding that. 
 
The first one, if you could confirm with me, is that under this 
piece of legislation that any person in the province will have the 
right to refuse access to any personal information that they may 
have. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — First of all, any person has the right to . . . 
not to have . . . to say they do not want their information stored 
on any information system. 
 
Secondly, they can withdraw that consent at any time. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Having said that then, Minister, 
do you have any sense of the number of people that will refuse 
consent to their information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I don’t. I would assume that as people 
become comfortable with what is in this Act, and as I said 
before to the other member, that this is far better protection than 
what we have at this moment. And I think that the public will 
see that and be made aware that this is a better . . . this is better 
protection than what they have at this moment. And then I think 
all the reasons for withdrawing consent may become a lot less 
urgent. And I think that people will hopefully see that the 
number will be very small. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I don’t particularly like your argument or buy 
into your argument that it’s better than we’ve had before. It’s 
like saying that you’re better off to have pneumonia or lose a 
leg than it is to have cancer. 
 
If you don’t have a system that looks after the needs and the 
privacy of the patients in this province, well then regardless of 
what system it is, whether it’s better than the previous one or 
the previous six or the one that will succeed this one, it doesn't 
really help too much. 
 
I know you did a fair bit of consultation, or your department 
did, with stakeholders. And you talk about stakeholders as 
being the medical association, certainly SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association), health districts — all those 
groups. Those are all interest groups. 
 
I think the problem that you’re going to find is that you’re 
going to have a hard time getting the information out to the real 
people out there, the everyday patients who have real concerns 
about how their privacy needs are going to be looked after. 
 
And I would ask you then, if you don’t have any idea as to the 
numbers of people that initially will refuse to give consent, is 
there at some point then a number that will make the whole 
SHIN project impractical? If half the people in the province say 
I don’t want anything to do with it, I don’t want my information 
on there, is the SHIN project itself then going to become 
impractical and you will have wasted millions of dollars on 

that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, I am confident that the 
number of people that withhold their information from any 
system will be small once they realize how much better this Act 
will protect their information and what rights that are enshrined 
in the Act for each individual person, to control their 
information and to be secure in the knowledge of where their 
information is going and how it’s being used. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’ll ask you the question again. Is there a 
number that will make it impractical to continue on with SHIN 
if the majority of the people of the province, being 51 per cent 
or . . . would you be happy if 50 per cent of the people are on, 
are you happy if 20 per cent? Is there a number that all of a 
sudden makes the SHIN network itself impractical? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, we’re hoping the number 
is very small. And there is no number etched in stone about 
when or when not an information manager becomes viable or 
not. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So in essence then, irregardless of how many 
people actually consent to have information on that network, 
you will continue on with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Continue on with what? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, we’re talking about SHIN; this Act 
has direct impact on SHIN. We’re talking about SHIN. How 
many numbers of people do you have to have before SHIN 
becomes impractical, or before you say well, we need to do a 
better job of selling this to people, that their privacy . . . 
information is kept private, to get them to say okay, we want to 
be part of the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, we’re hoping the 
numbers will be small, and I don’t have a defined number to 
give you. But I do want to say that SHIN is developing as an 
information manager in consultation with a wide variety of 
health providers. Those health providers are becoming quite 
comfortable with the idea, with SHIN as an information 
manager, and with the ideas that an information manager has 
and will be able to provide service in this province. And I think 
that as the providers are comfortable, so will the people that 
they speak to and that they provide the services for. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, probably the health providers are 
becoming comfortable with it but are the people becoming 
comfortable with it? How long is it going to take for them to 
become comfortable? Your government’s already spent $30 
million at least on the SHIN network project itself before you 
ever brought this Bill forward. And I’m just wondering — well 
I’m not wondering — the people know that a lot of that money 
is going to be wasted because you’re going to have to do things 
differently than originally started out to be. 
 
However I will ask you, under the Bill in order for a person to 
give consent they can have . . . you can have an implied 
consent. They don’t have to do it in writing. Is that a clause in 
there that gives you any concern that there may be some 
mix-ups down the road where people will say . . . a trustee will 
say I had consent, I had implied consent? However you’ll end 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

up in court and the client may say no you didn’t have consent. 
So I’m wondering if the clause in there that says you don’t have 
to give consent in writing gives you any concern? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The providers in this system already 
operate under their own professional ethics. And implied 
consent is not something new that this Bill has all of sudden 
introduced into the system. So I would assume that the onus on 
the provider, on the trustee with the information, will be the 
same and added onto with this Act. But I think that the 
professional ethics that govern how people provide care and 
how they are trustees of information now will only be built 
upon by this Act, not eroded. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Minister. You mentioned earlier 
that this Bill provides much better protection than it did before 
so the same thing may apply to this implied consent then. If 
you’re going to have explicit consent, and consent where you’re 
prepared to back it up with some fines which aren’t very large 
to say the least, you’re telling me that not having the consent in 
writing doesn’t cause you any concern. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Having worked in this system there is a 
fair amount of onus on the providers to get consent, depending 
on what you’re getting it for, in writing or verbally. That 
consent implied, expressed, or implicit will stay the same, and 
this Act will only reinforce that. We will not see anything . . . 
any less than we have now; in fact we will see it better defined. 
And I don’t think that there’ll be any problem with providers 
who already work in the system under this kind of assumption 
and under their own professional ethics. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Will consent then be a bit like negative billing 
— negative consent? If you don’t expressly say no, I don’t want 
my information used, then it may be misconstrued that that’s 
fine, go ahead and use it by the trustee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — That’s exactly the opposite. I mean the 
express consent is in writing but there’s also an onus on 
providers in the Act that there is some way to educate the public 
that this is what they’re expressing their consent for. 
 
I mean right now we look at consent forms for surgeries, for 
admissions to hospitals. You have informed consent, and that’s 
what we . . . this Bill will also deal with informed consent. So 
we expect people to be informed about what they’re consenting 
to, or actually asking to have their information not put on the 
system; that they will be informed. 
 
Mr. McLane: — But do you not see that there could be . . . a 
problem could develop? As I indicated before, and I’ll repeat it, 
that a trustee may think that they have consent and you end up 
in the courtroom and the client says no, I didn’t give him 
consent. Then you’ve got a problem. And that’s something we 
certainly don’t need to have — any more chaos in the health 
system than we’ve already got. 
 
And this to me would seem that would maybe lead down that 
path. And I would think that if you had consent in writing then 
it’s pretty black and white. And if the reason . . . if there’s a 
reason for not giving the consent in writing, I’d like to be made 

aware of that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think again back to my answer — I will 
repeat it again — that what’s in the system now still takes into 
consideration expressed consent and implicit consent. So that 
there are incidences where your consent is implied by the fact 
that you’ve gone to say a specialist from your GP (general 
practitioner) being referred there so your information has 
followed. That will not be changing. 
 
The Act does nothing to erode what is already in place. And 
that’s how the system works, and the providers work within the 
system, like I said before, under their own professional ethics. 
 
If there are problems with the termination or the definition of 
implied consent then those problems exist now. And this Act 
will enhance, I think, what we expect of providers and as 
trustees. And I don’t think it will do anything to erode what is 
now. I think it will only add to what we have in the system, as I 
said. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, who will be the main trustee in all 
of this? Who will be the one that will probably receive the most 
numbers of consent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Bill doesn’t anticipate one main 
trustee. A trustee is whoever takes the information from you. It 
will be most likely your doctor; it could be a nurse; it could be a 
lab tech; it could be a physiotherapist; a mental health worker. 
It doesn’t concentrate the trustee around one particular group. 
It’s a wide group of providers that will be trustees. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Under this Act, does it limit who could be a 
trustee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s on page 4 of the actual Act; under 
trustee, under the definition, under T; it specifies exactly who 
can be defined as a trustee. 
 
Mr. McLane: — That appears to be pretty broad, and it seems 
to me that it doesn’t limit it to . . . it doesn’t exclude anyone. Is 
that . . . do I read that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It includes what we would consider to be 
the mainstream health system. 
 
Mr. McLane: — But technically it doesn’t exclude anyone, is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not understanding the intent of your 
question — if you could clarify that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well I think the question is simple. I think 
technically, under the Act, it doesn’t exclude anybody from 
being a trustee, whether it be a doctor, a nurse . . . it could be a 
bureaucrat. It could be anyone. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It includes . . . The definition of trustee 
includes a wide variety of people that are included right now in 
the mainstream health system. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Not having received an answer I guess we’ll 
move on after asking the question of the minister three times. 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

One of the things that concerns me with a lot of legislation that 
your government has brought forward in the past three or four 
years are the number of regulations. And certainly this Bill is no 
different; in fact it’s probably a lot worse. The Bill is about 30 
pages long as I have it here, and there are pretty near two full 
pages of regulations. 
 
Can you tell me what the need for that length, that many 
regulations might be for a piece of new legislation that’s before 
the House and before the people of the province today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I just want to make a comment about not 
answering the question. Just because you don’t get the answer 
you wanted doesn’t mean that I have not answered the question. 
 
Under the regulations the health system is quite broad and the 
regulations need us to have the flexibility to deal with the 
system as it is now, and as it will be in the future. There is an 
ability in the regulations to have consultation when regulations 
are changed that will have impact on certain areas of the Bill. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, what this tells me, that there’s two 
pages of regulations for a 30-page Bill is that, as most people 
suspected, that you weren’t prepared nor ready to bring this Bill 
forward; and that so in order to accommodate anything that may 
be have to be changed in the security of the Cabinet chambers 
with an order in council, you can go ahead and change it. 
 
You’ve been asked today about the selling of information. You 
said, well that wouldn’t happen. But under the regulations a 
minister through an order in council can change all of that. A 
minister can change virtually every clause in this Act because of 
this amount of regulations. And as I’ve said, I suspect that the 
reason for this is because you weren’t ready to bring the Bill 
forward, and had to do it to try to justify $30 million being 
spent on the SHIN network. 
 
I would think that when you’re bringing in a new piece of 
legislation, that the amount of regulations in it, Madam 
Minister, could be very small to start with. Because it’s new 
legislation, put everything into the legislation and let the people 
look at it for what it is. 
 
The old saying, the devil’s in the detail, certainly applies to a lot 
of legislation, and here’s a perfect example of it. And I would 
have thought that maybe you might have wanted to be a little 
more upfront with the people, especially when you’re dealing 
with their privacy, as to exactly what you wanted to see in the 
Bill instead of trying to hide it in the regulations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I draw the member’s attention to page 28 
of the Bill, section 2, under regulation 63. 
 

At least 30 days before the coming into force of a 
regulation made pursuant to clause(s) (and name them) the 
minister shall provide a copy of the proposed regulation to 
each of the health professional bodies that regulate 
members of a health profession pursuant to an Act. 
 

This gives all the people who are impacted by this — the health 
providers, the regulated health professions — the ability to look 
at anything that we will be bringing in as a regulation to react to 
the changing health system as it . . . We all know it has been 

changing and will continue to change and also will technology. 
 
This gives a degree of comfort to the stakeholders and to the 
regulated bodies that there will be consultation before 
regulations are put into place. And we have given this assurance 
to people and this is actually one of the strengths of the Bill. 
 
And I think that in the consultation that we’ve had over the last 
18 months — the wide and extensive consultation — that 
people are very comfortable with this Bill. And I think the 
public will also be very comfortable knowing that their privacy 
is going to be protected. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Minister, yes, you will send a copy of 
this to all the member stakeholders. But again you’re missing 
the point. We’re talking about the people of the province — the 
real people out there. 
 
And as a legislator, I was sent to this building — the same as 
you were — to represent the needs of the people in my 
constituency. And they are hoping that I am looking after their 
needs in pieces of legislation. They’re not too concerned as to 
whether the number of stakeholders that you think are important 
— and they are — in the health system. But what about the 
people out there? 
 
I’m the representative of the people from my constituency. 
They’re my only avenue to know what’s happening with a piece 
of legislation — to keep them aware. And by hiding stuff in the 
regulations, you sure don’t further the trust of the people with 
legislators or with legislation. So you have to remember there’s 
a difference between the special interest groups and the real 
people of the province who you’re supposed to be protecting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d like to draw the member’s attention to 
page 2 of the Bill, the whereases that set out the rights of the 
public in this Bill, and clearly articulate to them that this Bill is 
for them and for their protection. 
 
All of the public that each of us represent would probably 
appreciate it if we read the Bill. And when we’re asking 
questions, I think the questions should keep to what the 
particular interests of the public are, which are to make sure 
their privacy is protected. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 71 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials for coming in today and 
answering our questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I would also like to thank my officials, and 
I would also like to thank the opposition members for their 
questions. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Health Information Protection Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite 
the Minister of Health to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to 
my left is Con Hnatiuk, the deputy minister. To my far right is 
Marlene Smadu, the assistant deputy minister; directly behind 
me is Carol Klassen, the acting assistant deputy minister, and to 
the right of Ms. Klassen is Lawrence Krahn, who is the 
executive director of medical services and health registration. 
 
Behind Mr. Hnatiuk is Steven Pillar, associate deputy minister, 
and to Mr. Pillar’s left is Rod Wiley, the executive director of 
finance and management services. And also with us is Barb 
Shea, executive director of drug plan and extended benefits. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good 
afternoon, Madam Minister, and to the associate minister, and 
good afternoon to all of your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, as you know just a few weeks ago, there was 
some argument I guess, if we could say that . . . use that word 
over whether or not that the proper process had been used as far 
as the government receiving calls from district health boards for 
capital funding projects. The regular process that your 
government had issued to the districts saying that the districts 
had to wait for a call from government was not followed. Your 
response to the media, Madam Minister, was that the process 
had changed and that every district health board should have 
known that. The fact is district health boards did not know that. 
 
Now what I want to know today is why was that process 
changed without informing the districts about it? And I really 
feel very strongly that the district, the Central Plains Health 
District in this case, was cheated out of a consideration for 
budget approval for the hospital in Humboldt. 
 
We have had a couple of years of deliberations over the 
building of a new hospital there whereat meetings . . . whereat 
members from Sask Health were present, knew full well that 
those . . . all of the plans had been made and that it was ready 
for submission to the government for approval. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I would like to know why this whole 
process had been changed by you or by your government and 
why there was not consideration given to the health districts to 

at least inform them if there was a change in process by the 
government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Just for the edification of 
the member, since becoming Minister of Health, I have really 
come to appreciate the capital funding process that the 
Department of Education has had and was developed while I 
was the minister of Education. It was a transparent process. 
Capital projects were submitted by school boards at any time. 
Capital projects were priorized, the process was transparent. 
And that’s what we’re moving to in Health. 
 
So for the purposes of this provincial budget, we have Health 
capital, $37.829 million. Of this, approximately 26.629 million 
is currently committed to projects already in progress. 
 
Health districts can now submit their capital projects to the 
department at any time. The health districts can submit projects 
that require urgent fire safety upgrading, occupational health 
and safety corrections, energy management initiatives, minor or 
major capital upgrades to address program and facility needs, 
and maintenance works. 
 
So we are moving to a system that’s transparent so that we 
don’t have a situation where for instance health districts are 
submitting capital requests each year. Those health district 
projects are going to be put on a list, they’re going to be 
priorized, and as the money becomes available, those projects 
will be undertaken. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I think you sort of danced 
around my question. 
 
Madam Minister, we have Sask Health officials out at just about 
every meeting, I understand, at every meeting where the 
planning for that capital project was being discussed and 
deliberated on. The Sask Health officials out in Humboldt knew 
very well that that project had been completed as far as 
planning goes. 
 
If in fact a submission for approval, an application for approval 
by government, could have been submitted at any time, surely 
the Sask Health officials should have known that and should 
have been courteous enough to offer that service to take in the 
proposal on behalf of the Central Plains Health District. 
 
Instead, what we got was the people out in Humboldt and 
Central Plains waiting and waiting and waiting for government 
to call for this application. I think this is underhanded and I 
think it’s quite deceitful, and I find it very disappointing. 
 
Madam Minister, could you tell me if there is any capital 
funding that will go out to the Central Plains Health District 
from this . . . any money from this year’s budget that will go to 
that district for the building of a new hospital in Humboldt? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that we are waiting for the 
Central Plains Health District — I believe that’s the name of the 
district — to submit their submission to the department. 
 
I’ve just indicated to you, member, that there is $37.829 million 
in capital funding this year, of which 26.629 million is currently 
committed — currently committed — and your health district is 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

in no different position that every other health district across the 
province. They can submit their proposals to us, and the 
difference between 37.829 million and 26.629 million — the 
difference of approximately 11.2 million — will be allocated. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. From what you’ve 
just said, if I’m hearing correctly, there has not been a 
submission yet from the Central Plains Health District for a new 
hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised that they’ve only 
submitted basic information. They have not submitted a project 
application. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I will look into 
that. And if you could afford the courtesy, I guess, to the 
Central Plains people of maybe checking with the Sask Health 
officials that were out there discussing plans for the new 
hospital and see whether or not they have further information, I 
would appreciate that. 
 
Madam Minister, I have some concern that . . . you know, with 
the whole revamping of the health system and the wellness 
model. I understand that you as government have asked district 
health boards to submit three-year strategic plans. And those 
plans I would presume had some guidelines for the health 
district officials. 
 
When I looked at the plan that Gabriel Springs had — first of 
all, they haven’t had one since 1994; and even in 1994, 1994 
was the last time needs and assessments were looked at in that 
district — they don’t have a plan right now for the . . . this time, 
the three-year strategic plan that’s supposed to be in. And the 
CEO (chief executive officer) of Gabriel Springs Health District 
tells me that they probably won’t have that plan ready for a 
couple of months yet. 
 
So, you know, when we’re considering the marks, the remarks 
rather, of the deputy minister of Health and the fact that some 
hospitals in rural Saskatchewan will not look the same as they 
did before, that naturally we’re wondering if that means that 
hospitals as they exist will be closing. Wakaw hospital is one of 
those hospitals that comes in play simply because of the daily 
census. 
 
So what I’m wanting to know is: is there any concern on the 
part of you as Health minister that these three-year strategic 
plans are not in place? They were supposed to be in place and 
sent to the government by the end of March for approval. 
 
How in goodness name can we determine whether or not needs 
in those districts are being met or whether or not there are good 
plans going on for the district if we don’t even have the 
three-year strategic plans completed when they should be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well one of the things that I’ve 
learned, and I’m sure the member has learned this, is that not 
only school divisions but health districts, governments, other 
agencies, can ask for plans, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that 
those plans are submitted in the time frame that the request is 
made for. 

As I understand, health districts across the province, some have 
submitted their strategic plan; others are still consulting with 
their communities as to the kinds of health services that 
communities would like to have in their particular health 
district. 
 
So yes, they were asked to have them submitted by the end of 
March. Many health districts have not done that because they’re 
continuing to consult with their various stakeholders and 
citizens. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
just for your information, the CEO of Gabriel Springs Health 
District told me personally that he had completed those 
consultations by last November already and still he seems to be 
able to sit there without completing all of these plans and 
sending them in. 
 
It would seem to me that your government would be concerned 
about that and would make sure that these people are 
accountable to do as they are supposed to be doing for the 
people of the province. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d just like to go to a further question. I want 
to know if this government has a plan to solve the very serious 
problem of a lack of medical specialists in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the information of the member, we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan, we’re very fortunate that 
we have a College of Medicine. And the College of Medicine 
not only trains Saskatchewan medical students to become 
general physicians, but it also is involved in a residency 
program for young people from across the country who want to 
specialize in particular fields of medical endeavour. 
 
What I can report to the member is that the number of 
specialists in this province in the last three years for instance, 
have increased from 439 to 451. And I’m told by dean of the 
College of Medicine that they have more faculty positions filled 
today than they’ve had for many years. 
 
In this budget, I can advise the member that we have 
significantly increased the health budget by $195 million. And 
in the health budget is contained funding, for instance, to recruit 
and retain medical oncologists and radiation oncologists, which 
are people that are required in the area of cancer treatment. 
 
In addition there are funds that have been made available 
through the health districts, particularly in Saskatoon and 
Regina, to recruit medical specialists. And I think that with 
some of the work that we’re now doing with general physicians 
in rural Saskatchewan, where they can train in a residency 
program for some specializations, that this is certainly assisting 
us in having general physicians in rural Saskatchewan that have 
specialization in general surgery, or anesthetics. This certainly 
is helpful. 
 
So I would say that Saskatchewan, not unlike many other parts 
of Canada, is busy recruiting those specialists that this province 
needs, particularly in the area of cancer treatment, particularly 
in the area of diabetes, and particularly in the area of 
neurosurgery. 
 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
know that there was a 1997 report of the medical council in 
Saskatchewan, the medical council being comprised of the 
college of physicians and surgeons, SMA, and the College of 
Medicine. And I know that that report also had officials from 
Sask Health that were invited to have submissions for the 
report. And I know that that report has guidelines in it, and I 
know that those guidelines are approved by Sask Health. 
 
Madam Minister, that report was entitled — and I’m not too 
sure why it was entitled as it was because certainly the 
guidelines in it do not concur with the intent of what the titling 
sounds like — it was entitled, Establishing and Maintaining 
Specialty Physician Services in Rural and Urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I really looked over that report and 
what I could see in there was that the guidelines were asking 
that there be three specialists of any one kind in an area of 
100,000 population and that there must be three or there will be 
none. 
 
Madam Minister, in rural Saskatchewan it is not necessary to 
have three specialists of any one kind. The necessity is not 
there. But it would be helpful if there was one allowed. Now 
it’s either, according to this report, three or none. 
 
So what is the result of this going to be? Specialists then are 
going to reside not in rural Saskatchewan but only in areas like 
Regina and Saskatoon because those are the only two areas of 
the province that would have a 100,000 population health 
district. 
 
Madam Minister, this report also indicates that Aboriginal 
people are not to be considered within the 100,000 population 
guideline. So there are areas within our province that have a 
number of Aboriginal people. 
 
What this whole thing means in essence is that we will not have 
resident specialists in rural Saskatchewan. We will only have 
the opportunity possibly for a specialist to be coming out of 
Saskatoon or Regina to rural areas once in a while — maybe 
once every week or two weeks — but no resident specialists in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, this sounds to me like centralization 
heavy-duty. Madam Minister, are there existing guidelines in 
that report that indicate to you that Saskatchewan Health is 
designing a program to limit the residency of specialists to a 
select number of cities in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you describe the medical council, 
the medical council is made up of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the College of Medicine, the college of physicians 
and surgeons, I believe PAIRS (Provincial Association of 
Interns and Residents of Saskatchewan), which is the residents 
association, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), and the Department of Health. And you know 
this is . . . these are recommendations that have come from the 
medical council. 
 
As I understand it, the medical council is saying that there 
should be a minimum of three physicians in each specialty area 

in order to provide adequate relief and coverage. and so that’s 
the public safety or a patient safety issue. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean that they all have to be located in the 
same area. Let me give you an example. I mean it would be 
possible to have a specialist in Humboldt for instance. 
Humboldt isn’t that far from Saskatoon. It would be possible to 
have a specialist in Melfort, not that far from P.A. And so on. 
 
It doesn’t mean that they have to be located in the same vicinity 
or the same city, but they need to be in closer geographic area in 
order to have relief and coverage, which is extremely important. 
 
And let me just give you an example. If you have two 
neurosurgeons for instance — and this is a problem that we’re 
having in Saskatoon with neurosurgeons — you have to have at 
least three available in order to cover off. And so there’s 
someone coming in from Regina to assist them in Saskatoon as 
they’re going out trying to recruit some more neurosurgeons. 
And it’s a public safety issue, member. It has nothing to do with 
the centralization of service; it has to do with having service, 
appropriate service, available to the people of this province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, when you talk about Humboldt 
and Melfort possibly having one resident specialist, the fact is 
that the boundaries of the health districts are different. And if 
you want to clarify or if you’re trying to clarify that it’s within 
an area that encompasses a 100,000 population base, I would 
like to receive that as a confirmation and an affirmation, 
because I think that will help people to get rid of some of their 
fears that we won’t have resident specialists in our own areas. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The key is that they work together and 
that they co-operate and collaborate with each other. It doesn’t 
mean they have to be in the same centre or the same health 
district. But they need to be able to work together and to be in 
collaboration with each other. And I think that’s the key. 
 
Just because one physician is in one health district and one’s in 
another, that shouldn’t prevent people from working together. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I’d 
like to go to the issue that you had just mentioned about . . . for 
instance, having — the necessity rather — of having three 
specialists, let’s just say, in and around Saskatoon. 
 
Well we very well know that our specialists are leaving. Dr. 
Gary Goplen has left. Mark Healey has left. These are top 
neurosurgeons in our whole country. They are gone as well as 
others are gone. 
 
Madam Minister, from what I understand, these specialists have 
said that they could do up to 60 surgeries a week and many of 
them only have O.R. (operating room) time to do three a week. 
 
Now if you say that’s not the reason, Madam Minister, I guess 
you need to be talking about what the reason is. It’s no use to 
say that we need three specialists in that area when they don’t 
have the time in the O.R. room to do what they are trained to do 
and what they want to do for the people of this province. Maybe 
you would like to offer further comment on what the reason is 
that these specialists, these very good specialists, have left our 
province. 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well Dr. Goplen was a constituent of 
mine, someone who I know. And so I can tell you that Dr. 
Goplen did not leave Saskatoon because of the events that you 
describe. 
 
As you know, we have just recently received the Noseworthy 
report, which is a report on the College of Medicine. And that 
report makes a number of recommendations which I think are 
extremely important to the future of the College of Medicine, 
but also to the future of this province in terms of being able to 
attract not only specialists to this province, but people who are 
academics and people who are researchers. 
 
(1645) 
 
And one of the areas that we have a lot of need for growth in is 
the co-operation between the College of Medicine, the health 
districts. This is certainly pointed out in the Noseworthy report, 
where there needs to be much more co-operation between 
Regina and Saskatoon health districts where we do have 
specialists, and the College of Medicine, which also has 
specialists. 
 
But there’s teaching specialists and there’re research specialists. 
And I think the trick is to develop a culture of co-operation 
where we have working environments for specialists, 
particularly in the College of Medicine, where they can do three 
things. They can teach, they can do their research, and they can 
also provide clinical services to the people of the province. 
 
And in order for them to do that, that requires the co-operation 
between the College of Medicine and the health districts. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I don’t think I heard you give 
me the answer of why you believe that Dr. Gary Goplen left. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think that you need to talk to Dr. 
Goplen. 
 
I did have an exit interview with him. It was in the confines of 
my constituency office. I don’t discuss conversations that take 
place in my constituency office between a constituent and 
myself. But I think that your observation about O.R. time is not 
the reason why Dr. Goplen left Saskatchewan. 
 
But you need to talk to him. He’s located in Kelowna, British 
Columbia, and I’m sure he could be reached through his 
parents. Or I can give you his address and phone number and 
you can have the conversation with him yourself. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I happen to believe that from 
everything that has transpired in this province since your 
government has taken office that we are heading towards 
centralization. We are heading towards centralization. 
 
This government has claimed that they would not decentralize 
. . . or that they would not centralize the system. You said that 
you’d give it back to the people. 
 
But what do we see, Madam Minister? We see hospital closures 
and downsizing. We see nursing home closures and 
downsizing. We see serious labour unrest to the point of civil 
disobedience; critical decisions that are affecting our province, 

made by the Premier. 
 
But this is not decentralization — it’s social manipulation, 
Madam Minister. The Premier tried to make criminals out of 
8,400 professional caring nurses. This is truly a deformed health 
system that the NDP has created, and it’s part of the 
government’s plan to reform health in a way that centralizes 
health. 
 
Madam Minister, why would this government cause nurses to 
leave the province? Why would this government cause 
specialists to leave the province? My deduction is that you 
believe that you may not need that many specialists or that 
many nurses in this province simply because we won’t have the 
services in rural Saskatchewan that we had before. 
 
Madam Minister, if health care is in the hands of the people, if 
health service decision making is decentralized, if health 
services are to be closer to communities, then why is the 
government putting restrictions on specialists who want to 
locate in rural areas? 
 
And that is what they are doing, Madam Minister. In Humboldt 
we are having restrictions placed on specialists that want to 
come into Humboldt. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I know the member is getting herself 
all rhetoriced up for the provincial election which is about to 
come shortly. And I must admit that rhetoric coming from the 
member just doesn’t look good on her, to be quite frank, 
because I don’t really think that’s who she is as a person. 
 
And I do want to say to the member that we have more services 
available in rural Saskatchewan than ever before. And let me 
just give you some examples. 
 
Up until recently, if you required cancer treatment in this 
province you went to Saskatoon or you went to Regina. Now 
you can have chemotherapy in 15 different districts. That’s 
called decentralization, Member. 
 
Up until recently, you could only receive your renal dialysis in 
Saskatoon and Regina. Now Lloydminster, P.A., Tisdale, 
Yorkton, and there’s another site that will be located shortly. 
 
You know, people talked about a lack of rural physicians in this 
province, and I can say that with this government we now have 
emergency room coverage for rural physicians, which means 
that when they’re away, other physicians can provide 
emergency coverage for them. 
 
We now have rural practice establishment grants which 
provides $18,000 to Canadian-trained physicians that establish 
new practices in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We now have medical bursaries at $18,000 per student per year, 
and those bursaries are available in second, third, and fourth 
year. And what that student has to do is return service to rural 
Saskatchewan of one year for each year they receive the 
bursary. And there are 15 grants each year. 
 
What do you know, Mr. Chairperson? We actually have young, 
Saskatchewan-trained doctors in rural Saskatchewan providing 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

services to rural people. 
 
On top of that, for rural people, rural physicians, we have a 
training program that provides up to two spaces for two rural 
physicians to get some specialized training in general surgery 
and anesthesia, and in exchange they provide a six-month return 
service to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We also have a locum service program which allows those solo 
doctors an opportunity to take a holiday, and they have locum 
coverage. 
 
And we also have weekend relief programs for those 
communities that have fewer than three physicians in rural 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think that’s bad. 
 
And if you tally it all up — 5.5 million for emergency room 
coverage; rural practice establishment grant, 18,000; 15 grants 
available each year of $18,000 per year for a student once 
they’re finished medicine to go to rural Saskatchewan. And 
guess what? Since 1991 there’s been 50 medical students have 
received bursaries; 21 of them have graduated, and 15 have 
completed or are serving their rural commitment for an overall 
retention rate of 71 per cent. I think that’s pretty good. 
 
On top of that, we have a training program which is 80,000 per 
year for an in-practice physician, plus 40,000 for a medical 
resident; locum service, half a million dollars a year; weekend 
relief, 1.3 million. And then we have a re-entry training 
program for rural family physicians that want to enter a 
specialty training. 
 
Now on top of that, we’ve increased rural home care by 42 per 
cent. We have Telehealth pilot projects linking rural physicians 
to specialists. We think that’s important. We not only have 
broader services, particularly in small hospitals and health 
centres; we not only have emergency care and chronic care, but 
now we have palliative care, respite care; we have professionals 
like chiropodists, dieticians, physiotherapists. 
 
So I say to the member, you know, you need to get out and ask 
people what services are available to them, and they will tell 
you there are more services available to them in rural 
Saskatchewan today than there were two years ago, four years 
ago, six years ago, eight years ago, ten years ago, twelve years 
ago. 
 
My point is that if you’re a person living on a farm, and my 
parents are, they have more health services for them today then 
they’ve ever had. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, what you read off of that paper 
is in word only. That is simply in word. 
 
I have talked to people in my constituency. Home care? Home 
care, there’s not even the number of hours that they had a year 
ago. Home care practitioners cannot give the service. They are 
getting more and more need for home care but they are not able 
to be able to provide the service. 
 
Madam Minister, Dr. Goplen and people like him have left this 
province simply because they do not have the backup staff to be 
able to assist them. Why in Yorkton are dialysis patients having 

. . . even though that the unit has been set up there, people are 
still leaving Yorkton and having to go to other centres to get 
dialysis. Madam Minister, why? They don’t have the backup 
staff to provide the service. 
 
You’ve mentioned to me that you were going to tell me another 
answer about why Dr. Goplen left and then you didn’t. But it 
doesn’t matter. That’s beside the point, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, there are not the backup services. The staffing 
to assist physicians and surgeons and specialists in this province 
are not there. And it’s simple as that. 
 
And nurses are leaving this province. They’re leaving in droves 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they are. I have had phone 
calls, as every other member of this legislature on this side of 
the House have, that indicate that if they’re only going to get 2 
per cent per year, they are leaving. And many of them have put 
in their applications already to work in other provinces, or more 
likely to work in the United States. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I’ll just be really short with the 
answer to this question about Yorkton. What the member needs 
to know is that the people who determine whether or not you’re 
eligible for renal dialysis. It’s not the Minister of Health, not 
any of these officials; it’s called a nephrologist. They’re a 
kidney specialist. 
 
And in the case of the nephrologist in Yorkton, eight. In this 
budget there is additional . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
you know, you need to get proper information. Eight. They 
were prepared to have eight off site because you have to have a 
linkage between the satellite centre and the Regina General 
where the nephrologists are located. 
 
In this budget there is funding to expand the program in 
Yorkton. Member, in addition, there are some people that are 
not eligible to have their renal dialysis on site because they . . . 
or off site, because they need to be in an area where there is a 
nephrologist available to them because they have complicated 
kidney failure. 
 
So, I mean, I’m sure that if you want real information, what you 
might want to do is contact Dr. Cam Wilson who is the 
nephrologist that is involved in the program with Yorkton, and 
he can give you accurate information. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Minister, I say hogwash. The CEO of the East Central 
Health District, number one, said it comes down to funding. 
There are a number of the 28 people that are using the dialysis 
either in Yorkton or Regina and there’s only eight being treated 
out there, number one, because you’re running it and only 
funding it for three days a week. 
 
Now I don’t know who’s telling the truth here — you, or the 
CEO, or the people in the Yorkton health district. But 
somebody is stretching the truth here. And, Madam Minister, I 
would be willing to lean a little bit towards them. 
 
We have the case of the man that lives two blocks from the 
Yorkton hospital. Could be treated in the Yorkton hospital; was, 
on Christmas Eve; but normally has to drive three times a week 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

or take the bus in here. And that person can be treated in 
Yorkton, but cannot be treated because of lack of funding. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I do not agree with what you’re saying 
here today, and you’d better check with the specialist because 
even he doesn’t agree with you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I will say this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We checked with him. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’m sure the member may have 
checked with, what’s his name, Doctor . . . Who’s the CEO out 
there? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Millar. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Dr. Millar — right. Dr. Millar. But I’ve 
had an opportunity to talk to the working committee, I think — 
what’s it called — Integrated Renal Committee. What you need 
to know is that this idea of having an off-site satellite clinic, for 
I think the Regina people, is new; that Yorkton is the first 
off-site satellite clinic for the southern part of Saskatchewan. 
The people in Saskatoon are more familiar with this because 
there is P.A. and Tisdale. And as I understand it, the program 
started in December, and they wanted to see how it worked. It’s 
worked quite well. Dr. Millar will know there is money in this 
budget to expand the program. The nephrologists are now very 
comfortable with the notion of an off-site satellite clinic. And 
we’re looking at expanding the program to another site. 
 
I mean, I know you really want to mix politics into this. And 
it’s not funding; it’s making sure that the people who are treated 
for renal dialysis are appropriate patients, because you need to 
make sure that they don’t have complications, that they can be 
served away from a nephrologist. You need to make sure that 
the people at the Regina General who monitor the dialysis are 
comfortable with the situation. And I can assure the member 
that the program is going to be expanded, and Dr. Millar will 
know that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, you told us this for two 
years. The past minister, the member for Yorkton told us the 
same stuff. 
 
I pushed for this. It was one of my pet peeves out there to get a 
renal dialysis unit in Yorkton and was very happy when it was 
announced. Now what we’re seeing is 6 to 8 people being 
treated in Yorkton and the other 20 driving to Regina. You’re 
going to tell me that all 20 of those people — not one of them, 
not two of them, four of them — could be done in Yorkton; I’m 
sorry, I don’t believe that, Madam Minister. 
 
(1700) 
 
And you say you’re going to expand it to other areas. Why 
don’t you fix the areas up that you’ve already got going, fund 
them properly, get them up and running, and then go to the next 
area. 
 
What we’re going to see — and you talk about me playing 
politics — that’s exactly what you’re doing. Oh, we did Tisdale, 
we did Yorkton, we’re going to Swift Current. We’ve been all 

over the place. You haven’t got one of them up and running full 
steam because you’re not funding them. You have people in 
Yorkton trained to run them and you’re not using them 
full-time; they have to go find part-time jobs. And I’m not 
playing politics. That is the truth, Madam Minister. 
 
So why don’t you fund Yorkton properly? Maybe only half of 
the 28 that’d normally get renal dialysis could use it, but that 
would be a vast improvement over the six to eight that you have 
now through lack of funding. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just for the members, to reiterate, there 
are eight people who are being served. It began in December of 
1998, January, February, end of March. 
 
End of March, the Minister of Finance, Minister of Finance 
announced in his budget 195 new million dollars for Health. 
There was a press release that said the Yorkton program and the 
Tisdale program was going to be expanded and it will. As well 
there is going to be another site. 
 
Do you understand? Is it clear? More people are going to have 
access to that site in Yorkton and the people who have access, 
that will be determined by the nephrologists — not you, not me, 
and not Dr. Millar, the CEO. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I have it very clear. I’ve watched your record in health 
care reform. In fact when the past minister, Louise Simard, 
came out and said we want all municipal officials, all 
community officials, all in the area of the East Central Health 
District to help form this district, take part in it, tell us what 
they think we need. 
 
And we went to meetings for, Madam Minister, probably a 
month, month and a half. Thought we had input. And she came 
along and said, well you’ve had input; now this is what we’re 
going to do. And that’s exactly what we’re seeing from you. 
And you talk about your record in health care. I have a little 
mistrust for you people. 
 
I remember in my constituency, Langenburg hospital comes 
right off the top here right away. That was the place where they 
raised money to build a new hospital. And you people came 
along and what did you do? You closed it. You shut it down. 
 
What do we have now? A glorified band-aid station that’s 
supposed to appease the people of that area. And they’re the 
first to say, if anybody has a problem, don’t stop at Langenburg. 
And the problem being now is that a number of cases don’t stop 
at Yorkton; come right to Regina, because in the end that’s 
where you’re going to get. 
 
So, Madam Minister, you can say I’m playing politics. I don’t 
trust you. The public of Saskatchewan don’t trust you when it 
comes to health care. So, Madam Minister, we’ll see what you 
do with renal dialysis. But we will be making you answer for it 
if once again it’s another one of those announcements where 
we’re putting more money in and it never sees the light of day. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just wanted to 
make some closing comments. And we must say on this side of 
the House, incongruence . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

I’m sorry, would you like to make a comment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to make a comment. To the 
member, he talks about the Langenburg health care complex. I 
just want to say this. That now in Langenburg . . . since the 
Langenburg facility was converted to a health care centre, we 
now have occupational therapy. This is since 1992. We now 
have speech language therapy. We have public health nursing 
five days a week, nutrition, dental education, diabetic 
counselling, podiatry, the lab five days a week, x-ray five days 
a week, physician services, home care, assessor, and nurse. 
 
So you know there are more things that are available to people; 
as well I believe that there are mental health services. So I don’t 
know what the member is talking about. You do not have your 
understanding of a hospital, but there are more services 
available to the people in Langenburg. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, if 
this reformed health system is all that we are going to get from 
this government, what the people of Saskatchewan have 
received, is not any benefit at all from it. But what the people of 
Saskatchewan have received are the liabilities of your reformed 
health system. 
 
Madam Minister, I have one more question to put to you. Have 
you heard any rumour that the board of governors of the 
University hospital in Saskatoon are talking of removing 
themselves from the Saskatoon Health District? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is no board of governors at the 
University hospital. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Pardon me then, Madam Minister, have you heard 
that the University hospital is thinking of finding a way to get 
out of the Saskatoon Health District. They are so frustrated 
within that hospital that they want to do something so that they 
no longer have to belong to a health district. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I haven’t heard that, but I’ll follow up. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, officials, I’d like to welcome you here, I guess, late 
afternoon to participate in these activities. 
 
Madam Minister, you put a certain amount of fear into the 
public here earlier this year with a few of your statements. And 
I wonder if you’d like to take this opportunity to clarify what 
you meant when you said that there would be fewer hospitals in 
Saskatchewan, when you went on to say that hospitals as we 
know them may not necessarily be in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder if you’d mind clarifying exactly what you meant. 
Because a lot of people take those statements — after having 52 
hospitals closed around this province — take the statement of 
fewer hospitals very seriously. And they view their hospitals, 
not as the Minister of Health described them as mental health 
services and home care and nutrition; they view hospitals as 
acute care facilities. That is what their term for a hospital 
means. It may mean inclusion of all the other services, 
including X-ray and including labs. But when they say hospital, 

their first thought is acute care. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you say fewer hospitals in 
Saskatchewan, what do you mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much. We have no, no 
plan to close rural hospitals. 
 
When we talk about health services, we’re talking about the 
broader health services that make you healthy. Your access to 
an acute care bed is not what’s going to make you healthy or 
keep you healthy. What you need to have is a broad variety of 
services to meet your ongoing needs, and the communities 
themselves identify those needs and as the districts do their 
needs assessment. And then the districts plan to address those 
needs and where to address the needs. 
 
Now what we’ve seen in what we call the social determinants of 
health, that what makes you healthy is not your access to a bed 
or a doctor or nurse, it’s whether you have good education, 
good food, decent housing, security, piece of mind — all those 
things impact on your health. So when we put a broader range 
of services into our health facilities, we are meeting the needs of 
people, the broader needs of people that make them healthy and 
keep them healthy. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I don’t even 
disagree with you on that. Except for the fact that when people 
need acute care services, they need them very quickly. 
 
And with the closure of the 52 hospitals that happened and with 
the fewer hospitals that you have commented on this past fall, 
people become very nervous because they want those acute care 
services in their communities. Because when an accident 
happens, they want to know that those facilities are going to be 
available to them. They want to know that the medical staff is 
going to be available in those communities. 
 
The Minister of Health just talked about the Langenburg health 
care facility. That place locks its door on Friday afternoon and 
doesn’t open up again until 8 o’clock Monday morning. What 
do you do for health care services on the weekend? They used 
to have an acute care facility there. They used to have nurses on 
staff. They used to have doctors on call. Don’t have that any 
more. And that’s what you’re proposing for more places in 
Saskatchewan when you say fewer hospitals. So, Madam 
Minister, I wonder if you could name those locations where 
there will be fewer hospitals. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I appreciate the member 
agreeing with me on what health services are and what the 
health needs of people are and what determines health. 
 
I think that I want to reiterate that there is no plan to close rural 
hospitals. And there has been a campaign of fearmongering 
going on trying to have people in rural Saskatchewan believe 
that the average daily census will determine the fate of their 
hospital. That is not so. And that is not what was said by me or 
by anyone else. 
 
When we talk about health services, again I want to say that 
health services are what people need. The districts are 
determining those needs by a needs assessment; they’re 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

planning to address those needs by putting services and 
programs in place that meet the broader needs of people, not 
just for access to an acute care bed. 
 
We now have access to respite care, palliative care, observation 
beds, step down beds, swing beds, all the things that people in 
rural Saskatchewan as well as urban Saskatchewan need when 
they have certain needs not just whether they have emergency 
needs. 
 
But there are many more needs that people have to have 
addressed, and that’s what the broader health services that we 
are contemplating and we are delivering will do for people of 
Saskatchewan, both rural and urban. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Which of 
these fewer hospitals will no longer have acute care services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I’ve said before, there is no plan to 
close rural hospitals. So to name some would be pretty much an 
exercise in futility. 
 
If the member wants to hear me again recite what we think 
about health care, I certainly will do that because I think that we 
have . . . the plan we do have is to broaden the delivery of 
health services that will meet the real needs of people in rural 
Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
The health needs of people are changing and the service 
delivery is changing. Our service delivery is more integrated. 
And as we change the service delivery systems to meet the 
needs of people, we will see changes. Those changes are going 
to enhance the services that we deliver and add services to 
many places, including rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, when you use the term 
hospital, does that always include acute care services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I believe I’ve answered the question about 
no hospitals being planned to be closed in rural Saskatchewan. 
The definition of a hospital I think is clear. And I think acute 
care in a hospital is something that’s needed in many situations, 
and how many are needed is for the district to determine. 
 
That’s what the districts do with their needs assessment. They 
determine how many acute care beds they have to have and 
where. So that is up to the districts to decide, and that is what 
they are doing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, does your definition 
of a hospital always include acute care? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Not only my definition of a hospital, but 
the definition of a hospital is 24 access to acute care and a 
physician service. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that. 
Now why did you say there would be fewer hospitals in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — What I said was that the nature of health 

services are changing — as I’ve just said before — and that we 
will see a different service delivery depending on the needs of 
the communities. And that’s what we’ll be seeing. We’ll be 
seeing that the needs of the communities will be addressed 
through whatever services are needed and programs that are 
needed, and those will be put in place by the different districts 
as they address the needs of their communities. 
 
Those needs are going to be changing and so will the service 
delivery patterns. And that’s what we’re going to be addressing 
and the districts will be addressing to keep up to the needs of 
their people. As our demographics change, as our population 
changes, as technology changes, as our service patterns change 
— all those things will be taken into account as the districts 
contemplate their needs. And then to address those needs, they 
put the programs in place. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So then you’re saying, Madam Minister, 
there will be fewer hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m sure you’ve heard me not say that at 
all. I’ve said there is no plan to close rural hospitals. I 
categorically stated that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, I’m glad you said that because I’d 
like to quote another statement you made: “Hospitals, as we 
know them, may not necessarily be in rural Saskatchewan.” 
You said that in a news scrum. 
 
So what did you mean by that, Madam Minister? “Hospitals, as 
we know them,” which means, in your own words now, acute 
care facilities, “may not necessarily be in rural Saskatchewan.” 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — What I meant is that the mix of services 
that we’ll see in hospitals will be different than what we have 
traditionally seen in a hospital. We have not seen public health, 
mental health, home care, observation beds, palliative care, 
respite care, chiropodist, dentists, physiotherapists, occupational 
therapists — all those services delivered under one roof. 
 
We haven’t seen that before. We are seeing it now. Those types 
of a congregation of integration of services are something that 
are going to add to the health services that are out in rural areas 
and in urban areas, when we put services together like that to 
actually address the needs of different communities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, you’re saying then 
that it will be up to the district health boards to determine 
whether or not a facility retains its acute care services based on 
their needs assessment. 
 
Or would it be better to say, Madam Minister, that the health 
districts will make the determination on which facilities have 
acute care services based on the funding you provide them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think the health districts as we know 
them now, as I said before, they do a needs assessment. They do 
a needs assessment in their communities, then they develop the 
programs to address those needs, and then they establish where 
those programs are best delivered. That is something that’s been 
going on since the formation of the districts and that is their 
mandate. 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If a 
district health board did a needs assessment which determined 
that they needed more acute care services, would you fund it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Our funding is based on need 
and on population and if that need has been identified to service 
a different population or a certain population, then we will be 
funding it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And who determines that need, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, the health districts have 
the mandate to do their needs assessment, which they have done 
ongoing for several years now. Those needs assessments are 
becoming more sophisticated and they’re identifying more 
problems in their districts and they’re identifying which 
programs need to be put in place to address those needs. They 
are doing a very good job of that, and that’s why we’re seeing 
expanded services, we’re seeing added services, and we’re 
seeing enhanced services in all of our communities and our 
rural and urban society. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We’re seeing all sorts of services except 
acute care. Madam Minister, if a district health board 
determined under its needs assessment that it needed more acute 
care, would you fund it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our funding is based on need and on 
population. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So Madam Minister, I’m sure the 
district health boards understand your base-on formula that says 
need and population. So you’re saying while the need may be 
there, if they don’t have the population numbers, you’re not 
going to fund it — is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not sure exactly how you can separate 
that because it’s the population that needs things. So I think that 
if the population needs certain services, that’s what will dictate 
how it’s being funded. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if we have a 
more aging population in the health district we are going to 
need different health care services than if we have a whole 
series of 20-year-olds in that health district. 
 
So while population certainly plays a role, the need of that 
population at times can play a greater role. You’re saying the 
district health boards get to do the needs assessment and that 
you fund it based on needs assessments. So, Madam Minister, if 
the health board does a needs assessment that says they need 
more acute care, will you fund it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think I’ve answered that question. I’ve 
said yes. If they’ve identified that as their need, that’s how it 
will be funded. 
 
I find it interesting that you’re only interested in acute care. 
What we’ve talked about is a change of demographics of our 
society and many of the needs that we have never addressed are 
now being addressed in some of these integrated facilities and 
to a far better degree. 

When our elderly population . . . and as our population ages, 
their needs are changing. We now have occupational therapists, 
physiotherapists, podiatrists. We have people that are giving . . . 
they’re giving services to our elderly population in the way and 
in the places where they need them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, since getting 
information out of you is like pulling wisdom teeth, you have to 
deal with you one issue at a time. And that’s why I’ve been 
dealing with acute care. 
 
But I’m glad to see now that you’re prepared to . . . If a district 
health board comes to you and says our needs assessment says 
we need more acute care, that you’re prepared to fund it. I hope 
the other Minister of Health agrees with you on that because 
that’s what your statement has been. And I’m sure that the 
district health boards will be very interested in that statement, 
Madam Minister, and I suspect you may very well see a 
significant number of applications coming in for further funding 
for acute care. 
 
So, Madam Minister, let’s move onto another area of health 
care that needs some significant concerns addressed. And that’s 
long-term care. There are a good many areas in this province 
that need substantial increases in services of long-term care. 
 
So, Madam Minister, if the needs assessment provided by the 
district health boards indicate that there is a need for more 
long-term care, will you fund it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The same answer as for acute — if there’s 
a population and there’s a need, yes we will fund it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Again, Madam Minister, the population 
is irrelevant if there is a need there. Or is the population base 
actually the major criteria here — that need is of lesser 
importance but your formula based on your population is what 
is the driving imperative for your department? 
 
Is need, is the need for the service the driving imperative? Or is 
fitting your population numbers into the formula the driving 
imperative? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I don’t think we can disconnect population 
and need. I don’t think we’d want to be having the need for one 
person to have long-term care in a far-reaching community and 
suggest we would build a facility for that person. So we have to 
connect need and population. And that’s how we do base our 
funding. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well there are a good many areas of this 
province, Madam Minister, in which the need is there and the 
population is there, and it’s a lot more than one person that 
needs a long-term care bed or an acute care bed, and it’s not 
happening around this province under your government. 
 
All you have to do is talk to virtually any person on the street 
that’s had any dealings with the health care system and they’re 
extremely unhappy with it. We’ve just gone through a strike in 
which the majority of the nurses have said that they were 
extremely unhappy with the working conditions that you have 
put them through, Madam Minister. 
 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

One of the things that you did during this nurses’ strike was 
move people out of the province and provided services for them 
in Minot or in some other locations. 
 
Madam Minister, did you pay for the entire costs of the patients 
that were transferred out of the province, and did you also pay 
for any companion that travelled with those patients? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes we did and we paid for one 
companion for each of those transfers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Since 
you paid for out-of-province travel and since you paid for travel 
by a companion for out-of-province travel, why are you not 
providing the same kind of support for people who were 
transferred in province — not because of a regular transfer 
where they would have been transferred from a community 
hospital into one of the central facilities, but because they were 
transferred strictly based on the strike, where family members 
had to travel with the patient that was in the acute care facility 
to another acute care facility where the services were being 
provided in that health district or in a neighbouring health 
district? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — If people were transferred somewhere 
where they didn’t normally go, then we would be paying. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, my colleague 
from Melfort had a citizen who was transferred because of the 
strike from Melfort to P.A. which would not have been a 
normal transfer for them. The cost of the transfer had to be 
borne by that patient and as well as the companion that travelled 
along with them. Will the department be investigating that and 
covering those costs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Please just share that information with us, 
and yes we will look at it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the things that you talked about last 
fall were primary health services and you tried to describe that 
as the new forum for health care facilities across this province. I 
wonder why in that discussion that was to help you correct 
some words that you had used earlier as fewer hospitals, etc., 
why acute care was not also discussed and provided in this 
primary health services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Primary health services has been 
something I’ve been interested in for a long, long time. In my 
previous position I have been very, very interested in promoting 
primary health services. Primary health services do include 
acute care services and circumstances where the need is there. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the 
things that the department has just done is carried out a study on 
the waiting lists, and we have the longest waiting lists in 
Canada. And a study was carried out that identified some of the 
points, the pinch points in the system from I believe it was the 
time that a patient saw the surgeon to the time they actually 
received the surgery. And there was some recommendations in 
there and hopefully those recommendations will prove to be 
beneficial. 

Madam Minister, are you carrying out a study prior to the visit 
with the surgeon? Are you investigating the waiting periods 
from the time that a patient may see a GP to a specialist, the 
time from a specialist to a surgeon? Are you investigating those 
areas to determine what pinch points there are in the system in 
those areas? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our task force looked at, as you had 
described, the waiting time once you’ve been diagnosed and 
have seen your specialist. We have not looked at the time 
leading up to that. We have not heard an urgent need for that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when you have 
as much as a 28-week waiting period for surgeries, I think there 
is a serious concern there that needs to be addressed. And I 
think an investigation in that area would be very relevant. 
 
In fact, what’s the statistic — that you wait 21 days for cancer 
surgery in Regina, or . . . yes, Regina I believe it is, if not the 
province? I think in those areas there is a critical need for some 
of those surgeries to be done a lot quicker than that, Madam 
Minister. I’m sure you’ve heard some of the horror stories as 
well as I have of people who failed to get in for cancer 
treatment and surgery because of the waiting list that suffered 
fatal results of those waits. And I think we need to take a very, 
very serious look at the whole system and not just look at one 
little piece of it. 
 
But we’ve had major health reform in this province since 
1993-94 and we’ve never taken a look at the entire system to 
see what’s happening — what’s working, what isn’t working. 
Obviously some things aren’t working. There may be some 
things that are working, and that will be well and good and 
those can remain in place. But we need to take a very serious 
look at what isn’t working. And to do that we have to take a 
look at the system and that hasn’t happened yet. 
 
I was pleased to see that the study was done from the surgeon to 
the surgeries. But we also need to take a look at what happens 
prior to meeting the surgeon. 
 
So is your department, and are you, taking a look at that and 
doing a study of what health care reform has meant to 
Saskatchewan Health and the actual service that patients 
receive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. We’re constantly looking at 
what we can do better. What the $12 million in the budget will 
address now, the recommendations from the waiting list task 
force, will be what we can quickly do is serve more patients 
through day surgery. We can also coordinate the 24-hour 
post-operative care in districts surrounding Regina and 
Saskatoon so there’s a better admission/discharge service in 
place that includes home care. 
 
We also are changing the system so that people scheduled for 
elective surgery can be given priority based on need. And this is 
something that we’ve never had on a waiting list or a 
waiting-time system. 
 
So those are things that we’ll be doing immediately to address 
what the task force showed us in their recommendations. 
 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1999 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe 
within your budgets you have allocated $50 million for 
computer upgrades or dealing with YK 2000 potential 
problems. 
 
Exactly what are you doing there, Madam Minister? What 
assurances do we have that our health care system and our 
records are going to be safe? And is the $50 million going to be 
adequate or are we going to see, as we have seen in the case of 
the Plains hospital transfers, massive overruns? 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We believe that the $50 million 
millennium fund for medical equipment and technology, that 
amount is efficient . . . is sufficient to ensure the critical Year 
2000 needs are addressed. And the fund will be targeted 
towards the costs incurred by health districts and the cancer 
agency specifically related to the Year 2000 readiness. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Since I 
mentioned the Plains, it triggered another thought. How much is 
the cost overruns going to be at the Plains? 
 
Now I know that you’re likely going to stand up and say, oh, 
no, no, we’re right on budget, right on time, nothing has 
changed, except we’ve added on all of these other new things 
that we have to do like in fact finding a parking place for staff. 
 
You know, we didn’t need that on the original plan because we 
weren’t actually going to have any staff in there because the 
nurses were all leaving. But now we’ve decided maybe we will 
need some staff in there so now we’re going to build a parking 
lot that’s not included as part of the original proposal. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the Plains transfer to the General 
Hospital, what is it going to cost us and how much are the 
overruns going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The total cost of the project, original 
projected cost was 83.2 million. The cost overruns, including 
the building code overruns, project building and site 
requirement overruns, move cost and commissioning, and the 
demolition of the nurses’ residence has totalled it up to 95.2 
million. 
 
The MRI (magnetic resonance imaging ) has been added in at 
2.3 million. There has been some other initiatives — 
community health consolidation, energy management and 
laboratory consolidation that also added about 6.4 million. 
 
Then there were program enhancements that the district 
undertook to do at the same time. That included the burn unit, 
the cath lab — the second cath lab — the enterostomal therapy, 
eye clinic, the G.I. (gastrointestinal) unit, and that added 
another 15.4. Mental health added 9.7. So the total cost of the 
project is $129 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when you know 
you’re doing a major project like this, why wouldn’t you have 
included all of these other things in the original estimates? 
 
You knew you were going to be putting a new MRI in there. In 

fact as I’m told that when the MRI — I’m not sure I should say 
when it arrived — before it arrived, the room was built and all 
of a sudden it was discovered that the room was too small and it 
had to be reconstructed to fit the MRI into that particular area 
where it was going. 
 
I mean there are some of these things, Madam Minister, that are 
obvious failures by the district health board in their planning 
process in dealing with this move. And I would suspect that part 
of this problem came about because of the decision of the 
government to rush the closure of the Plains ahead by a year so 
that they wouldn’t actually have to deal with that situation 
during an election year. That’s why it was closed last year 
rather than this year as it originally had been slated to do so. 
 
When the minister, Louise Simard, made the announcement of 
the closure of the 52 hospitals, one of those items was that the 
Plains hospital would close in five years. So the General 
Hospital went ahead with its plans for the expansion for the 
eventual closure of the Plains hospital that was rushed. 
 
All of a sudden you had to have all these other things in there. 
You had to have the energy consumption changes; you had to 
have the mental health services changes all in there. And that 
should have been planned into the process prior to those moves, 
but because of the rush at the Plains hospital it created a severe 
dislocation and that caused considerable problems. 
 
The $129 million, Madam Minister, should have been part of 
the original estimates. Why wasn’t it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think what we’re having is a confusion 
about what’s actually project ’98 and what are actually program 
enhancements that the district planned to put in given that they 
had the ability to do so at this time. 
 
As I have said before that health services and our health needs 
are ever changing, so what was planned back when the project 
was determined changed as it went along which is normal in 
construction. And it is also normal for the district to add in what 
they have now seen as identifiable needs and to include them in 
the construction as this project was going along. 
 
Those have added services to Regina that they would not have 
had before and at a considerable less cost than they would’ve if 
they would’ve waited and done them afterwards as stand-alone 
projects. 
 
Subvote (HEO1) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (HE02), (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 



April 28, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d like to thank all the officials from the 
Department of Health, and I’d also like to thank the members 
opposite for their questions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the minister — both the ministers — and their officials 
for coming in today and providing us with some of the answers. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


