





























































Hansard: April 27, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 829 
 April 27, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I had 
done a bit of a rant, but I’ll carry on. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to the Lake Diefenbaker potato 
company — and you outlined the various principals that are 
involved in that, four of them — what kind of investments do 
they have? What is the equity position of the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes. They’re a private company or 
corporation, if you will. We provided the names of the 
shareholders as best we know them. But in terms of the extent 
of the level of investment by each one of them, we don’t have 
access to that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have security 
there. Now what place in the entire scheme of security is the 
Saskatchewan security, the Sask Water security? Are we 
secured in the first place, or are we subject to some securities by 
other creditors? Where do we rank in the case of necessity to 
recover some of this security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay. First of all, we have two forms of 
security. The first is we’re secured against the buildings, and 
then secondly we have a third priority on all . . . on general 
assets, I should say. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So we have first security on the 
buildings. How about on the land? Are we in third position on 
the land, or are we in first position on the land because of the 
mortgage situation, and then we’re in third position on all other 
potential assets. If that’s the case, who holds first security on 
the other assets and second security on the other assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You know, if I’ve got your question 
accurately, first of all the building and the land are considered 
as one unit; they’re not separate at all. The Farm Credit 
Corporation and the Royal, to the best of our knowledge, have 
what is called a pari passu agreement that splits up the asset’s 
proceeds if dissolution were to take place; that’s how it’s laid 
out. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In regards to the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) operation in Lucky Lake, I understand the initial 
intention was that that operation would be producing white seed 
potatoes for the export market and that it has since gotten 
involved in the domestic food market. But could you confirm 
that the initial intention of SPUDCO was that it would be 
producing white seed potatoes for export? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all I would want to say that 

there was, as you are probably aware, some substantial 
investment in infrastructure in that area already, and I’m talking 
about irrigation infrastructure that was largely grown in the 
1980s under the last government — I’m not being critical of 
them, I’m just saying it was there. 
 
The intent of Sask Water through its SPUDCO division was to 
find some crop other than canola or a wheat that certainly are of 
nowhere near the value that potatoes are. 
 
The intent of SPUDCO at the time was, as you’ve described, to 
develop the seed potato industry — and really still continues to 
be our objective, that is the development of the seed potato 
industry. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My understanding is 
that after having been initially established to get into the white 
seed potato export market, it instead has gotten into the red 
domestic food market and that that’s the problem we have now 
with of course the glut of potatoes and the catastrophic drop in 
potato prices. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just in response to the member, I think 
largely you’re confusing the operation between the objectives 
of SPUDCO and Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. As I 
said, SPUDCO’s objectives are the development of the potato 
seed industry, and they were and still are. What Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation’s market plans are is for them 
. . . it’s their decision to make, and I believe you’re confusing 
the two of them. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well I guess I have to ask. Is SPUDCO in fact 
involved in the red domestic food market, today? Is that their 
production? Are they selling into the red domestic food market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, to the member, all of our 
crop production and all of our crop sharing arrangements with 
local producers are solely for the production of seed potatoes. 
But as an example where the seed is grown too large, they 
obviously would use some of those for fresh pack. But that is 
not the objective in any of the arrangements that we have with 
any of the growers. They’re just simply the residual potatoes, if 
any of those are used for fresh pack. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I guess though, Mr. Chairman, whether 
residual or not, is it this red domestic food production that has 
caused the catastrophic drop in potato prices, which now means 
that potato producers are getting 2 cents a pound, and they’re 
not able to continue at this 2 cents a pound. What we want to 
know is, has taxpayers’ money been used to compete against 
potato producers? Is taxpayers’ money being used to drive 
potato producers out of the industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I want to point out to the member that in 
all of Saskatchewan . . . Saskatchewan’s production represents 
1 per cent of all the potato production in western North 
America. That’s all of Saskatchewan’s potato production. Now 
SPUDCO would represent probably one-tenth of 1 per cent. 
We’ve just done some quick calculations here. So to suggest 
that SPUDCO has any significant influence on the world price 
of potatoes is I don’t think a logical conclusion. 
 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Mr. Hillson: — With all due respect, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 
think the minister is answering the question. Is Lake 
Diefenbaker, is SPUDCO selling into the domestic, and I mean 
local Saskatchewan red food market? 
 
Now I’m being called by local producers, including Hutterite 
colonies, who have a very limited market. Their market is 
driving into the city of Saskatoon and it hardly pays for them to 
use up the gas to go into Saskatoon. Their market is extremely 
localized. And in Saskatoon they’re selling northern 
Saskatchewan potatoes. Of course in Regina they’re selling 
Craven potatoes. 
 
So to talk about 1 per cent of the western North American 
market . . . They’re not competing with Seattle; they’re not 
competing with San Francisco; they’re not competing with Los 
Angeles or Vancouver. We’re talking about the Saskatoon 
market which is a very localized market that can be flooded 
very easily. And what I’ve been told is that taxpayer-subsidized 
ventures are flooding the Saskatoon market which has in fact 
made it uneconomic for other producers such as private 
producers and Hutterite colonies to continue in potato 
production. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — One of your questions referenced the 
Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation and where they’ve sold 
their potatoes. Again I can’t comment on a private company or 
corporation. What they do with and how they market potatoes is 
entirely up to them. 
 
With respect to SPUDCO, we sold . . . Roughly 2 per cent of 
the total amount of potatoes sold, as far as we’re aware, went 
into the fresh pack market so far. So it represents a very, very 
small amount. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well can the minister tell us how many pounds 
were sold into the Saskatoon market, which is the market we’re 
talking about. I say, I don’t care how many potatoes were sold 
in Seattle or Los Angeles. How many pounds were sold into the 
Saskatoon market, into the local domestic Saskatchewan 
market? 
 
I think where we’re mixing apples and oranges here is you’re 
talking about the total western North American market which is 
talking about 150 million people. But we’re talking about a very 
localized market in northern Saskatchewan that can be flooded 
very easily. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the best of our knowledge, 
specifically the answer to your question is none of the potatoes 
are sold into the Saskatoon market. The 2 per cent that I alluded 
to earlier, as far as we know, all went into the Alberta market. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, can the minister confirm 
that Saskatchewan taxpayer dollars are not being used to 
compete against Saskatchewan potato producers, that’s driving 
Saskatchewan potato producers out of business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Then, Mr. Chairman, can the minister then tell 

us to what he and his officials attribute the drop in potato prices 
to 2 cents a pound in this province, in the localized market, as 
opposed to the rest of the common. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think, again, I’d want to repeat the fact 
that prices are down throughout western North America and this 
certainly isn’t a localized issue. And I think, again, in reference 
to the amount of potatoes that SPUDCO is involved in 
producing, to suggest that they have any impact on the world 
market prices or western North American prices, is quite a 
stretch. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the minister can 
understand that at 2 cents a pound we are driving potato 
producers out of the industry. And I would ask if there is any 
plan on the part of the department to try and level the playing 
field, to try and get potato producers through this crisis so that 
potato production in the province can be secured. Or is the plan 
to drive out the private potato producers so that these 
corporations we’ve been discussing will be the only ones 
producing potatoes in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Absolutely not. It isn’t our intent to 
drive anyone out of the industry at all. As I said earlier, we’ve 
. . . the infrastructure is there in Saskatchewan; we have all of 
the irrigation infrastructure in place. A lot of the area out in the 
Lake Diefenbaker area, Outlook area, is prime location for 
growing potatoes — it grows good potatoes. And it certainly is 
our intent to ensure that the potato industry continues growing 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have one 
last question dealing with SPUDCO. Is Mark Langefeld an 
officer of the Lake Diefenbaker corporation or is he involved in 
any way, shape, or form with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As far as we know he is, yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What role does he play in the 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, to the best of our knowledge he 
was hired by their board of directors as their chief executive 
officer. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Does he remain in that position at the 
present time or has there been any changes? And has there been 
any changes in the SPUDCO board in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all with respect to your question 
with respect to SPUDCO, SPUDCO is a division of Sask Water 
and it doesn’t have a board. And to the best of our knowledge, 
Mr. Langefeld is still there, but we’re not . . . again we’re not 
the one that hires or dismisses him if the case be. He’s hired by 
the board and by the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation as 
far as we know. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Does your department or SPUDCO have 
any directors on the Lake Diefenbaker board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

Minister, an issue that has been one of great concern to a lot of 
taxpayers in east-central Saskatchewan is of course the 
moratorium that was put on drainage with the Assiniboine, the 
Upper Assiniboine basin study. And that’s been in place I think 
for the last two and a half years. I think we’re in the final year 
of that study. 
 
Could you indicate where that study is in terms of the 
relationship between your department and that of Manitoba and 
the kind of study that has been worked on? What 
recommendations do you see coming forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, as the different levels of 
government are trying to compile a report, it would be 
inappropriate I think for me to speculate on what the 
recommendations would be. 
 
I would say this though, that . . . First of all, one other thing I 
wanted to add. You had alluded to in your question that the 
Saskatchewan government and the Manitoba government were 
working together. I need to add as well that the Canadian 
government as well is involved in this process. 
 
And I thought that it might be just as simple as just to read for 
you . . . The technical committees — there’s six committees, by 
the way, in Saskatchewan — are proceeding with their work 
plans and expect to present the results of their work to the local 
watershed committees in May and June of this year. Work will 
then focus on developing water management objectives and 
strategies for the watershed. This will involve working with 
local watershed committees in the fall of 1999 — this fall. 
Public open houses will be held between November of this fall 
and January 2000 to present the study results and finalize 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Connected to that river basin study, of course, is the whole 
problem with Fishing Lake. And as you’ve indicated, because 
of the waters actually travelling across a provincial boundary, 
we do have the federal government involved, we have the 
provincial government of Manitoba, we have municipal 
governments involved — those communities that actually 
obtain their water sources along that river. 
 
And as you are aware, Mr. Minister, because I’ve spoken to you 
about this before, the Fishing Lake project, as it was defined, 
was to deal with the extremely high levels of water that are 
currently within the Fishing Lake system. That project was put 
forward and it was rejected by a number . . . I shouldn’t say 
rejected, I guess. What occurred was a number of communities 
objected to that project and asked for further study by Sask 
Water to insure that, indeed, their concerns were being met, 
rightly so. 
 
Now that we’re moving past that, and I know we have a 
situation in the community of Canora where they are now going 
to be obtaining their own . . . their supply of water is going to 
be coming from a different source, which I’m sure Sask Water 
is aware of as well. We have the ability to deal with that project 
again. 
 
I understand that the Foam Lake watershed corporation had its 
meeting last night, in fact, where Sask Water was going to be 

making a proposal to that. Can you inform the House and the 
people of Saskatchewan as to what Sask Water is intending to 
do with that extremely high level of water at Fishing Lake and 
how they’re going to return the lake to its level of a number of 
years ago. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I hope you would appreciate the concerns 
that have been raised to me regarding, first of all, environmental 
damage around the lake with the water level being five, six feet 
higher than what it normally is. There’s tremendous damage to 
the environment. There are a number of homes that were 
damaged and are still at tremendous risk because the ice has not 
left the lake. And there is a tremendous fear that if the ice 
breaks up on a day when there’s going to be extremely high 
winds, there will be a tremendous amount of damage. 
 
The project doesn’t require a lot of money. I’ve heard from a 
number of people in the area that because of how the 
environment changes when you have very flat land with water 
actually seeping from lake to lake. It doesn’t take much for 
willows and different grasses to grow and block the silt that is 
coming down with the water. As a result, what we’ve seen is 
tremendous increase in the water level. 
 
The project that was proposed by Sask Water dealt with a fairly 
significant project: cutting through lands, getting easements 
from farmers, and that’s been put on hold. Is there an alternative 
to that that can be done in a fashion that is, of course, much 
more economical, but also would still achieve the same result 
that was there five years ago? That water flowed through that 
system five years ago; today it’s not flowing. There must be a 
problem downstream. Is Sask Water proposing another 
alternative solution? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well I’d like to tell you that we’re going 
to take any surplus water and move it up to northwest 
Saskatchewan where we really need it, but unfortunately that’s 
not the case. 
 
I want to tell you that discussions and options are still being 
examined and explored. The watershed association, in 
discussion with Sask Water, continues to focus on decisions and 
processes to move a proposal forward. And the proposal would 
centre around some of the key questions, and that is whether an 
environmental impact assessment would actually be required. 
But the earliest anything could happen would be in the year 
2000, and that’s largely because in the year 2000 the 
community of Canora will then be getting its water from 
underground sources, as I understand. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, as I’ve indicated, there’s been 
tremendous amount of damage around the lake to the 
environment, but also a tremendous amount of damage to 
cottages where of course there is no flood damage. Cottages 
that were built in areas that are outside of the so-called flood 
zone, the high water level, and yet these cottages have attained 
serious damage. Is Sask Water going to be involved in any type 
of reimbursement for damages to the cottages? As you work 
with the Foam Lake watershed corporation, will Sask Water be 
compensating anyone who has received damage from the high 
level water? 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, I’d say while of course we’re 
concerned about the impacts that this has on individuals and we 
never like to see anybody suffer any losses, Sask Water would 
not be involved in any compensation as a result of natural 
causes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and 
through you to members, I would like to introduce a couple of 
friends and special guests to our Assembly. Seated in the 
Speaker’s Gallery, Mr. Frank Wald who is the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives for the North Dakota State 
Legislature, and Mr. Glen Forseth who is a representative from 
North Dakota state. They’re here to observe our proceedings 
and to meet with us for the next couple of days. And I would 
ask all members to welcome them here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s 
appropriate that we have a couple of North Dakotans in the 
gallery to listen to this question because it involves the Souris 
River. 
 
I have another friend from across the border who will be up 
here this morning who sent me an e-mail with a couple of 
questions he wanted asked of Sask Water, and it deals with the 
flooding along the Souris River. 
 
How much water is being released presently from Boundary, 
Rafferty, and the Alameda dams? What’s the flow going across 
the international border at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, Mr. Chair, there’s 
currently nothing being released out of the Alameda or the 
Boundary dams. At the Rafferty, as of yesterday, it was reduced 
to 40 cubic metres per second but I think your question was 
specifically as at the border. So we’re estimating that it’s 
probably still around 50 cubic metres per second at the border 
yet. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, there seems to be some flooding, 
Mr. Minister, that’s occurring across the border in the US 
(United States) and we were wondering just . . . and you’ve 
answered the question about the amount of water — 40 cubic 
feet per minute is still a substantial amount of water. Is it 
possible to reduce that flow at all on the short term and spread it 
out throughout the summer? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I said, we’re releasing at 40 cubic 
metres per second right now. Next week it’s our intent to reduce 
that to 25 cubic metres per second in an attempt to get it down 
to full supply level. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of contact or continuous 
contact do you have with the North Dakota officials in 
relationship to the water and the flooding that may be occurring 
along the Souris River in North Dakota? Are you in contact 
with them, monitoring it on a daily basis to determine the 
impact that the water coming out of the dams in Saskatchewan 
would have? Or are you on a weekly basis, or what kind of 
contacts do you have with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just in response to the question, we 
follow the guidelines set out under the Canada-US operating 
plan as a starting point, but we are always in discussion and 
consultation with the two groups, that is the Corps of Engineers 
and the North Dakota State Water Commission. But even after 
consultation, any changes we would make . . . we would 
certainly give them advice and notice of any changes in flow 
that we would make here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. One last 
question on this. North Dakota has electronic monitoring on the 
water levels along the Souris. Does Sask Water have access to 
that information and do you access that information if you do 
have access to it on a continuous basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that we get that information on 
a real time basis directly off the Internet. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, we all know that a couple of years ago your 
government took two thrusts in agriculture and decided there 
was two important sectors. 
 
One of course was pigs — hogs — and your government said 
that the hog industry in Saskatchewan was going to increase 
and many people followed that, including many private 
investors. We all know what happened to the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan and we all know what happened to a lot of 
private investors. 
 
The second area where you said you were going to have 
agriculture survive was in potatoes. And your government said 
that we’ll have the thrust, we’re going to do it through Sask 
Water, which many of us at the time asked why Sask Water — 
what do they know about potatoes, what do they know about 
farming? But it seemed to be the fact that Sask Water was in the 
area where the potatoes were going to be grown. That’s the 
Lake Diefenbaker area. 
 
So consequently many investors invested into the potato 
industry and one of those companies was Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation. As you know, Mr. Minister, that the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation is in serious financial trouble. 
There are many private investors there who have invested 
money, who’ve put up land to back their investment, and some 
of those investments are in serious jeopardy of being lost. 
 
Now as recently as today, Mr. Minister — and I hope that you 
are aware of it because your cabinet colleague from 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

Rosetown-Biggar is — is that there were some meetings being 
held with the creditors, and this is the second or third serious 
meeting that’s taken place in the last short while. 
 
My question to you is: are you aware of those meetings and is 
your government involved in those meetings and to what 
extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The member actually had three 
questions and the first one was with respect to why Sask Water 
would be involved in this. I guess largely because . . . I go back 
to a response I gave to your colleague and that is that there was 
substantial infrastructure already in the area, from which 
actually you come, and that is the irrigation infrastructure and 
logically where other crops weren’t worth nearly as much, it 
was believed that potatoes are an industry that would benefit the 
area far more than crops such as canola or wheat might. 
 
In respects to your question regarding meetings, yes we are 
aware that their meetings are taking place. We have, by 
invitation, we had a representative there and also we had two 
. . . we had a representative present by the invitation of the two 
secured creditors as well. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, you mention you had 
representatives there. Were the representatives from cabinet or 
were they from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m sorry. Could you repeat that 
question? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Were the representatives that you eluded to at 
these creditor meetings from your department or were they 
there from your cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — From Sask Water. 
 
Mr. McLane: — What role would the representatives from 
Sask Water play at those meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Simply as observers. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Will those observers be reporting directly 
back to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They will be reporting back to our CEO 
(chief executive officer) Ron Styles, who will make the board 
of directors aware of anything that he believes that we should 
. . . any significant decisions that need to be made that he feels 
the board needs to be aware of. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Two questions. Before this evening, before 5 
or 10 minutes ago, were you aware that the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation was in financial trouble? 
 
And the second question, before this evening were you aware 
that you had representatives that were attending creditor 
meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ve answered this question once earlier, 
but we became aware late last year that they were experiencing 

cash flow problems. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Second part to that question, you didn’t 
answer it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, we did. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister; yes, we did what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, we knew we had observers there. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’ll let that go because I don’t believe for a 
minute that you were aware that you had people there and that 
the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation was in the trouble it 
is. 
 
Mr. Minister, when your observers report back to your deputy 
and then hopefully to you, what are your plans to help resolve 
the situation that the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation finds 
itself in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Largely of course it’ll be entirely 
contingent on what they report to us. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Given as I said earlier, Minister, that your 
government was the main thrust into the potato industry in this 
province and certainly in the Lake Diefenbaker area, do you 
take any responsibility for what has happened to a company like 
the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I can’t comment on what the Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation . . . what decisions they make. 
That’s entirely up to Lake Diefenbaker and their board of 
directors. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, one of your employees, 
Mr. Harvey Fjeld, was instrumental in setting this corporation 
up and getting investors in the area to invest in it. Now today 
you’re telling us that you don’t have any responsibility to that. 
Why then were some of your people involved in starting up that 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Fjeld 
wasn’t at all involved in the establishment of Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, then you haven’t 
been kept informed very well because he certainly was, as were 
other members of Sask Water. 
 
In light of the investment of local producers — and it could 
have a detrimental effect to the potato industry, certainly in the 
Lake Diefenbaker area on both sides of the river, as your 
cabinet colleague will tell you — if something should happen to 
this corporation, many people are going to lose some money, 
lose some land. And it could have a real detrimental effect on 
the potato industry in Saskatchewan in that area if this company 
was to go under. 
 
With that in mind, do you not feel that it may be the role of 
government to ensure that they can intervene on behalf of those 
farmers and those producers, and talk to the creditors to allow 
them to come up with some reasonable end to their plight? If 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

they don’t, there will be many people out of business in that 
area, as well as your potato production program will go down 
the tubes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The two secured creditors are in 
discussions, as you alluded to earlier, and we certainly would be 
hopeful that there would be a positive outcome from that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — We would certainly be hopeful as well. But in 
the event there isn’t, what’s your plan then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, we’ll wait until our 
representatives report back to us as to how those discussions 
turn out. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s nonsense. You’re 
going to wait until the creditors foreclose on them. You’ve got 
an observer at the table; I know your cabinet colleague has been 
involved in the meetings. What’s the plan? Come up, be free 
with the taxpayers of this province, whom you’ve got millions 
of dollars invested out there. Tell us that you’re going to do 
something and try to work with those people to see that they all 
don’t go financially bankrupt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ve always made it clear that we are 
prepared to consider any reasonable proposal and certainly to 
work with local growers. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Maybe we’ll ask a question that maybe you 
can answer. Do you have a number of acres of potatoes that you 
expect will be grown in Saskatchewan this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, at this point we 
anticipate that SPUDCO will be crop sharing in 745 acres this 
year. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I didn’t hear the 
number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Seven hundred and forty-five acres. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Is that up from last year, or was that your 
original target for 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s down from just over 1,600 acres 
from last year, and that’s because lots of the growers have 
decided to grow on their own as opposed to crop sharing. 
 
Subvote (SW01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SW02) and (SW03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Vote 140 

 
Subvote (SW01) — Statutory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to 
certainly thank opposition members for their questions, and I 

want to thank my officials from Sask Water in their assistance 
to me this evening. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22  The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening I 
have with me from the Department of Labour Sandra Morgan, 
the deputy minister. We’re joined by Pat Parenteau, policy 
analyst; and Jan Whitridge, legal analyst; and behind the bar, 
John Boyd, director of planning and policy branch; and Peter 
Federko, who is the chief executive officer of the Workers’ 
Compensation Branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials. And, Madam Minister, we appreciate 
you taking the time. Certainly, I know my colleagues have 
extended condolences and we will be mindful of that in this 
discussion, we have as well this evening. 
 
Madam Minister, this debate has been going on for a significant 
period of time. It’s an issue that affects a number of individuals 
and no doubt due to the extent of the time and the debate, 
maybe not as many people today as it did even a year ago. I’m 
not exactly sure what the numbers are. Some of the questions 
we’ve raised in the past while, and certainly last spring when 
the question came before the Assembly, was the amount of 
compensation that the government would be facing if you either 
allowed the courts or if you basically went back and rightfully 
met the needs, not just the needs, but the requirements of what 
would have been paid out in pensions to the disenfranchised 
widows who have been affected as a result of the changes. 
 
(2000) 
 
And, Madam Minister, I think when we look at the 
disenfranchised widows tonight, and one would have to ask, if 
indeed none of the individuals we’re dealing with today, if 
indeed none of them had remarried, I’m wondering what, 
Madam Minister, what kind of costs we would be — I shouldn’t 
say we wouldn’t be facing a cost because they would actually 
have continued to receive their pension — but has the 
department any idea of what that pension would have amounted 
to today had none of the individuals remarried and would have 
continued to receive the pension that was theirs at the time 
when they remarried? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you to the member from 
Moosomin. The figures would have been for the back pay 
portion of it, if you want to put it that way. Seventy-four million 
without interest, 99.4 million with 7 per cent interest and an 
additional 34.4 million for future benefits. So what would that 
be . . . about 134 million. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

Mr. Toth: — So that, I guess what I’m saying, Madam 
Minister, is if each individual disenfranchised widow had not 
remarried, the workers’ compensation pool would have been 
paying . . . over that period of time would have paid that money 
to each and every one of the widows. It was money that was 
coming to them as a result of an accident on the job that had 
taken away their partners. 
 
And I think the concern is . . . and I think when we look at it, 
you look back if indeed that payment had continued, while it 
looks like a significant dollar value today, when you look back 
through the years, if that would have been an ongoing payment 
to each and every one of the widows, it wouldn’t be necessarily 
that high for the simple reason it would have been an ongoing 
factor that we wouldn’t have to be dealing with today. And I 
guess what we need, Madam Minister, while you’ve argued that 
as a result of some of the fiscal constraints that that is certainly 
a large number to try and work with today. 
 
I just noticed, I believe last week, Workers’ Compensation 
Board had, if I’m not mistaken, something like a $42 million 
surplus in their fund and they’re now paying back or sending 
back some rebates to some of the employers. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess the question is, when you look at . . . 
the bottom line is workers’ compensation was . . . this is a 
workers’ compensation issue that we’re dealing with and it 
would seem to me that if the proper criteria had been followed 
from day one, Workers’ Comp would have factored that in and 
we probably would not be facing any premiums any higher than 
we are now if we would have continued that process. Now 
that’s water under the bridge. We realize that. That’s water 
under the bridge and we’re basically dealing with something 
that . . . I would have to say an injustice from the past. 
 
When you . . . based on the numbers you’ve given us and the 
fact that the current piece of legislation limits the payout to 
$80,000, how many individuals are you aware of that qualify 
and what is the total amount that this $80,000 would be to the 
disenfranchised widows if they all decided to take that 
payment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’d like to clarify just some factual 
things. Now any insurance plan is based on an actuarial 
assessment of what would be paid out, given the rules that the 
premiums were collected under at the time they were collected, 
no different than pension plans or anything else. 
 
So the employers wouldn’t have been paying premiums as if the 
Charter of Rights existed; they would have been paying 
premiums under the old set of rules. And under those old set of 
rules people didn’t get zero, but they did get a different kind of 
compensation that existed under the old rules. 
 
So one of the things you have to understand is that it wasn’t 
money just sitting there that wasn’t used; it was a different set 
of rules for the different set of actuarial tables and a different set 
of premiums at that time. The amount that it would be would be 
about 23.4 million for 272 widows under the current intention 
to do an $80,000 tax-free per widow, as well as a reinstatement 
to the six widows that came within the time that the Charter of 
Rights was proclaimed and when our legislation changed in the 
province. 

Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, how did your department arrive 
at this figure? No doubt the women involved are different ages 
and some probably would qualify for more; some would qualify 
for less; some would probably receive significant funds higher. 
And what criteria did the department use in establishing this 
$80,000 figure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There was really two broad directions 
to go in here. One I guess I would call the full-meal deal where 
you decided that you would go the direction that Ontario and 
BC (British Columbia) went to full retroactivity, even to people 
who were in the program before the Charter came into force. 
 
And then there was the other way which some provinces went 
where it was reinstatement from date of reapplication when they 
changed their legislation. And if you look at it from that point 
of view, maybe PEI (Prince Edward Island), being the most 
recent example of reinstatement from 1998, and you look at the 
differences between what the widows would receive under that 
. . . when I looked at the fact that if you weren’t going the 
full-meal deal route and you were going down some other road 
of trying to meet the fact that there was a need there without 
acceptance of liability then the question became, how do you 
come up with something that’s the most fair to the most of the 
women? 
 
And the most fair seemed to be, because some of the women 
were older and more frail, they would not live long enough 
likely, given our life expectation as women, to collect a 
significant amount at a small payment per month. And it was 
probably more beneficial to receive a one-time lump sum 
payment where they had the financial freedom to make a 
decision what to do with a reasonable amount of money 
received all at once instead of in small amounts. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, this payment we’re talking 
about tonight, who’s required to pay the payment? Is the 
payment coming out of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board) or is it going to be coming out of a special provision of 
general revenue pool? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is an application against an 
insurance fund, and I think every province that’s dealt with this 
has made the compensation out of the insurance fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So if it’s coming out of an insurance fund, then 
when you’re carrying insurance, insurance has different levels. 
Would not that insurance fund have been able to pay a higher 
level that would have maybe seemed fairer? 
 
You’ve given some reasons why you’ve come up with that 
$80,000 formula, but when . . . It seems to me . . . I know the 
argument is whenever you carry insurance, you’re going to 
basically look at what the maximum payout would be, and the 
fact that work . . . it’s not really going to hurt Workers’ Comp 
other than maybe premiums to pay or the general revenue pool. 
 
So I guess the question being, in looking overall . . . and like I 
indicated earlier, some widows may be around 80 or less, some 
a little higher. Why would you not have given some 
consideration to that and looked at this fund at possibly being 
somewhat higher to be fairer to all the widows involved? 
 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think one of the things you have to 
look at is the purpose of the program itself. And what you’re 
trying to do is have a balance between employers feeling that 
it’s more beneficial to them to pay into a workers’ 
compensation fund than to go the route that they go in the 
United States where they’re into litigation and court cases. 
Right now you have the heads of large business organizations 
there being basically sued for murder, for all levels of things, 
because they have a litigation-based system instead of a 
workers’ compensation system. 
 
So one of the things you need to try to do is maintain support 
for the program and for employers’ belief that this is a better 
way to go than to go the judicial route that they’ve gone in the 
United States. And one of the trade-offs in the program is you 
try to achieve a reasonable premium level while at the same 
time getting a buy-in to the both preventative and payment parts 
of the plan. And in return for giving up the right to sue, people 
get a guaranteed level of compensation, either for injury or 
death. 
 
And one of the problems we’re running into in Saskatchewan, 
particularly need I say during the prior government, was that the 
fund was in big financial trouble, and the integrity of the fund 
itself was threatened. And employers also felt that because in 
Alberta they pay such lower premiums than they do in 
Saskatchewan, the employers were certainly not looking for us 
to increase their premiums. They were looking for us to 
decrease their premiums. 
 
So again what we tried to do with the surplus that was there in 
the fund was to balance the needs of the widows with also the 
needs of employers, who were already feeling that the 
premiums were higher than a sustainable level, to get a 
commitment to stay in this kind of a program. So there was a 
question of jeopardizing even the program itself if you had to 
now apply a whole new set of premiums in order to pay this 
much expanded program that you’re suggesting, and again 
making the argument to them to do that in the absence of a legal 
imperative. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Madam Minister, I remember a number 
of years ago, and certainly I didn’t keep it up at the time, but 
there was an insurance policy that I was carrying personally. 
And I would probably guess had all the couples that we’re 
talking about here, had they had private policies, those policies, 
upon the death of the spouse, would have probably paid a level 
and would have paid whatever the guarantee of that policy was, 
right through till the time of the natural death of that spouse. 
That particular insurance program I’m talking was you could 
carry certain levels of monthly payments if you were disabled, 
and then if you happened to be deceased, then your spouse 
would receive those payments. And as I understand the policy I 
had at one time, there was no ending to that policy; that my 
spouse would have received that. 
 
And I guess the question I have is . . . and the question I don’t 
understand is why there was a change as a result . . . I mean, the 
fact there obviously was a fine line that said upon remarriage 
that this policy discontinues, or this pension discontinues. Is 
that exactly what was said at the time? 
 
(2015) 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A personal insurance example probably 
isn’t the best example because in a personal insurance example 
you pick the plan you want and you pay the premium to get the 
plan you want. In this instance here, it’s more like a disability 
plan because the employer pays the entire premium. So it’s an 
employer package with a certain set of things that you get for 
opting in to that package. So it’s not really quite the same as 
personal insurance where you sit down with your agent and you 
say for this level of coverage I’m prepared to pay this much per 
month. That’s not the kind of situation it is. The employers buy 
the package that’s there. 
 
And at the time, pre-1985, what the agreement was in that 
package was that people in this situation received a tax-free 
lump sum payment when their benefits were terminated and, in 
addition, any dependent children continued to receive monthly 
payments until age 18. And it was also assumed at that time, 
because of the different status of women and whatnot at that 
time, that if they remarried, a new spouse would contribute to 
the household income. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, to date, how much . . . what has 
your department spent, or Workers’ Comp spent on obtaining 
legal opinions surrounding this matter? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The costs for ourselves, because I got 
two runs done on the actuarial table to make sure that the 
figures weren’t inflated. And so the cost to us has been about 
$50,000 to get the actuarial figures that, again, after I became 
minister I got the work repeated just to make absolutely sure 
that the figures were accurate and that we weren’t working with 
artificially inflated figures. And so there would be the $50,000 
cost for that and there would be some costs. The legal advice 
was in-house through the Department of Justice and I don’t 
really have a figure for that but it wouldn’t be substantial. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And there’s one 
thing I neglected to mention earlier on, when we began, was the 
fact that certainly while there are a number of concerns as to the 
legislation and the payment that’s before us today and some of 
the parts of the legislation, the fact that it’s even here is some 
recognition. And I think we certainly want to acknowledge your 
part as the Minister of Labour because we’ve discussed, as I’ve 
said, this issue for a number of years, and previous ministers 
said they were looking into it but we never seemed to get very 
far in it. And so I want to acknowledge the fact that you’ve 
taken some leadership in that part. 
 
Madam Minister, your department I believe is quite well aware 
of some of the legal situations that have arisen in other 
jurisdictions, I believe, namely BC, where the legal opinions 
have actually come out in favour of disenfranchised widows. 
And I’m sure that has to be a concern to your department 
because as I understand the legislation, for any widow who 
doesn’t decide to take the $80,000 lump sum, if they decide to 
go to the courts and at the end of the day they really don’t get 
anywhere, they lose even access to the $80,000. So that is an 
indication to me that you’re aware of other legal opinions 
across the country. 
 
The question I have to you is what types of legal opinions have 
you received as minister responsible for labour, in regards to the 
fact that if a number of women decide to go through the courts, 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

what you might be facing down the road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the things that really 
distinguishes Saskatchewan from the other provinces is that we 
acted very quickly to change our laws once the Charter came 
into effect. It was really only four months between when the 
Charter came into effect and when we changed our law. In BC, 
this wasn’t the case. They let their law sit from the time of the 
Charter in ’85 until 1994. So they had had a very sustained 
period where they were essentially breaking the law under the 
Charter. 
 
We have six widows who fall into that category, who were in 
this situation between the time that the Charter was enacted and 
the four months later. Now those widows likely would have a 
good case in court, but in 1994 there was a court case, Murray 
v. Canada, in which the judge ruled in the Supreme Court that 
the Charter cannot be applied retroactively. And in some 
jurisdictions this decision has been made, not based on a legal 
case but as a policy decision. And I guess they’ve just decided 
that they could afford it to do that. But it’s certainly our advice 
that the Charter would not apply retroactively and that it would 
be these six widows between the time that the Charter came into 
force and when our laws were changed. And the BC situation 
was different because they were in contravention of the Charter 
for so many years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re basically saying then, Madam 
Minister, based on the fact of the changes being made in 
Saskatchewan much quicker, it’s your opinion or the opinion 
that you’ve been receiving or received in your office, legal 
opinions that are basically indicating that the widows, if they 
challenged it, would have a difficult time challenging the 
portion or the dollars that you’re offering today — that they 
may not have the same grounds or feet to stand on as the British 
Columbia case. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be accurate, but I would 
re-emphasize that they certainly continue to have the right to do 
that. It’s not our goal to keep anyone from going to court. And 
even up until two years, even if they choose to pursue court 
action, at any point if they feel that’s not producing the results 
for them that they hoped for or that they don’t feel that it’s 
going to go in the right direction, they still have the option then 
to cease that action and still apply and still receive the money. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I guess, Madam Minister, considering the 
fact that we can go to any number of lawyers, and they can all 
come up with a different opinion, it certainly presents the 
disenfranchised widows with a very serious decision in regards 
to that because certainly they’ll be . . . I know we’ve chatted 
with a number of them who have been looking at different 
provinces and different circumstances, and they’re weighing the 
options. And it’s very difficult considering they’ve been 
pushing this issue for such a long time, and I can appreciate 
why $80,000 to many of them is almost a slap in the face. 
 
But, Madam Minister, as I understood the last part of your 
question, you had indicated that the disenfranchised widows, 
once this legislation is moved through the Assembly, that they 
have up to two years to apply for the $80,000, that they have 
that time to sit back and determine whether or not court action 
is worthwhile. And if they don’t go that route, they have access 

to that. And I guess that’s something that would have to be 
weighed very carefully because, even if you chose court action 
and found you weren’t getting . . . you could eat your $80,000 
up fairly quickly. So that’s another area, when you look at it, 
$80,000 doesn’t really stretch that far. 
 
But what you’re telling us tonight is that there is a two-year . . . 
I guess don’t know if I can use the term, phasing in, but there’s 
a two-year period whereby anyone at any time during that 
period can apply for that $80,000. 
 
Now is your department fairly . . . do you have a firm number 
of individuals? Or are you uncertain as to whether there are 
some other individuals who may qualify for this as well, beyond 
what you know today? Is there any information out there that 
would certainly let people know where they sit in regards to 
possibly qualifying for this disenfranchised widows’ payout? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The actuarial company that provided 
the figures has estimated it at 272 persons. And as soon as the 
Act is passed, the Workers’ Compensation Board will begin 
advertising across Canada to determine if there are people who 
have moved to other provinces or whatnot that might qualify. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe that 
there’s one other portion that certainly is of major concern, and 
maybe some of the other members will be raising it as well. 
And I believe it’s the point about court action. 
 
There’s a part in the legislation that talks about court action and 
the inability to qualify for the funds. And I wonder if you could 
explain that a bit and why that portion is part of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because it has been the belief in 
making this decision that this is a gratuitous payment and not a 
liability, it then is a question of whether a person accepts that or 
not. And under common practice in this kind of a situation, I 
think this is a fairly standard legal provision. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and her officials here this evening. Before 
I start into asking any questions I would like to take this 
opportunity to read out a petition that has been circulating the 
province. As we present petitions during the day, we don’t get 
the opportunity to read the entire text, but this not being a 
normal time for presenting of petitions, we can read the entire 
text, so I will do so. 
 
And this is a petition in support of Saskatchewan’s 
disenfranchised widows, and it says: 
 

To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
in legislature assembled: The petition of the undersigned 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 
That all widows/widowers who lost their husbands/wives 
through work-related fatal accidental deaths prior to 1985 
suffered significantly because of the decision to deny them 
benefits if they remarried before 1985; 
 
That the removal of the survivor’s pension based upon 
remarriage: 
a) denied them an important source of income; 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

b) was based upon a false, unfair and discriminatory 
practice; 
c) may have discouraged widows/widowers from 
remarrying and interfered with choice and privacy rights; 
d) may have created a situation of dependency on a spouse 
in remarriage; and 
e) failed to have regard to the personal circumstances of 
the widows/widowers and failed to have regard to the 
vagaries and contingencies involved in the remarriage. 
 
That the offer made by the Province of Saskatchewan does 
not take into account the entitlement owed to each 
widow/widower and does not restore pension benefits 
rightfully owed to them. 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to Disenfranchised Widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. And as in duty 
bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Chairman, these petitions come from across Saskatchewan 
and, Madam Minister, from Saskatoon, from Wynyard and 
Quill Lake and Watson, Coronach, Rockglen, Bengough, 
Willow Bunch. A lot of these came from the Coronach area, 
Madam Minister: Fife Lake, Estevan, Nipawin. As I said 
earlier, Madam Minister, they have come from across this 
province — Assiniboia, Willow Bunch. And so I would like to 
table them, for the record, so that people will know that these 
people had a concern for this Bill, had a concern and believed 
that some necessary changes were needed to the Bill to 
recognize that the widows in particular, but the widowers if 
there are any, believe that they had some rights that were 
abrogated by the law and are seeking compensation for those 
lost rights, and for the harm that was caused to their lives when 
the compensation was withdrawn from them at time of 
remarriage. And I’ll turn this in to the pages later. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you talk about a gratuitous payment 
to the widows, my interpretation of that would be that the 
government has no imperative to make that payment — that this 
is being done for compassionate reasons, for recognition that 
these people suffered some harm in their lives but that WCB 
and the government were not responsible for that. 
 
(2030) 
 
So, Madam Minister, that being the case, that this is a policy 
decision to provide some compensation because of compassion 
reasons — not because of legal grounds, not because of a need, 
not because any wrong was done — why is this money being 
taken then from an insurance program, Workers’ Compensation 
Board? Why is it not being taken from the general funds 
provided to this government by the Crown, through taxation, 
that is administered by the government and used in a number of 
cases on compassionate grounds on the belief that it’s a social 
need and that the government’s role is to provide for that social 
need, and to provide sums of money to individuals to aid them 
in their place in society? 
 
An example of that would be monies provided through Social 

Services. There is no legal requirement set out in common law 
that says we have to provide that, but as a society we have 
agreed to provide that to individuals because we believe that 
they are deserved of some assistance. In this particular case, the 
government is saying that the widows and the widowers are 
deserved of some compensation, not because of legal reasons 
but because of compassion. So would it not seem reasonable, 
Madam Minister, that this would be paid from the general 
coffers of the government rather than through an insurance 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess your argument is a bit of a 
moving target because if the argument is that an insurance 
program owes something, it seems reasonable then that the 
claim is theoretically at least against the resources of that 
program. And moving it to the General Revenue Fund doesn’t 
solve any problems, because when you’re looking at a surplus 
of eight million, I would ask you whether you would take the 
money out of highways, education, or health care in order to 
pay for it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you didn’t 
answer the question, though . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
whether or not a compassionate payment should come from 
general revenues, or should it come from an insurance program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In every province that has dealt with 
this, regardless of the fact that every province has handled it 
differently, the payment has come from the insurance fund. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, indeed the 
provinces have handled this situation differently. BC has 
reinstated the widows, providing them with compensation 
retroactively to 1985, and reinstating their pension benefits. 
Alberta has at the present time done nothing, to the best of my 
knowledge. Neither has the Northwest Territories. In 
Saskatchewan we have this piece of legislation that will provide 
$80,000, and it is a significant amount of money, particularly 
considering that it is tax-free. Manitoba still hasn’t proceeded 
with anything at the present time. Ontario has reinstated the 
pensions. Quebec has done nothing, is perhaps in the works but 
as of yet has nothing there. Nova Scotia reinstated the pensions. 
Newfoundland reinstated the pensions. Prince Edward Island 
reinstated the pensions, as did New Brunswick. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the majority of the provinces across 
Canada, to my information, have reinstated the widows’ 
pensions. It’s only Saskatchewan that has legislation now on the 
books that has not provided that reinstatement, and Alberta, 
Manitoba, the Northwest Territories, and Quebec have yet to do 
anything on this matter. So we have four provinces that have 
done nothing, five that have reinstated, and only Saskatchewan 
that is providing for a cash settlement payout but no 
reinstatement. 
 
So when you say, Madam Minister, that everybody is different, 
you’re certainly right. And you can’t say that all of these 
provinces are richer than Saskatchewan because I would suspect 
that Newfoundland financially is in at least the same position 
that Saskatchewan is, if not in a worse position. Their taxes are 
even slightly higher than Saskatchewan’s. They are the worst 
taxed in Canada and Saskatchewan is the second worst. 
 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

So, Madam Minister, the widows are not happy with this 
situation. They believe that they are entitled to a reinstatement 
of their pensions, and that’s what they’re asking for. They 
believe that because this is a gratuity, a gratuitous payment, 
because it’s not tied to legal action, that they should therefore 
not be denied legal action against their insurer — their insurer 
being the Workers’ Compensation Board. But your piece of 
legislation would deny them that opportunity if they accept the 
$80,000. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what if an action was to be commenced 
by a widow or a group of widows against the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and the case is heard prior to the two 
years, and settled prior to the two years, but the case is 
dismissed by the courts? Would they then be entitled to the 
$80,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just going to reiterate a couple of 
points that you made in your preamble there, just to make sure 
there isn’t an incorrect idea of what’s gone on. We could have 
gone the route of reinstatement from date of reapplication, like 
Nova Scotia and is it PEI (Prince Edward Island)? 
 
And the reason that we didn’t was, given the pool of money 
available, it was more fair to more of the women to go the lump 
sum payment, because some were older and some were 
younger. And in order to even out the benefit from the point of 
view of being able to benefit within a lifetime, it seemed like 
the one-time lump sum payment gave more financial freedom to 
more of the women, other than using that same amount of 
money to reinstate benefits from the future forward. 
 
Now I will mention that both Alberta and BC ended up raising 
their . . . oh pardon me, Ontario and BC ended up raising their 
employer premium significantly after they made these policy 
decisions, and that Ontario also at the same time reduced 
benefit levels and restricted the types of injuries that are 
compensable at the same time they did this. So they kind of 
gave with one hand but took away with the other to the current 
and future beneficiaries of the program. So it’s only all roses if 
you only look at part of what they did. 
 
The other comment I would make is that the legislation, the 
intent of the legislation as it’s written, is not to prevent them 
from court action. They can go ahead and do that. I think the 
intention of the legislation is that if they lose their court case, 
yes, you’re right, they’re not entitled then, but they could stop 
action at any point along the way that they felt they weren’t 
likely to have a good outcome and they would still be entitled to 
the payment. I think the issue is around funding the action. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I’m not sure that the question is 
about funding the action, Madam Minister. The indication we 
have from the participants in the disenfranchised widows’ 
group is that they have the funds available to carry on a court 
action if that is their desire. Now it’s obviously not their desire 
to do so if they can achieve their ends without the need to go to 
the courts. 
 
I wonder if, Madam Minister, if you could give me an 
explanation of what do you mean by reapplication. In the case 
. . . my interpretation would be that the government would say 
we’re prepared to accept applications for reinstatement of 

benefits. Now would that apply at the time that the application 
was made, be it May of 1999, or would it somehow be at some 
other date previous to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No it would be from the date that the 
women applied and then forward after that date. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have 
here a copy of a letter from a legal firm that was sent to the 
Premier, and I suspect you probably received a copy of that, 
which states a number of legal conditions and items that had 
happened previously, precedents based on the Grigg versus 
British Columbia case in 1996, which brought this forward in 
that province at which point in time the government was forced 
to pay to reinstate the pensions and to pay the compensations. 
 
Madam Minister, it seems to indicate to me that . . . and 
obviously I am getting one side of the story here from one 
lawyer, and as the Minister of Finance told us, I guess it was 
last session, that if you hire a hundred lawyers you’ll get a 
hundred different opinions. And being a lawyer himself, I’m 
sure he knew wherewithal he spoke. And I’m not sure if that 
also means if a hundred different people are hired you give out 
a hundred different opinions on the same issue . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, you didn’t. But you can certainly find a lot 
of lawyers around, though, who will provide you with those 
hundred different opinions. 
 
So, Madam Minister, it seems to indicate here that one would 
suspect that the widows would have a strong case if the law is 
comparable between Saskatchewan and British Columbia. And 
I suspect that it was basically the same law. So I’d like to read 
you a couple of lines from clause no. 14 in this presentation in 
which it says: 
 

In Grigg the court considered whether a distinction drawn 
on the date of remarriage rather than simply a 
consideration on whether or not the claimant was married 
constituted discrimination on the basis of marital status. 
And the court held that it did. 
 

Now the part I read is the opinion and not the ruling from the 
court that this decision was based on. 
 
But, Madam Minister, would you provide some other 
explanation as to the Grigg case versus British Columbia that 
would substantiate your modus operandi in providing a 
gratuitous payment rather than providing reinstatement and 
compensation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again our legal opinions are based 
on the Saskatchewan experience, and BC is the only province I 
think that has a completed legal case in this matter. And in that 
particular case, it was post-Charter widows that launched the 
case. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, can you give me an 
indication of . . . in British Columbia and in the other 
jurisdictions that have settled this, whether or not those widows 
that remarried prior to April 17, 1985 were also reinstated for 
their pensions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In two jurisdictions it was retroactive to 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

1985 and in three jurisdictions it’s from date of reapplication 
forward. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Did it also 
include, though, widows that had remarried prior to 1985 and 
the Supreme Court decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, for date of reapplication forward it 
did include the others as we are including the others in a lump 
sum payment, feeling that that is fair to more of the widows 
than going from date of reapplication forward. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, did any of the 
provinces also provide compensation or retroactive benefits to 
some other date prior to the date of reapplication? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, two out of five, and eighty-five 
only. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Did the two that provided the 
compensation to a prior date, probably 1985, was it at the level 
they would have been receiving had their benefits not been 
discontinued or was it at some other level of compensation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It reflected all the different changes in 
the Workers’ Compensation Board’s policy over time within 
those provinces so it would have been as if they had been in the 
program. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think that’s basically what the widows in Saskatchewan have 
been asking for, is that kind of action. 
 
Madam Minister, if one person who is a party to an action taken 
against the WCB or against the government in this case, was to 
discontinue the involvement, is she eligible for payment of the 
$80,000 even if the action is continued by other plaintiffs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Once we 
get into going through the Bill clause by clause, I will be 
proposing an amendment to the Bill which would allow widows 
to seek compensation through the courts as well as seeking the 
compensation of the $80,000. 
 
(2045) 
 
One of my colleagues, the independent member from 
Greystone, will also be introducing an amendment which would 
go if compensation were awarded by the courts would discount 
the amount of compensation that a widow or widower may have 
already received based on this piece of legislation. 
 
Madam Minister, I think there are a good many people across 
this province who feel that this would be a fair system of 
compensation, a fairer system. I recognize that because this is 
coming out of the Workers’ Compensation Board, that the 
people at Workers’ Comp who are paying the fees to Workers’ 
Compensation Board do have some concerns with the costs that 
may be added to their fee structure to provide any compensation 
that is necessary. 
 

And that’s why, Madam Minister, on the $80,000 per widow 
since it is a gratuitous payment, the feeling is that it would be 
better provided by general coffers, by the general fund rather 
than coming out of an insurance program that will be 
compensated from current employers’ benefits. As you 
explained to my colleague, benefits in the past prior to 1985 
were based on the actuarial statistics of the time and the 
assumption that a certain number of people on the pension 
program would remarry and therefore not be eligible for their 
benefits. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would ask that you give consideration to 
that as we proceed through the course of this Bill and give some 
serious consideration to the amendments that will be proposed 
as we go through clause by clause. Thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I shan’t 
take a great deal of time tonight, but I most certainly think it’s 
appropriate that we’re addressing this, this very evening given 
that tomorrow is the annual day of mourning for workers killed 
on the job. And I view our work tonight as rectifying some 
wrongs. First of all honouring the deaths of spouses who are no 
longer with their families, no longer with them as income 
earners, as emotional support systems, and in most cases as 
parents. These individuals were also someone’s son or 
daughter, brother or sister. And in the case of the women who 
are with us this evening in the gallery, they were their best 
friends and their loving partners. And I don’t want us to lose 
sight of those things in this discussion. 
 
Our work really then is about the memory of those people who 
are now gone and especially those who were left behind. And I 
guess one of the things that I wanted to do was to bring this for 
re-edification this evening about the real seriousness about 
trying to address retrospective justice. And it most certainly is a 
very, very onerous task, a very difficult one —not just facing 
this situation, but as we know, we’ve been dealing with treaty 
rights and so many other things, and it’s difficult for a lot of 
people to get a handle on retrospective justice. 
 
Now you’ve all heard me talk ad nauseam, I’m sure, about there 
not being a fair and just world and it’s not. It’s not a fair and 
just world. 
 
And it most certainly is difficult to face the greatest challenges 
of all, and that’s what these women have had to suffer along 
with their children. And I don’t want to just simply say women; 
I know that there are men who have lost their wives as well, but 
just for the situation this evening I’ll address them as widows. 
 
And I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would comment — and 
this is really the core for me this evening because I don’t want 
this to go on and on all night — the decision by your 
government to include in this Bill the removal of democratic 
rights, because I believe that it is an inherent democratic right 
for us to be able to pursue legal recourse if one so chooses. And 
to me that really is the fundamental thing. What was it that led 
your government to make this decision to withhold this right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t think — with all due respect to 
the member, because I do respect the member — that it’s a 
question of denying recourse to the legal system. It’s a question 
of funding the recourse to the legal system. The women always 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

have had and continue to have the right, as any other person 
does, to use the legal system to determine the legal obligations 
of a government. And our decision has been based on legality, 
to our understanding of it, and on good public policy in terms of 
the workers’ compensation fund and the employers that are part 
of that fund and the workers that are part of that fund. 
 
Now if a court was to make a different decision, we would 
certainly honour that, but that would be something that the 
women will have to make a decision about themselves and will 
have to move forward on themselves. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I think I understand, Madam Minister, 
what your comments were, but I want you to understand that 
there is also a perception. The perception is that this is a 
punitive measure — that if someone accepts the $80,000, they 
should forfeit their right to legal recourse. If they do not accept 
the $80,000 and they walk empty-pocketed as many of them 
have now for decades — many of them, as you know better 
than probably anyone here; we’ve spoken at great length about 
the circumstances facing some of these individuals. They then, 
in order to pursue their legal right, have to live longer without. 
And it really leaves people with the perception that there’s 
punishment here for the decision to want to go into a court of 
law and pursue their legal rights because we’ve already heard 
that there were legal considerations, Charter considerations, and 
compassionate considerations. 
 
And by the decision to put in the Bill that there in fact is what I 
call a lump sum payment — I don’t call it; it’s called it in the 
Bill — a lump sum payment called a gratuity, this removes it 
from the legal consideration and the Charter consideration and 
puts it much more into the compassionate consideration. And 
that’s part of what has confused me somewhat. And I guess 
what would really be helpful to a lot of people would be for you 
to take a few moments and to tell us whether or not you can 
understand the perception that some may have that this is seen 
as a no-win situation for them, that they see this as a 
punishment rather than a pure benefit. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can understand that, but I have to tell 
you after being in government since ’91, perception is always a 
little different than governing. And I don’t mean that in any 
flippant way, but it’s much more difficult to decide of all the 
requests that come to government for funding and 
compensation how you can satisfy the depth of justice that you 
might wish to satisfy. 
 
There is many cases where there’s disagreements about what 
should happen, whether it’s over a discussion about land, a 
discussion about . . . HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) 
would be an example. And the provisions that are in this Bill 
are similar to the provisions in the HIV compensation Bill. 
They also signed a similar agreement in order to receive 
payments. And it is common in every case where governments 
would prefer to not go to court and would prefer to settle things 
and are prepared to allocate a sum of money to achieving that 
purpose that this kind of condition exists. Whether that will be a 
condition that exists into the future, I can’t say, but certainly it’s 
been a common practice to date. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

Mr. Jess: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and to the other members of the Assembly, 
Ernie and Jean Harack, former residents of Redberry Lake 
constituency, farmers and business people from Radisson, who 
now after many years of Ernie being employed by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool make their home here in Regina and 
are in here this evening to listen to the debate with interest. 
Please join me in welcoming Mr. and Mrs. Harack. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like to 
welcome Ernie and Jean here this evening. I have had a long 
involvement with Ernie when he was in his employment with 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool as a district representative and 
was one of the people that I guess recruited me to become a 
delegate for several years in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. So I 
would like to welcome Ernie and Jean here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, I was very interested in what you said and as 
you know, many years passed when the first discussions of HIV 
positive people and those who went on to develop AIDS 
(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) related illnesses and 
sadly, there are subsequent deaths of many people who came 
and made the case to us in this very building. I know what 
you’re talking about and I guess one of the things that I would 
want for any one of those people who don’t have a life and are 
watching us this evening, is to say, you know, I would like to 
think that I can be a responsible person here as well and I don’t 
want to ever say to you as a minister of the Crown, or to the 
government, let’s give everything that everyone asks for, 
including the kitchen sink. Because that would be 
extraordinarily irresponsible. 
 
First of all, it’s not possible but it would also be irresponsible 
and it’s incumbent upon all of us as elected members to do the 
responsible thing. 
 
But one of the things that concerns me greatly is it’s getting too 
easy for governments to begin to impinge on democratic rights 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

of people and one of those things that concerns me most is the 
way in which it appears that people’s hands are being tied to do 
what it is that the government is wanting them to do, and they 
have to forfeit something in order to be able to receive some 
sense of justice, or in this case some remuneration for what’s 
transpired in the past — or compensation would be a better 
word. 
 
I have a lot of concerns about this because if one begins to 
reflect, and not just over the last 10 years but what is mounting, 
is greater and greater evidence of people feeling more hopeless, 
less optimistic, especially less empowered. 
 
Like they feel that they are losing so much power and that they 
can’t fight Big Brother government. And that when they do 
have something that they have to carry out and fight against 
government, that it’s an ongoing, difficult kind of battle against 
the very people who are supposed to be their spokespeople, 
their representatives. 
 
And in the end, if there is a settlement, then it’s at a cost and 
that cost is: you take and do as we say or you give up what 
we’re offering. And it makes it very, very difficult for Joe and 
Josephine Citizen to be able to feel like they’ve got a chance 
anymore. And that’s one of the things that I just wanted on the 
record because it’s something that people are saying to me more 
often now as they throw up their hands. 
 
And by the way, I don’t think it’s all what transpires as a result 
of this Assembly or government and politics. Since I’ve got this 
floor for this moment I am going to give a quotation because I 
most certainly know that the media doesn’t do anything to make 
people feel more optimistic, hopeful, and empowered either. 
 
And every year there’s an award given out for journalism called 
the Pulitzer Prize. And Pulitzer himself is the one who said: 
 

That a cynical, mercenary press will one day create a 
people as base as they. 
 

I don’t want us to be cynical and I don’t want people to be 
mercenary. I don’t want people to be left with the impression as 
the citizens of this province that elected members on both sides 
of the House really don’t care about them; we simply care about 
politics or having all the power. 
 
(2100) 
 
And I guess one of the things that would make a difference, I 
think it would make a statement, would be to consider the 
amendment that’s coming forward this evening as a step toward 
empowering people. And I can see the side of government . . . 
In fact what I’d like to do for just a moment is to, on the basis 
of so much of what our discussions have been over the last year, 
would be to see if I correctly interpret some of the things that 
we’ve said and what your point of view is. 
 
And I think I’ve heard you say this and I want to give you the 
opportunity to tell me whether or not this is the case. That in the 
best of all possible worlds the widows would be fully 
compensated and their pensions fully reinstated. That those who 
have to pay into the Workers’ Compensation fund and helped to 
create this Workers’ Compensation Board surplus would have 

the benefit of decreased rates to allow them to be able to 
compete better, and that all others who have felt that they too 
have some dibs on the surplus would benefit as well. 
 
Now I think that that’s what I’ve heard you say, and that most 
certainly is the best of all possible worlds. So my question, after 
this very long verbiage — and I promise you that I probably 
won’t have more than one question left after this — is the 
reason that there is such a concern about allowing legal recourse 
to these widows is that more groups and more persons with 
what appear to be legitimate claims against the surplus will 
come forward? And my addition to that question is, how much 
is there a concern about putting the Workers’ Compensation 
Board fund into a deficit situation? I’m curious about the 
government’s considerations on this and your opinion. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for her comments. 
I’d just say that in the best of all possible worlds, as you 
indicate yourself in my comments, we would have spent the 
money three times because all of the interested parties would 
have wanted the whole surplus to go to themselves. 
 
But I’ll also talk about having a right to go to court. Having a 
right to go to court doesn’t require that the government pay for 
you to go to court. And we do have a legal aid system that 
covers certain kinds of legal situations. I don’t believe this is 
one of them. And certainly for all other people seeking justice 
in our society the rules about how you access the legal system 
are more or less the same. 
 
And one of the things a government does have to be careful 
about is consistency because if you’ve got one group that wants 
to take you to court for one purpose that they believe is right, 
and you believe isn’t, and you fund them to do that, then what 
do you say to the next group, whether they be environmental or 
treaty or whatever else, that wants to take you to court and 
equally wants to be funded to do that? And so there’s also a 
question of consistency across the treatment of many different 
people who may have a differing view of what government is 
obliged to provide them and what the government’s view of it 
is. 
 
So I would just re-emphasize that certainly the group is 
welcome to take us to court and up until the two years has 
expired is welcome to apply for what we’ve offered. And if we 
are wrong we certainly would comply with whatever the court 
offers. But I hope you’re seeing the point I make about 
consistency across a range of many people who may believe 
that the government owes them, for one reason or other, some 
compensation. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I most 
certainly agree with consistency that allows for not only 
predictability for future groups if is based on common sense. 
And in fact if we really did our jobs well in governments across 
the land, there would be enormous consistency in terms of 
people working towards common objectives in having specific 
timelines across Crowns and departments and agencies and so 
forth. There would also be measurability. There would be dates 
where one would say, this is what we projected, and this is what 
actually happened. I absolutely believe in more predictable sorts 
of things and consistency. In fact I would not only welcome it; I 
most certainly advocate for it. 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

But one of the things that you’ve said is interesting, and that is 
. . . not just one, you’re always interesting, but I just wanted to 
point out that the one comment that you just made is that this is 
being perceived in a way as giving monies over to each person, 
$80,000 with which they in turn could choose to come and sue 
the government with this money. 
 
You see my view is, if they’re deserving of the $80,000 they 
should get the $80,000. Maybe they’re deserving of more 
legally. But if they’re deserving on a gratuity basis for the 
$80,000, they should be able to do with that money whatever 
they wish, okay? Whether it’s sue the government, go on a 
vacation, put money down on a mortgage, do whatever they 
wish to do . . . and that that is separate from their right to be 
able to have legal recourse. 
 
I’m getting a little mixed up here about the perception that 
somehow the monies from the surplus that would be given to 
these individuals would then . . . the government somehow has 
to have control over how it is they’re going to use those dollars. 
And I’m wondering if that’s really what I’m hearing you say. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I don’t know that we can get 
much further on this because I think, as I’ve indicated, in issues 
where there’s disagreements of this sort, this is reasonably 
common practice to do this. It’s consistent with the way that 
other compensation has been handled, and it doesn’t remove 
people’s ability to take the government to court. And let’s face 
it, one of the reasons why governments do settle things and 
make offers is so that we don’t need to spend yet additional 
dollars in courts going down roads that aren’t very productive. 
So I would just have to say that that’s really the best answer I 
can give, and I can’t improve on it. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chairperson, and Madam Minister, I 
don’t have any further questions, but I do have a comment, and 
most people who were hearing this Bill at second reading in the 
province were probably busy at work. So I would just like to 
reiterate my remarks from that day. 
 
There’s only one reason — well probably a little more than one 
— why this Bill is even in this House for consideration. And 
even though I have amendments that . . . an amendment and a 
joint amendment with the official opposition this evening that I 
would very much like under consideration, I want to take this 
moment to thank you, Madam Minister, to thank your deputy 
minister, Sandra Morgan, to most certainly thank your staff who 
have worked very, very hard to ensure that this would be 
brought to fruition. I stood singly, alone, and frustrated for a 
very long time in this Assembly talking about this issue. And if 
it had not been for you and the people in your department to see 
this through, there would not even be this offer on the table. 
 
So I wish to just end my questioning this evening with an 
unequivocal thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I will try and not simply repeat 
what other members have already put forward, although I must 
confess that my ideas are fairly similar to those we have already 
heard. 
 

This is such a positive piece of legislation and such a good day 
for Saskatchewan in redressing an injustice done to a 
particularly unfortunate group in our society that it is really sad 
to me that what should be a good news story is somewhat 
overshadowed by one unfortunate part of the legislation, 
namely the women that we have frankly been victimizing over 
the last number of decades, we continue to hold the big stick 
over them when we say that the offer of compensation will be 
removed if they dare go near a lawyer or a courthouse. 
 
I mentioned this afternoon the parable of the widow and the 
unjust judge. Now I should say, Madam Minister, I’m certainly 
not going to categorize you as the unjust judge, but of course 
the story . . . the point of the parable is that the widow was able 
to receive justice by her persistence, by her refusal to give up, 
by her continual demanding that she receive justice, and she 
finally got it. And I think that there is a parallel here, that the 
workers’ compensation widows have been persistent. And with 
the help of the member for Saskatoon Greystone and now of 
this new Minister of Labour, they are finally receiving a 
measure of justice. 
 
There is really only one thing that hangs over this legislature 
tonight and over this piece of legislation that we should all be 
able to celebrate, and that is there is still the whiff, the odour, of 
the punitive in sections 3 and 4 in saying that the compensation 
offered will be removed should these widows attempt to make 
legal claim. And I think, with all due respect, Mr. Chairman, 
there’s something contradictory here on the part of the 
government. We must keep in mind that the government has 
consistently and persistently denied there is any legal claim 
whatsoever. Now the member for Cannington made reference to 
the Grigg case. We’ve been told that the government takes the 
position the Grigg case does not apply; there is no legal claim 
whatsoever. 
 
And of course the legislation uses the term “gratuity.” Now as I 
understand it, gratuity is legalese for freebie. So the position of 
the government is that this is a free, gratis payment. It is not the 
extinguishment of a legal claim because in the government’s 
view there is no legal claim. So the government’s position in 
punishing those widows who go to court is contradictory. If the 
government was offering $80,000 to extinguish a legally 
enforceable claim, then the section would make sense. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, the government says there is no legally 
enforceable claim. Therefore the government is saying that any 
one of these unfortunate people who choose to spend their 
money on legal fees is, in their view, wasting their money and 
will inevitably fail. And the government is not saying we owe 
these widows anything. The government is very clearly saying 
they are in a legal sense owed nothing. But we are going to 
make a gratuitous payment. 
 
Now that word gratuity, it seems to me while I understand it 
and I understand your reasoning, Madam Minister, it 
contradicts everything the government is saying. If this payment 
is a gratuity, if there is no legally enforceable claim as you have 
reiterated time and time again, then why is the government 
determined to avoid litigation? I mean it seems to me we try to 
avoid litigation where we have some concerns of the possible 
success thereof. But if we take the position that there is simply 
no legally enforceable claim and that’s the position of the 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

government, then it shouldn’t matter at all whether these 
women choose to consult their lawyers or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now if this was a TV courtroom one 
might enjoy that performance but I think it’s exactly legal 
advice like that that does not do anybody a particular service. 
 
And I would say that whereas we are not dealing with 
extinguishment of a claim, we are dealing with a situation 
where there are two differing points of view on what represents 
adequacy. And if you wanted to put it from the point of view of 
not looking a gift horse in the mouth then I guess that would be 
the context in which to look at it from your argument, sir. 
 
So we aren’t avoiding litigation. Anybody is quite welcome to 
sue us at anytime. We would certainly encourage them not to 
because we think this is fair. We think it’s good public policy. 
But certainly if that is the best legal advice that you would 
provide then I guess it would be on your shoulders to of 
provided that advice. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Maybe there’s nothing further to be said in this 
matter, but I mean the government’s position is that there’s no 
legally enforceable claim. That’s the government’s position. So 
why does the government want to try and avoid these women 
from talking to their lawyers? Maybe their lawyers will agree 
with the government. I don’t know. I’m not giving legal advice 
here. 
 
Maybe the lawyers will tell them I’m sorry, I don’t think there’s 
a legally enforceable claim. But I just don’t see why they have 
to be discouraged from consulting lawyers, why they have to be 
discouraged from taking legal action, and why they have to be 
punished if they choose to follow that route. 
 
But I’ll pass onto the next point and that is that I understand the 
amendments that will be introduced will be to remove the bar to 
compensation if a widow chooses to commence legal action, 
but that if she does and is successful, the $80,000 payment that 
she would still, in our view, be entitled to and ought to receive, 
would be deducted from any final court judgment. 
 
The member for Greystone has very eloquently pointed out that 
even in opposition, we have to show some restraint in arguing 
that the governments are merely money machines promising 
cash to any and every group. 
 
But I think it is important to recognize that the widows who are 
receiving redress this day have not been a grasping and greedy 
bunch. They are by and large, if not completely, a group of 
limited means. They are certainly not among the pampered and 
prosperous of our society. And so I don’t think they can be 
accused of being greedy and of demanding that their priorities 
come before other pressing priorities in our province and that 
their needs come before the needs of all other groups in society. 
 
I think that the opposition is taking a responsible tack in saying 
that if the widows go to court, in the event they are successful, 
the 80,000 they receive from this Bill will have to be deducted 

from any judgment. 
 
But I simply leave with this: this legislation should be a good 
day for everyone. It should be a good message. It should be 
along the same lines as when our national government decided 
to take compensation for the Japanese-Canadian internees in the 
last war. It should be something that we should all agree is 
correcting a national wrong. And this legislation would be if 
this one section were removed — the section which provides 
punitive action against those widows who attempt to seek legal 
redress. 
 
And I say — I still have to end with this — I find it 
contradictory that the government wishes to discourage legal 
action although they take the position that there is no legal 
claim. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I have an amendment that I would propose on this 
particular clause. The clause as it stands now reads: 
 

Notwithstanding anything in the Act, the board shall make 
a payment of $80,000 in a lump sum out of the fund as a 
gratuity to each person who: (a) applies to the board; (b) 
furnishes the board with proof that he or she meets the 
eligibility requirement set out in section 4; and (c) 
furnishes the board with a release in the prescribed form. 
 

The release that is being talked about in here, I’m assuming, 
Madam Minister, and you can correct me if I’m wrong, is the 
release that says, if I accept the $80,000 I am no longer entitled 
to sue WCB for any other compensations related to this matter. 
 
So what I am proposing Madam Minister, to do with this 
amendment, is to add the word “and” after the word “board” in 
clause (a); striking out the word “and” after clause . . . after 
section (b) on this; and totally removing clause (c) which is the 
section that deals with the release in the prescribed form. 
 
The effect of this would be to eliminate the release form that 
widows and widowers would have to sign which would 
relinquish their rights to sue the corporation, the WCB, if they 
were to accept the $80,000. I believe that, Madam Minister, this 
is what a good many people in this province are asking for, 
particularly the widows and their families. It would seem to be 
a responsible means of dealing with this issue. So I would ask, 
Madam Minister, that you would support this amendment when 
I present it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I was giving the minister an opportunity to 
respond at this point in time if she wished to, but I would move: 
 

an amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill by: 
a) adding “and” after clause (a); b) striking out “and” after 
clause (b); and c) striking out clause (c). 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
wish to move an amendment to clause 4 of the printed Bill, and 
I wish to amend clause 4 of the printed Bill by deleting 
subsection 4(2) and substituting the following . . . Actually, Mr. 
Chairman, I think what I will do is read the Bill in its printed 
form where subsection 4(2) reads as follows: 
 

(2) Where a person who would otherwise be eligible 
pursuant to subsection (1) has commenced an action or 
proceeding with respect to a claim arising out of the 
suspension, discontinuance or termination of the person’s 
compensation mentioned in clause (1)(a), the person is not 
eligible for a payment pursuant to section 3: 
 
(a) unless the action or proceeding is discontinued; or 
 
(b) if a judgment is entered or decision made in favour of 
the person. 

 
I wish to delete that subsection and substitute the following, and 
I hope I receive the government’s positive response: 
 

(2) Where a person who is eligible pursuant to subsection 
(1) has received a judgment or decision in an action or 
proceeding awarding to the person an amount with respect 
to a claim arising out of the suspension, discontinuance or 
termination of the person’s compensation mentioned in 
clause (1)(a), the person, on receiving payment of the 
amount of $80,000 pursuant to section (3), shall be entitled 
to receive only that part of the amount awarded under the 
action or proceeding that exceeds $80,000. 

 
This was addressed earlier, Mr. Chairperson, and it deals with, 
of course, that not only would each and every widow be able to 
receive the $80,000 but would also be able to proceed with 
legal recourse if he or she chose to and that upon some 
judgment that would exceed the $80,000, that the previous 
80,000 that they’ve already received would be subtracted from 
the judgment. 
 
I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Special Payment 
(Dependent Spouses) Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2130) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I note that I have sitting with me 
Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister, so this must be Labour 
that we’re discussing. And I also have Cheryl Hanson, assistant 
deputy minister; Sharon Little, manager of budget and 
operations. And behind the bar we also have John Boyd, 
director of planning and policy branch; Graham Mitchell, 
executive director, labour services; Dr. Fayek Kelada, manager 
of occupational health and safety services; and Peter Federko, 
chief executive officer of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister again, 
welcome to your officials. Just a quick mental note. I’m not 
sure if it’s looks or what, but having all the women around you 
up front and the men at the back, I’m not sure exactly what that 
means. But we appreciate the fact that you’re here with your 
officials tonight and to raise some questions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Maybe it says something about getting 
responses quicker. I don’t know. 
 
Madam Minister, about a year ago the member from Kindersley 
and the former Labour minister, Mr. Mitchell, had a discussion 
in Labour estimates regarding the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. And we thought it would be the last year 
we’d have that discussion since Mr. Mitchell said that the 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) was 
virtually history at that time. 
 
First off, Madam Minister, do you share the same view as Mr. 
Mitchell did about the CCTA when he said the following, and 
I’m quoting from last year’s budget estimates, where he says: 
 

It hasn’t always been my favourite subject over the nearly 
two years that I’ve been in this position, but it’s a story that 
is winding its way to(wards) a conclusion. 
 

Do you have any comments on that statement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s a slow and winding road, and at 
this point the discussion is taking largely place with CIC, the 
Crown Investments Corporation, and I know that Minister 
Lingenfelter will be in discussion with those representatives 
because the Bill largely applies to the Crown Investments 
Corporation sector. And although I have been part of some 
discussions to try to facilitate a coming together of the parties 
around this issue, there’s still work to be done. And I think if 
you wanted more detail on it you would have to speak to Mr. 
Lingenfelter during his estimates. 
 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

But we continue to try to get the parties to reach some kind of 
accommodation around the issues that first prompted this 
legislation, and it certainly is not easy because there’s some 
fairly dug-in positions. If we had, I guess, a larger province and 
a larger set of industries, this would not be such a difficult 
question because in some provinces they’ve divided up the turf 
rather neatly between the different people involved in the 
industry. But because Saskatchewan is small and people come 
into much closer contact over a much broader range of projects, 
there seems to be more controversy around this. But no, we 
aren’t at the end of our discussion yet. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, so 
basically what you’re saying is your department is not as 
involved anymore in the discussions. Minister, let’s see which 
. . . Government House Leader, Crown Investments Corporation 
is basically looking after that. 
 
I guess, Madam Minister, in the discussion . . . and you said you 
still have had some involvement in the current discussion. 
Wouldn’t it just make sense, Madam Minister, to basically 
acknowledge the fact that whether it’s CIC or whether it’s your 
department in regards to the fact that the CCTA agreement 
originally arose out of the Department of Labour, wouldn’t it 
make much more common sense to allow for open bidding, 
union or non-union, and for government to, at the end of day, 
determine that what’s best for the Crowns or any construction 
project is the lowest qualified bidder be given the job? 
 
I have a hard time believing, Madam Minister, that we need an 
agreement, CCTA agreement as we have in front of us, because 
we want to, if you will, protect unionized companies. It seems 
to me that if unionized employees want to see their companies 
work well, that there’s no reason why that can’t be very 
competitive and provide competitive bids. And I think all this 
does is creates disharmony in the business world and certainly 
in the construction sector. And that’s an area I think, Madam 
Minister . . . certainly we’ll raise that with the minister as well 
and find out exactly where the current process is taking us, 
where we are today in regards to the CCTA agreement. And in 
view of the fact that it’s been moved and greater discussion has 
taken place with Crown Investment Corporation, we won’t 
pursue it further. 
 
But maybe one question I could ask, Madam Minister, is 
exactly what role have you taken and what is your views 
regarding the CCTA? Are your views personally that this is an 
agreement that should stay in place and that you would be 
encouraging the minister to maintain the current status quo? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there are a whole range of 
workplace, collective bargaining, and tendering issues that are 
linked to this agreement. So whenever it’s discussed, it’s not 
discussed with whether just to go lower bid or not. There’s a 
whole range of issues that are discussed within both the 
employer and the unionized employee perspective, as well as, I 
must say, the unionized employer perspective on this particular 
thing because you’ve got some employers who are wanting to 
be involved in a fair collective bargaining process with their 
employees and to do a lot of work in apprenticeship and trades 
and other areas, and you’ve got other employers who have a 
different view of the world. So this isn’t just a union, employer 
issue. There’s also some employers who have a different view 

of this issue than other employers. So it’s not as straight 
forward as it would appear. And it has always been a Crown 
investment agreement which is due to expire in the year 2000. 
 
And so our only role really in the Department of Labour has 
been trying to work through some of the bargaining and other 
issues that get folded into this issue in this discussion, because 
how you go in terms of unionized or not unionized employers 
also does affect the bargaining process and other things. So it’s 
not quite as simple as it’s portrayed. But that’s why the 
Department of Labour has had some involvement in it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, we certainly will be following up with further 
discussions with CIC when we have an opportunity to sit down 
with the minister then. The unfortunate part, Madam Minister, 
however as I believe, CIC most of that will take place in 
committee, and I don’t believe we’ll have the opportunity on 
the floor of the Assembly to have the minister here. And that’s a 
concern because it just doesn’t give us the same time or the 
same public exposure as you do on the floor with the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Madam Minister, is calling 
across question period. We only get so many minutes in that 
and the Speaker keeps us really tight in that area as well. 
 
But it is an issue that we will continue to raise and then 
certainly it continues to be brought to our attention. In fact just 
recently we got a letter from Manley, the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association. I believe all of you and your 
colleagues received the letter from the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association dated April 22, which is just actually 
a couple of days ago. The letter points out a number of areas 
where there is . . . continues to be a rift between the government 
and the industry. 
 
And so that’s why, Madam Minister, that’s why we raise it here 
with you tonight because of the fact this is really the only real 
opportunity for us to debate this whole issue as far as on the 
floor of the Assembly. And it’s a concern to us when it gets 
moved to CIC, and down the road we’ll have an opportunity in 
committee of Crowns. But that will not be quite as an open 
process as I . . . it seems to me as I feel that the privilege of 
discussing it here in the Assembly. 
 
Madam Minister, another couple of areas I’d like to just move 
into as well this evening is, and not probably not spending as 
extensive time as I might, but I want to raise a couple of 
questions. In the last year this Assembly has been called on to 
pass two back-to-work orders dealing with strikes in this 
province. Back in the fall, you may remember, Madam 
Minister, with power workers and most recently for the nurses. 
In both cases this was done because these workers were thought 
to be essential to the safety of the public. And we’d like to 
know if you can tell us what exactly the policy of the 
government is these days. Which government workers are 
allowed to strike and which aren’t? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In some provinces the condition exists 
where there is blanket legislation that covers what’s called 
essential services. In this province, because we do believe in the 
collective bargaining process, we have chosen not to have 
blanket legislation, but to require the circumstances to be 
brought before the legislature in each separate instance. And I 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

think all governments over the history of Saskatchewan at one 
time or another have enacted this type of legislation in specific 
circumstances. 
 
Now I think there is a difference of opinion on what might be 
considered an essential service and a difference of opinion on 
when public safety or services are at risk. And I think, if 
anything, these last two circumstances have pointed out to me 
. . . is perhaps we don’t have quite the instrument we need today 
to deal with these circumstances. And you may know from a 
trade union perspective, they see this very linked to anti-scab 
legislation which is also controversial. 
 
So in the meantime until we find that better instrument for 
dealing with these kinds of situations where public interest and 
public safety are in question, we’re working with the tools we 
have, and that’s to proceed with free collective bargaining as far 
as you can reasonably achieve that goal. 
 
And it certainly is not our preference to use this tool. But the 
reason why we’ve made it a tool that you have to bring back to 
the legislature each time is that we do not adopt the position 
that governments should have a blanket ability to enact this 
kind of provision without having to bring it to the legislature for 
debate. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, I guess the 
concern certainly raised by power workers and the nurses . . . 
and I think you can appreciate for me to argue for unionized 
employees would not be seen as something that would be an 
area that I’d be really standing and trumpeting over. 
 
I think certainly the Saskatchewan Party’s policy has been a 
policy of fairness, but when we talk fairness we’re not just 
talking the fact that there’s an opportunity for unions to bargain 
fairly before the heavy hand of government comes upon them, 
but even an opportunity for individuals to work. 
 
And it was interesting, just this past weekend at an auction sale 
a gentleman out our way had indicated he’d come and begun 
working at a plant here in the city. And he’d asked his employer 
what was the criteria that his employer could not fire him any 
longer. His employer had indicated that if he was there, had 
stayed on the job for three months, that he really wouldn’t be 
able to fire him. It would have to be something quite drastic. 
 
Well the employee indicated he didn’t last a week. What he 
found very difficult was the pressure he was receiving from the 
union. He was not a unionized person at the time and he just 
found it very frustrating being in the workplace, so rather than 
fight the situation he left it. 
 
And so I have to acknowledge that I have some concerns about 
the way unions and individuals within unions operate. And 
certainly even in the nurses you have differences of opinion, 
even amongst nurses, as to how they perceive their union 
functioning and serving them. 
 
But I think the biggest concern, specifically with the last two 
pieces of legislation, was with the quickness. In fact it appeared 
the legislation was in place before even actual strike action was 

taken. 
 
Now when we look back to the Power workers or even the 
current situation with the nurses, I guess the question is, are 
there circumstances when Power workers and nurses could 
strike when it wasn’t considered a hazard by government? 
 
It would seem to me if we’re talking about allowing a collective 
agreement to work, you would want to at least give an 
opportunity for the teams to, while they’re bargaining, even if 
they break off, to try and see if the teams, the two parties, could 
come back together rather than imposing back-to-work 
legislation before they’ve even gone out on the picket lines. 
 
And so that’s a concern and I would like to hear your response 
to that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well there’s two responses I would 
give to that. One is a government has an obligation to act on 
information that’s provided to it. 
 
And when you have duly authorized bodies, such as district 
health boards, who are authorized with the responsibility to 
ensure health care for the citizens of the province, and they 
communicate to you in writing that they cannot guarantee that 
safety in the condition of a strike because of the numbers of 
managers they have that can cover the amount of acuity they 
have and the people that they’re looking after, and also their 
ability to get a black and white agreement with the workers that 
they are dependent on, on what services will be covered and 
which won’t, it then I presume placed them in sufficient 
uncertainty that they then communicated in writing to us. 
 
At that point the government is then in receipt of a letter from 
responsible bodies saying we cannot guarantee the public 
safety. And at that point I think the government becomes 
certainly morally liable and liable for not acting. Because if 
someone dies then, the health district would say, we told you 
that this wasn’t a safe situation and you didn’t act to protect the 
public safety. Had they not sent us those communications, that 
might have been a different circumstance. But once you’re in 
receipt, as a government, of a document where someone says 
they cannot ensure the public safety, it places you in a different 
position than if you’re just going on speculation of who did 
what, is it soon, is it not soon. 
 
I think the other circumstance is when the Premier believed he 
was bargaining in good faith and people left the bargaining 
table with a commitment to return the next morning, and instead 
of returning the next morning, issued strike notice. And I think 
that was also another circumstance in this event. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, a number of points you 
talked about there that basically caught my attention somewhat 
in regards to the current situations. It would seem to me, 
Madam Minister, that the district health boards were put in 
place by your predecessor, and basically by your government, 
to shield you from a lot of criticism when it comes to delivery 
of health care services. And the fact that they would send letters 
. . . I find it interesting that already they’ve got letters, you’ve 
got letters on the table before even strike action or notice is 
given. 
 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

And we certainly appreciated some individuals from the 
department who did come and talk to us about their perspective 
if the nurses went on strike. And their perspective didn’t seem 
to be quite as serious. They did indicate that they would, over a 
period of time, they would begin to run out of the resources — 
no doubt about it. But they didn’t give us the feeling that it was 
a matter of just a few hours. And I think, Madam Minister, you 
can’t blame the district health boards because you’ve got a 
department that . . . Department of Health would certainly 
indicate the level of care and delivery that they could give and 
that was something that would be at your fingertips. 
 
And to also argue that the Premier had been meeting with the 
two groups for a period of hours. As we understand, it was just 
a short period the Premier actually met with the actual members 
and then had consultations between the departments. So those 
are some of the concerns that we have and some of the issues 
that angered a number of the nurses, certainly out in our area — 
the fact that the impression was left that we bargained away for 
11 hours when the actual face-to-face wasn’t all that long. So 
you have to ask yourself, how can the unions feel comfortable 
that there is actually bargaining in good faith that was going to 
be allowed to take place when with . . . in view of the fact that 
we had legislation come down correctly. It would seem to me, 
Madam Minister, that what you are basically saying, in effect, is 
that these two unions no longer have a right to strike, that they 
are almost an essential service from the comments you just 
made. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess one of the circumstances that 
you have to appreciate here is that — and I’ve talked this over 
with people who have a long history in looking at the labour 
question — generally how labour laws are applied and how 
bargaining occurs. And prior to Dorsey you had a number of 
small and separate unions where if one home care went on 
strike, if one hospital went on strike, there was always lots of 
buffer in terms of where you might get other services, although 
certainly a general strike was possible. 
 
But one of the situations we have now with the unions 
amalgamated is the system becomes disabled very quickly on a 
very wide scale. And this is a somewhat different circumstance 
than ever existed in the past; in fact, this would be the first time 
in the history of the province that this circumstance has existed. 
 
Now I don’t think this is the end of a discussion. I think we do 
need to discuss what’s a reasonable way to do this and how can 
the people who operate and are responsible, the management 
end of these services, have the comfort level in discussion with 
nurses and other health care providers that a level of service is 
provided that adequately ensures patient safety, while at the 
same time, I think, is still quite able to create the kind of 
inconvenience that makes the pressure of a strike one of the 
tools in collective bargaining. 
 
And no doubt as we move through this and cooler heads prevail 
all round, we’ll need to get to this discussion, but I don’t think 
it’ll be one we’ll be having today or tomorrow. But again the 
circumstance was one that decisions were made based on the 
information available at the time. And I think we were also . . . 
although strike notice was served at a particular time, you 
would know as well as I do that people certainly talk in 
workplaces. And you don’t make your final decision until you 

actually have a notice in hand, but you’re certainly aware that 
that is the action that’s being contemplated. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I guess you hit the nail on the head when you 
indicated that as a result of Dorsey, the Dorsey report . . . and 
there has been a number of areas and issues certainly that are 
ongoing in the bargaining process that have arisen as a result of 
the Dorsey report. And I would be remiss if I didn’t say that, 
and acknowledge the fact that people that I’ve talked to, 
workers in the health field out in our area, when they look back 
at it and they basically say, had we not had the Dorsey report, 
had we continued to operate, yes, we’d have these little 
unionized groups, but most of the employees, certainly in a lot 
of the rural communities, didn’t really feel that they were all 
that badly done by by having these smaller bargaining groups. 
 
However, two of the health districts that happen to be part of 
my constituency were mostly represented by one union anyway; 
it wasn't a big change. I think certainly in the Pipestone Health 
District there was an SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union) group in one community, whereas 
everybody else was under SEIU (Service Employees’ 
International Union) and most of Pipestone was under SEIU. 
 
But the feeling was that they found a way to work through their 
differences and they didn’t really feel that it worked all that 
hard and that it created a major problem for them to have these 
smaller bargaining units. And it just seemed that certainly 
probably, if anything, this current round of negotiations with the 
nurses has probably brought to light a lot of the controversy that 
has arisen as a result of the Dorsey report. 
 
And I think, Madam Minister, the strike, and the fact that the 
nurses went on strike and actually even defied legislation, was 
just a way of them venting some of the frustrations they were 
feeling with government and its inaction in addressing a number 
of the areas that the Dorsey commission had brought forward, 
areas of inequities that had to be addressed. 
 
And I recognize that we’re not going to settle it on the floor. It’s 
not you and I arguing over that. But our caucus certainly is just 
pointing out the fact that these issues need to be addressed and 
we hope that the collective bargaining process will be allowed 
to work and that certainly the threat of further strike action . . . 
that the nurses will continue to allow this process to work. 
 
I hope, Madam Minister, that SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) will go to the table next 
time they meet, on May 10, with something a little more 
concrete and a little more . . . a proposal that would indicate that 
they are certainly recognizing the memorandum of 
understanding and are showing that they are willing to give and 
to address the concerns, rather than what I received yesterday, a 
call that indicated nurses felt that SAHO had actually come 
back to the table with less than they had left the table with. And 
that was something that really had infuriated the nurses. 
 
So as Minister of Labour, I can appreciate the fact that this is an 
issue I think we need to acknowledge. If we’re going to allow a 
process to work, a collective agreement, that both sides . . . 
while you can appreciate the union is going to come with 
demands much higher than what they expect to achieve and 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

certainly you say it can say managers are going to come with 
something less. But once you’ve signed a memorandum of 
understanding, you would hope that there would at least be 
proposals that would indicate moves are underway to address 
those concerns. 
 
And I think, Madam Minister, those are some of the issues that 
as Minister of Labour that you have to stand up and speak for 
and say if we’re going to provide that environment we certainly 
have to have a better understanding. And I hope those are some 
of the things that you would pass along to the labour unions or 
organizations or people that you would deal with on an ongoing 
basis, Madam Minister, rather than saying if you’re not going to 
bargain fairly we’re going to bring in strike action. I’ll allow for 
a comment, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a few things I would say in 
response to that. One is that we certainly value the collective 
bargaining process and Saskatchewan actually has the lowest 
number of lost-time days to labour disputes of I think any 
province in Canada . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Western Canada. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Western Canada. And so we have done 
a pretty good job overall of being proactive on the collective 
bargaining front. 
 
The second thing I would say is we are absolutely committed to 
the provisions in the MOU (memorandum of understanding) 
and certainly it’ll be the government’s intent to fully back the 
provisions that were in that MOU that was signed by all three 
parties. 
 
And I guess the third thing that I would say that given the 
ability of the parties to finish bargaining that agreement based 
on the MOU, the legislation can by regulation be withdrawn. 
And it would certainly be our hope that that would be the 
outcome. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report 
progress. 
 
(2200) 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, from the Women’s Secretariat, I 
would like to introduce Faye Rafter, the executive coordinator; 
and Joan Pederson, assistant executive coordinator. 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, 
Madam Minister, and to your officials. Madam Minister, I feel 
this department is one that is probably the most neglected 
department by this government, probably by the people of this 
province. I notice when looking over the budget this year, that 
this is the department that had the largest percentage of 

decrease. 
 
Can you give me an idea of why this would be the department, 
that when we represent 52 per cent of the people in this 
province, this department is the one that had the largest 
decrease? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I thank the member for her 
question. The reduction is primarily due to the sun-setting of 
one-time funding for specific projects such as the women’s 
on-line program, and the rural and farm women’s initiative. 
 
And so this, all that’s happened now is we’re . . . and our 
historical funding base, but every once in awhile if we get 
special projects, it bumps up. And all that’s happened here is 
the bump up isn’t there, and we’re on our regular base. 
 
But I have to say that this is a highly valued department of 
government. We do gender analysis now in virtually all the 
programs of government. And I just met recently with federal 
minister, Hedy Fry, who said that the impact of all the women’s 
departments, secretariats, and the ministers responsible for the 
status of women had, on the pension CPP (Canada Pension 
Plan) discussions in Canada . . . was very significant in terms of 
ensuring long-term economic sufficiency for older women. And 
it’s these kinds of reasons why this secretariat exists to ensure 
women’s economic security both in their working and home 
lives, but also in retirement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Before I respond 
to your comments, then I’d like to ask you when it says transfer 
for public services under the budget, if $345,000 that was there 
last year and not there this year, is that to do with the women’s 
Internet or the Internet services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The two particular initiatives that 
would make up that money would be the on-line program that 
connected women to the Internet and helped them learn how to 
use that resource. And the other one was some one-time 
materials on family violence, awareness, the wallet cards that 
gave people access to knowing where to get services and 
whatnot. So they were one-time types of initiatives. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the on-line 
program that was used . . . that was brought in two years ago, 
and you and I have had a number of discussions about, has there 
been any independent people looking at this program to 
determine how beneficial it was — people outside of your 
department, probably outside of your government — that could 
actually look at it and say if there was a benefit to the people of 
the . . . women of this province that were waiting to see how 
this $750,000 that this government came up could be spent on 
women? Can you tell what kind of analysis has been done on 
the money that was spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There is an independent evaluation 
going on right now. But I have to tell you that every single 
women’s group that I’ve met with over the past year, including 
First Nations, Metis, immigrant, farm women, women with 
disabilities, they found this to be one of the most useful and 
exciting programs that they’ve been involved in because as one 
mother put it to me, she can be at home with her children and 
not be out of contact with the various women’s organizations 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

that she’s always been involved and committed to whether on 
childcare issues, on violence against women issues. 
 
And I think a lot of the women feel it also helps them out 
because typically they have less money for travel, to get 
together to meet, to send out mail, etc. Through the Internet, 
through e-mail, through being able to have a Web site, it vastly 
reduces the costs for them of communicating with people who 
are interested in the programs and services they are involved in 
and reduces the isolation of these various organizations. 
 
And if the people who received programs are any indication of 
the value of programs, I would have to say it was an 
overwhelming success. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, no doubt the 
people that received the money are going to say it was a 
valuable success or it was a success because they got the 
money. 
 
But the ones that didn’t get it, and the other very important 
issues in this province that were ignored because the 
government decided that this was the best place to spend money 
for women, I believe there would be quite a number of women 
that would disagree with you quite violently. 
 
I don’t believe this, this program has got anything to do with the 
actual purchase . . . Excuse the word violent. I shouldn’t use it 
in this room, right? Strong. They have very strong feelings 
about this. 
 
Madam Minister, I think that maybe you could . . . was there 
any actual computer equipment purchased with this program or 
was it all just hookup? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The groups used the grants to purchase 
computer hardware, Internet connections and software, as well 
as to organize Internet training for members, staff, clients, and 
volunteers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don’t think 
there is a lot of point in us discussing this because I’m sure that 
we’ll have to agree to disagree on the value of this program for 
the people of this province. 
 
I was wondering if you could give me an idea of how much 
money was spent by your department this year on 
entrepreneurial incentives for women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re just getting a little more 
information for you here, but some of the conferences that I’ve 
attended on behalf of the Women’s Secretariat have included 
the women in exporting, which was an initiative of the federal 
government that included all the departments of Economic 
Development across Canada as well as people who worked 
closely with women. And I would say that our main role in that 
is not to provide the service directly because that’s the role of 
the Department of Economic Development. 
 
But through our economic indicators we’d be able to determine 
how many women are in small business, how they’re doing 
economically, what some of the barriers are so that as we’re 
involved in policy discussions in government about economic 

development, about financing, we’re able to make comment on 
things like the small business loans associations for women, the 
. . . I certainly thought the women in export was one of the most 
important programs that I’ve seen. 
 
But we also, in our speeches and in our presentations to people, 
certainly urge women to access those resources that enable 
women to participate in business. And women are in Canada 
one of the largest growing sectors of people involved in small 
business and in successful small business. 
 
So we see part of our job as to encourage women in those 
directions, to let them know where the resources are, and we did 
publish last year a guide to funding for women in small 
business. So we think it’s a very important area of development. 
I’ve been out . . . I’ve been invited to speak for example out in 
Swift Current to the local women’s business organization and a 
lot of the women there are doing small businesses either out of 
their farms, out of their homes, or out of the business district of 
their community and there’s no question it’s creating a lot of 
value-added economic development to those communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, of course 
women and employment is a very important issue to me and to 
everyone in the Saskatchewan Party and we see more and more 
women entering the paid force and deserving well-paying jobs. 
And I note with interest that you have developed an analysis of 
the education and training needs of women being prepared for 
employment. Could you summarize what this analysis is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think rather than take too narrow of a 
take on it, when we developed the provincial training strategy 
we basically said to employers, to training institutions, to 
anybody who’s involved in education and training in the 
province, that we required a system that was much more 
responsive to employers’ needs, and within that strategy made a 
commitment to questions of diversity within the training 
strategy. So in all the services and programs that are being 
developed, the department is seeking to create a balance, a 
gender balance, a balance amongst aboriginal people, 
non-aboriginal people, immigrant people, disabled people — 
the notion being to try to get everybody actively involved in a 
very responsive labour market development and training 
system. 
 
So women are an integrated part of the larger training strategy 
which is meant to be responsive to employers. And when 
employers tell us that they’re not getting the responsive services 
that they need, people go out from the department directly to try 
to determine what isn’t working and we try to get those things 
straightened out and get the training and services to them that 
they need. 
 
So the women are an integral part of that effort. However, there 
are still some specialized programs in areas of bridging 
programs, helping people who have been out of the workforce 
for a long time re-enter the workforce, those kinds of things. 
But it’s generally part of the province’s training strategy of 
which the Women’s Secretariat again would have been a part of 
the policy development of that strategy. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I also 
note that the Women’s Secretariat, you’ve developed a resource 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

manual to support workplace implemented . . . to work to 
support workplaces, implement family-friendly workplaces. I 
guess I’m not familiar with the publication and I’m wondering 
if I can receive a copy of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Certainly, and we appreciate your 
interest. Our whole purpose in starting this discussion was it 
seemed that more and more people were talking about it and 
there were discussions that took place for a year around the 
province culminating in a conference. 
 
And it was interesting because whether it was small business, 
large corporations, government, self-employed people, there’s 
just a whole range of people with an interest in this topic. 
 
We are not totally clear on where we will be able to go from 
here but in the absence in the next steps being taken by 
government, communities are continuing to have these 
discussions and employers are continuing to pursue how they 
can improve circumstances in their workplace. 
 
And within the Public Service Commission we now have a 
person seconded who is working on how to develop more 
family-friendly policy within the Public Service Commission. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, this publication 
that you have developed, I was wondering if you could describe 
what this document actually provides. I think it’s the type of 
information that probably would be valuable. And maybe you 
could also let me know what the cost was to develop this 
publication? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I was just getting it straight 
because there’s two reports. The first report was the report of 
the task force, which were the group that went around the 
province and met with people and held the conference and 
whatnot. And they made a series of recommendations on what 
kind of things would be helpful in the ongoing development of 
both policy and practice around balancing work and family. 
 
Now the second thing we’re doing is a document that will 
actually start to provide people with more information about 
some of the best practices that are going on in the province so 
that people who want to use those as a model will be able to 
build on the experiences that have happened in other places. 
And we find quite often that it’s better to build on people’s 
willingness to move forward in these things than it is to 
necessarily legislate or require that people do these things. And 
we certainly haven’t seen yet a lack of interest in it. 
 
So the first stage was the task force report, which we can 
certainly provide you with. And the second stage, we’ll start 
moving more into the area of practice. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So then just for clarification, Madam Minister, 
this resource manual, this publication is . . . it hasn’t been 
developed yet; you’re still developing it. So there’s cost 
involved in that that’s still being worked on. Then the 
information that I’ve received, when it said it was a developed 
publication, it hasn’t yet been developed. 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There may be a little bit of confusion. 
There was an old . . . an old one was done more as, I guess, a 
discussion-starter back before the task force did its work. So we 
have an old report, we have the task force, and now the work 
that’s being done to take this work to the next step. And I 
imagine that, without being too specific, it won’t be any more 
costly than other publications that we’ve been involved in 
doing. 
 
But in order to empower people to have this discussion, there 
needs to be some information for them to work with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the balancing 
work and family task force that you mentioned earlier, I 
understand that the report has been completed. But I’m 
wondering what is happening now. What is the government’s 
commitment to actually carrying on or working with the 
recommendations that was brought out in this report and how is 
your department actually lobbying the government and the 
different departments to make sure that this is something that is 
looked at? Or was the $750,000 that was being spent on it just a 
tabled publication that will never see the light of day again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Maybe I could just go over some of the 
things that have already been done. Now earlier on as we were 
moving into consideration of this discussion, we did implement 
some measures to support work and family. And some of that 
was changes to The Labour Standards Act to improve maternity 
and other family-related leaves. Other amendments included a 
reduction in the qualification period for maternity, parental and 
adoption leave; the introduction of 12 weeks parental leave in 
place of paternity leave; and an increase in adoption leave from 
6 weeks to 18 weeks. 
 
In the area of part-time work, for parents who are struggling to 
balance work and family responsibilities, we amended some of 
The Labour Standards Act to support part-time workers by 
providing pro-rated benefits. 
 
And the Women’s Secretariat offers workshops on balancing 
work and family responsibility, and as well provides practical 
advice to employers on how to create a family-friendly 
workplace. And the Secretariat has distributed work and family 
information packages to assist individuals in the workplace. 
 
And then, as an employer, the government provides access to 
programs and policies that help employees achieve a better 
balance between work and family. And that of course includes 
employee benefit programs as well as counselling and family 
support. But it also includes flexible start and stop times, job 
sharing, variable hours, pressing necessity leave, which add to 
the quality of both work and life. 
 
Now we’ll also be taking this discussion up with the ministers 
responsible right across Canada. And again, in meeting with 
Hedy Fry just recently, who is the federal minister, she’s 
certainly concerned about these issues, and I think what would 
be ideal if we could have both the federal and the provincial 
government come together to look at how we can create a more 
family-friendly environment generally in Canada so that people 
can be both active in the workforce but also can still maintain 
their commitments as family members and members of the 
community. And I think it’s one of the real modern challenges 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

for governments to keep this perspective on the people’s need 
to look after those around them, to nurture the little people, and 
also to look after aging or in other way ailing family members. 
 
So we may see changes over the next few years from all levels 
of government in tax policy and other things to recognize the 
caregiving roles that we still want to hold onto in our society. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, I’m delighted to hear the 
minister mention the word changes in tax policy because I think 
that’s probably one of the very most important issues that could 
be dealt with in the whole report on balancing work and family 
task force. I would imagine in your dealings with people or 
women around the province you’ll find that many of them are 
finding that going to work is something that they have to do in 
order to keep food on the table, but when it comes to actually 
making sure that their family life is a priority, they would prefer 
to be at home, or they would at least like there to be a choice to 
be at home. 
 
And because of the tax policies and the amount of money that 
goes out of every paycheque in this province to the government, 
there really isn’t a lot of option for the people in this province to 
actually to stay, to actually balance a family. They’re too busy 
trying to balance the cheque book. 
 
Madam Minister, when we talked about some of the initiatives 
that this task force looked at and you talked about leave going 
from six weeks to eighteen weeks, now is this something that’s 
a recommendation, or is it something that you’ve already 
lobbying the federal government so that there could actually be 
EI (employment insurance) benefits for someone that has — an 
adoptive parent, for example, that would like to spend time at 
home — have you lobbied the federal government for those 
changes to some of these policies, or is it still just in paper and 
the ink isn’t dry yet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — For the very specific changes I 
mentioned, those are part of Saskatchewan labour policy which 
I’m glad I can count on you to support. But as far as the tax 
changes go, I think the federal government has done a little bit 
on the area of caregivers, but one of the things that Hedy and I 
discussed, which is certainly an issue, is that these . . . to start to 
move into the area of tax benefits is very expensive and one has 
to be thoughtful about what it is you’re giving some tax 
incentive for and how far you go in providing those incentives 
and whether you cap them or whether you do them per child or 
how you do them, but it’s definitely worth doing the work to 
take a hard look at whether there’s a way we can be more 
supportive. 
 
One of the interesting facts, when we were doing the work on 
women’s economic security is, if you take a young man and a 
young woman of about the same education doing about the 
same kind of work, their wages are pretty similar. 
 
When women’s and men’s wages really start to part company is 
when women enter the workforce and then have children, and 
it’s the family considerations, I think, that have a lot to do with 
women’s declining economic position as they move into the 
years when children are a big part of the equation. 
 
And so, I do think we need to take a look at this from the point 

of view of women’s economic security and pensions and what 
not, as well as from a nurturing perspective. And again, as I 
mentioned when we talked about it, policies in this area are 
very expensive, but I think it shouldn’t deter us from looking at 
what we can do and what makes sense to make it a little easier 
for people to balance the decision to have children with the 
desire to keep active in the workforce. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of your 
colleagues was commenting that taxes had very little to do with 
family life and balancing life. I think that many people in this 
province would beg to differ because it has everything to do 
with the fact that sometimes your life gets a lot more 
complicated because of what you have to take home at the end 
of the day. And I don’t think that anyone can deny that. If they 
do, then I guess maybe I’d like to see how they balance their 
cheque book. 
 
Madam Minister, sexual harassment is becoming more and 
more prevalent in the workplace, regardless of the incentives 
currently in place. Could you indicate what kind of numbers are 
being reported on sexual harassment to your department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we’ve found is that 23 per cent of 
. . . and we only have the Canadian figure here because sexual 
harassment is dealt with in many different places —some by the 
Human Rights Commission, some in the occupational health 
and safety, and some through inquiries for training to the 
Women’s Secretariat. So there isn’t one single place where the 
information is collected, but it’s estimated that 23 per cent of 
Canadian women have encountered work-related sexual 
harassment. 
 
Now on a positive note, since we’ve included sexual 
harassment in occupational health and safety legislation, and 
since we’ve prepared through that branch a guide for 
workplaces, incidents of harassment are declining considerably 
once people have a clear understanding of what’s considered 
harassment, and what remedies can take place within the 
workplace if people feel that harassment has taken place. 
 
And certainly our goal was with these workplace committees, 
was to get those problems resolved within workplaces without 
them having to go out to independent tribunals to get resolved. 
The idea is to solve the problem as close to the source as 
possible. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you give me an idea of 
how many workshops you had on sexual harassment this year, 
what the cost involved is, and can you give me an idea if most 
of the government departments or all of the government 
departments have actually asked for this workshop for their 
departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. In 1998-99 we had 500 requests 
for information and resources, but training specifically has been 
delivered to over 700 private and extended public sector 
employees, and we do charge a fee to help defray the cost of 
some of this training. So there’s also 500 participants from 
non-profit organizations free of charge have received training as 
well, and there was also informational sessions delivered to 
about 200 individuals. So this would be the amount of training 
that was delivered over the past year. 



April 27, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, have most of the government 
departments taken this training or is it an area that is still being 
looked at, at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s our belief that the majority of the 
public service has had opportunities to participate in this 
training. It would be best probably to ask the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission that question 
because we’ve done train the trainer workshops. And once we 
train trainers they then go on to deliver that training in other 
areas and we then sometimes lose touch with how much 
training they’re delivering because they’re off then doing it 
themselves. So I think that question would have to be asked to 
the Public Service Commission. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chairman — please 
pardon me. Madam Minister, one area that we haven’t touched 
on, and I think is probably one of the biggest concerns that I 
have and probably you as well, is the issue of Native . . . of our 
Aboriginal people and how they are being dealt with, especially 
the women. And lately we hear a lot of talk about elder abuse, 
and I’m wondering if your department has been looking at this 
issue, and how you are monitoring or how you are dealing with 
the very real needs of the Aboriginal communities outside of 
the reserves? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s a specific issue. Because the 
seniors’ secretariat resides in Social Services, I think that a lot 
more of the work that’s been done around that issue has 
probably been done both through the areas of health and social 
services. Our main involvement would not be in doing that 
work directly. However, we do work with Aboriginal women’s 
groups to help them improve their capacity to deal with issues 
in their community, to deal with their governments, to 
participate in their own governments. And also we are working 
on a comprehensive profile of Aboriginal women that will help 
them target some of the areas that they want to address in their 
communities. 
 
I had the benefit of going to such a conference with all the 
elected women chiefs and councillors and representatives of the 
various bands in Saskatchewan, and one of the very interesting 
presentations they had there was on health data in Aboriginal 
communities. And it certainly gave you a strong impression of 
what the most pressing issues were that needed to be dealt with 
in those communities. And so I think the profile that we’re 
working on now when we sit down to discuss it with the 
Aboriginal women will be equally helpful. 
 
But again, the elder abuse question particularly I think is more 
readily taken up with the senior secretariat in Social Services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, thank you. 
The meetings that you had and the discussions with the chiefs 
and some of the other Aboriginal people you discussed, would 
mostly be dealing with issues on reserve, because a lot of the 
people that these chiefs would be working with live right on the 
reserve. And the ones that I think you’re probably just as 
concerned about are the Aboriginals that are living off the 
reserve and are being dealt with through areas like Social 
Services. 

I know that a lot of single young women on social services are 
Native, and I would imagine there are very difficult issues 
surrounding their lifestyle. And I’m wondering if there’s 
anything in place right now to deal with them specifically, and 
if your department is working with Social Services in a way that 
could actually bring some of the education that you have to the 
recipients of social services in a way that again, the information 
isn’t going to be gotten and then just stored on the shelf, not 
received by the people that could benefit most from it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess there’s two responses to that. In 
our policy work, we’ve really made an effort over the past 
couple of years to make sure that all our policy information is 
integrated and that Aboriginal women, disabled women, etc., 
are well represented within the evaluation that we do and then 
have access to good information that they can use within their 
own tribal councils and what not. 
 
But what you’ll find these days is that most of the tribal 
councils are very conscious themselves of the need to represent 
their urban members and I doubt that there’s any large centre 
now that doesn’t have tribal councils providing urban services. 
And certainly true in Regina, it’s true in Saskatoon, it’s true in 
Yorkton, it’s true in P.A. (Prince Albert), it’s true in North 
Battleford. 
 
So the women themselves who are part of those tribal councils I 
think are very active in provision of those services and probably 
because we’re not a direct service delivery agency, we work 
more on the level of facilitating their empowerment to deal with 
these issues, their knowledge of the issues, their ability to bring 
forward the facts and the statistics; but it would be more Social 
Services that coordinates with the tribal councils that are 
working in the urban areas. But I don’t think there’s any band 
that hasn’t become conscious of the need to serve their urban 
populations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, you talked about 
the cities, Saskatoon, Regina, P.A., Yorkton, that are dealing 
with urban . . . and the Natives that are not living on the reserve 
that are living in the urban centres, but there are of course very 
many Natives living in towns like Humboldt, and Wadena, 
Kelvington, places like that. And they will not have access to 
the information that they do in the bigger centres. 
 
First of all, do you have any idea of what percentage of the . . . 
of the Native, especially women, living off-reserve are in this 
bigger urban centres? Is that a large percentage of them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We know that it’s probably 
approaching about 50 to 60 per cent, I would say. Whether it’s 
larger than that I would start to feel on uncertain ground, but it 
is a very large proportion of the population. The other thing I 
would say is there are also programs funded that serve primarily 
urban, inner-city populations and those would be funded from 
the Department of Social Services, through the Associated 
Entities Fund, through the child action plan, through a whole 
range of mechanisms. 
 
So there would be a lot of instances where there’s also services 
being provided directly through organizations like Youth 
Unlimited and others to the population that you’re talking 
about. And I think more and more these organizations are 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1999 

integrating their efforts and working together to do that. 
 
But again, we don’t direct fund any of those services. We just 
try to work with the women to make sure that they are 
empowered to both articulate what they believe the problems 
are for their communities, but also to act on them and to have 
their voices heard within the decision-making bodies that affect 
them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I think 
that one of the big opportunities or challenges that you may be 
facing is to make sure that the young women in the school 
system right now are aware of the special issues that surround 
women’s jobs, workplace issues. And I’m wondering, with the 
many publications that you’re putting out, if there’s any 
publication directed to school-aged children that can start 
bringing them up to date with some of the issues they’ll be 
dealing with when they leave school and start entering the 
workplace. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There would be a few things. There has 
been an agreement signed between the Department of Education 
and both the First Nations and Metis community on curriculum 
development and curriculum material that’s I guess culturally 
appropriate within the schools. But also the Women’s 
Secretariat has done a brochure on date rape, and we also do 
training on request again on these kinds of issues. 
 
But these . . . again I think working on a more integrated model, 
there’s an attempt made to integrate this stuff within the 
curriculum and also to make sure that the materials that are 
being used in the schools today are more representative of the 
actual students that attend those schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m reading the 
budget, and it looks to me like the number of staff that the 
Secretariat has is 14; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that’s correct. It increased by one 
this year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, we’ve discussed a number of 
programs and publications and issues that the Secretariat has 
worked on in the last year. And I also see that one of your 
mandates, one of your goals, is that you monitor government 
departments to make sure that women’s concerns are looked 
into. And the whole idea of women’s issues right across the 
whole span of this province is looked after by your department. 
Now to have that all done by 14 women is a remarkable job. 
Maybe we should be giving some lessons to some of the other 
departments. 
 
But at the same time, I’m wondering how we can possibly say 
that we can look at every issue and look at it in one department 
and ask them to look across the whole government spectrum 
and get this work done. I’m wondering if you don’t have many 
comments with your cabinet ministers saying there has to be 
another way to make sure that we don’t just put it in one little 
department somewhere, and run it by the Women’s Secretariat 
when really the issues should be dealt with in every department, 
on every Bill, in every aspect. 
 
So we don’t have to just single the Women’s Secretariat out or 

women out as this is their issue; this is their department, give 
them a million bucks and tell them to stay home. This is, to me, 
something where I think rather than putting women in one little 
department, I think we should be doing a lot more screening to 
make sure the government is looking at it right across the broad 
spectrum. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well partly it’s an educative process 
and as there are more women sitting at the cabinet table, as 
there’s more women sitting in caucus, as there’s more women 
managers in government, as there’s more women in policy 
roles, the Women’s Secretariat, I think, has helped to develop a 
larger view in government of these questions. 
 
And I don’t think they would mind at all if you would lend 
support to the notion that they would have more resources to do 
the work that they do, but it is also an educative task. And once 
people have embraced the idea and taken it to heart, it certainly 
becomes easier to do this work and people become more 
sensitive to the issues. 
 
I think today, for example, you would know that there’s issues 
about parenting that are readily understood by both men and 
women and it’s been part of an evolution of the way that we 
think about these things. So I think that’s partly what the 
Women’s Secretariat is involved in is helping evolve the 
thinking of government on a range of issues. But they do 
participate in some interdepartmental committees where their 
participation creates a wide scope of impact. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I just want to thank you and 
your staff for being here. And I know that after the next election 
there’s probably going to be a lot more women in the House. 
And I would also think there would be many changes to many 
government departments because of the changes in the House, 
and I’m sure that we’re all looking forward to it. 
 
Subvote (WS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (WS02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:44 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


