





























































Hansard: May 06, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1127 
 May 6, 1999 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
the officials. On my left, Terry Scott, deputy minister; Hal 
Cushon, director of policy and program; Doug Mathies, Crop 
Insurance general manager; Ernie Spencer, policy director . . . 
or assistant deputy minister rather. And who else have we got 
— Jack Zepp, director of admin services; and Ross Johnson, 
budget officer. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. Welcome, Mr. Mathies, from 
Melville; nice to se you here tonight. 
 
I just want to start off with a question dealing with crop 
insurance, and specifically with crops that may out of necessity 
have had to been left over winter and then suffered wildlife 
damage. Where does the responsibility lie and how does one 
initiate a claim for such damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The program works so that you have to 
make a post-harvest claim by November 15. And then upon 
harvesting, whenever that may be it will be analyzed to see if 
there’s any contamination quality, excreta or whatever. And 
then . . . and if you’re not in crop insurance of course, there’s 
always the big game damage compensation program that you 
can apply to that has rules and regulations around it with a $200 
deductible. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. So there’s no need to be in crop 
insurance, and I guess I should have remembered that. 
 
But the concern that’s come to me is about an individual who 
did in fact have to leave out 150 acres of crop. And it was 
damaged by wildlife to the extent that even the grain companies 
would not consider even buying it if he harvested it. The 
gentleman tells me that when he went to crop insurance to have 
it appraised for wildlife, they would not even go out to appraise 
it. What would the reason be for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well we don’t want to guess, make too 
many guesses here. I think the best thing to do is to either give 
us here the information or send it privately over because if it 
was recent years, like this year, then we don’t see any reason 
why it wouldn’t be adjusted. But there again, like we’re just 
talking here and we’re kind of guessing. So we don’t have to 
guess, you might want to give us more detail. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Okay, but the drill is that once it’s reported to 
wildlife and wildlife . . . Environment and Resource 
Management people ask crop insurance to evaluate it. Crop 

insurance — there should be no question that they should go out 
and assess the damage because it’s not a crop insurance 
problem, it’s a provincial resource management problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — But crop insurance would do the 
adjusting. So it would come to us and so we don’t know why 
. . . what the situation is with regards to your case, why 
someone wouldn’t come out and adjust it. 
 
Mr. Osika: — The suggestion was made that . . . an 
observation was made that there was the majority of the crop in 
the area had been harvested and since that was the case, they 
would not go out to assess or evaluate the damage. And that 
kind of bothers me a little bit because there are extenuating 
circumstances and individual cases. And I guess what distresses 
me is just the refusal to even go out and evaluate it and give it 
to the Environment and Resource Management people and then 
let them deal with whether or not it should or should not or 
could not have been harvested the previous fall. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well again we don’t know the details 
and if you want to provide us with the name and the details we 
can certainly look into it and get a factual response. 
 
The guidelines for crop insurance in this program are that you 
have to follow good management practices. If the crop is off by 
the end of September in the area . . . if all the crop is off in a 
good year, for example, and this crop is out in November then 
you have to ask . . . crop insurers ask themselves well what 
about management practice here. What’s the circumstances? 
And if they were to be denied a claim they always have the 
route of appeal. So they can take their claim to the appeal board. 
 
But again we don’t like guessing on the details so I’d appreciate 
it if you just . . . We always look into these things. I mean like I 
have a number of examples for the wildlife compensation, 
because it’s a new program over the last few years, and we 
basically got everything ironed out but we need the detail. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate that. I 
appreciate the responses from crop insurance on issues that 
come to my attention and responses from your department. But 
in this case it was just a little bit of a concern to me and I know 
there’s an appeal process. But sometimes those things drag on 
and on, and at this time of year when people are anxious to 
clean up their land to hopefully be able to start seeding again if 
they get some kind of help. But I will then give you the detail in 
writing and appreciate your response to that. Thank you very 
much. 
 
I’d just like to shift gears now, and wonder if you were able to 
this evening give us a bit of an update with respect to where 
we’re at with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) loans in as far as the extent of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I can start with this. We got ACS staff 
here that will be here . . . is here as we speak. 
 
The total loan values, I’ll give you the last three years if you 
like. In 1996-97 we had 16,762 loans for a value of 263.6 
million. That declined in 1997-98 to 10,800 loans at 175.3 
million. As of December 31, 1998 we had 7,875 loans for a 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

value of 144.5 million. 
 
We can give you a further breakdown if you desire. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Those are impressive differences and reductions. 
How do we account for those? Are those loans that have been 
paid back in their entirety? Are those loans that have been paid 
down? Or are those loans that have been forgiven? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We were trying to figure out if it was the 
same year end. I gave you the year end total for 1998-99. What 
I’ll give you here is . . . What’s happened of course is we are 
winding down ACS, as you know, and there’s been a 
combination of people moving their portfolios to other 
institutions and that. And there’s some write-offs and there’s 
some settlements. 
 
So I’ll give you some of the numbers. Since April 1, 1996, $40 
million of repayments . . . or settlements rather. As a result of 
payments, $206 million has come in. 
 
We’ve had $64.8 million of write-offs. These are a combination 
of uncollectible loans where there was no recovery possible, or 
settlements were less than full. Then we collected during the 
same period, $58.8 million worth of interest. 
 
So it’s a combination of settlements, payoffs, and, well 
basically people moving their accounts. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Sixty-four point eight million dollars in loans 
that were written off. 
 
For handling all these transactions, does ACS have to rely on 
outside legal counsel or assistance from law firms? And if they 
do, who are the law firms and what would those costs entail? 
 
(1815) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We have . . . The Department of Justice 
handles a lot of our legal work internally, and then we do have 
some law firms; I know — MacPherson Leslie Tyerman. We’re 
trying to get you some numbers. 
 
In 19 . . . legal services as of February 28, about $174,000; and 
. . . from MacPherson Leslie Tyerman. Anyway there’s a 
number of other ones as well, totalling $190,000. So most of 
it’s MLT (MacPherson Leslie Tyerman). 
 
The thing that we’ve done that you may know or may not know, 
is that we’ve handled every case on a business-like basis. No 
longer, I mean as of a number of years ago if you were going to 
start winding ACS down, no longer are we retaining solicitors 
to chase something . . . money that’s not there. 
 
So what they do is they look at the asset base, make a business 
decision on behalf of the taxpayers of this province, if it’s 
possible to get a settlement, a reasonable settlement, we always 
try to do that first. If there’s no money there, of course then 
there are write-offs because you can’t get money out of 
something that’s not there. And the cost as of February 28 is 
about 190,000. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you for that, Mr. Minister. Following 

along on another issue that seems to have really come to light in 
the very recent past and that . . . I want to share this with you 
because I need to have some of your views and responses on 
how you see this situation unfolding, and whether or not there 
can be anything done to help people whose leases have expired 
— the six-year leases that have now expired as a result of land 
being recovered by financial institutions. 
 
And now the six years is up and the land is being repossessed 
and put up for sale. There are different financial institutions and 
I . . . some of the people that have in fact been faithful in living 
up to their lease commitments and responsibilities now find 
themselves faced with a request for a horrendous amount of 
money as a down payment on an opportunity for the right for 
first refusal. 
 
Is there anything that might be done to help these folks keep the 
land that they faithfully retained and faithfully paid their 
financial responsibilities and commitments? Is there anything 
that your department can do to offer some assistance to these 
folks that desperately want to continue farming? 
 
And given the circumstances, the financial and economic 
conditions that exist, is there anything that your department 
might be able to do to help in this very urgent situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I believe you’re referring to the problem 
with Farm Credit Corporation loans? With our land, the bit that 
we had, there was about two-thirds of the land went back to the 
original owners that we’ve sold. And so as far as FCC (Farm 
Credit Corporation) is concerned they’re asking, I believe, up to 
40 per cent down payment which some of the people had a 
problem with. 
 
What we’ve done, we’ve met with FCC; I’ve met with them 
myself. We then coordinated a meeting with FCC, the lands 
branch tenants association — I think that’s what they call 
themselves now — and our department. 
 
They had that meeting about two weeks ago — ten days ago — 
two weeks ago. And out of that meeting came a decision that 
they would explore options as to how they might handle the 
next part and portfolio through FCC. 
 
Unless I’m mistaken, I think FCC seems to be the key right 
now. And I’m going to be meeting with this tenants association 
when they’ve reviewed the options. And I don’t know exactly 
when that meeting’s going to be yet. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Minister, one of those people that have been 
talking to me are saying, hey look, all we want is some kind of 
a break to keep our land and continue to farm it. And if in fact 
FCC in this case wants 40 per cent down, would there be a 
consideration for the monies that have been paid over the last 
eight to ten years, some of that be used as a portion of the down 
payment, that’s what they’re looking for. I guess they’re 
desperate to try and find some means or some way or some help 
to retain their land that they want to continue farming. 
 
I’m pleased to hear that you will be meeting with those groups. 
There are other financial institutions involved as well and I 
guess what distresses me in one instance is . . . is a farm family 
that tells me that the land is being repossessed and leased to 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

others with no consideration for leasing back to that tenant. 
 
And I’m curious and I wonder if you might be able to enlighten 
me why that is? When they want to continue farming the land is 
being repossessed and being offered to people in a surrounding 
area but not back to the person that’s living on that land and 
wants to continue farming it. I’m not sure whether anybody has 
come to you with that problem. If they haven’t, I want to share 
it with you on behalf of my folks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well not to confuse the issues. The issue 
you’re talking about is Farm Credit Corporation which is of 
course the federal government. We are involved to the point 
where we’re trying to offer some assistance and some kind of a 
settlement in terms of the down payment because the down 
payment really is the issue. Because, if you compare the lease 
rate to the payment with the interest rates that are out there now, 
there’s not much difference. It’s that down payment that is the 
problem. 
 
And we are trying to help them. We don’t have a vehicle to 
extend money of course because we winding down FCC . . . or 
we’re winding down ACS. And of course there is the banks, 
you know, lenders or credit unions. But we must remember that 
the FCC tells us that 80 per cent of the land that’s gone back 
have gone back to original owners. And I get both sides of it, I 
must tell you, because there’s other people who say well you 
know you’ve right at first refusal. And, you know, working 
towards giving the people who lost land, giving them breaks to 
get the land back isn’t fair to me as somebody who wants to 
expand my land base for my son. I mean you get both sides of 
the argument. 
 
What we’re trying to do is be very sensitive to those people 
who have leases and want to keep them because it’s part of their 
land base. And I think they’ll be the number one priority if 
possible to try to find out if there’s any possible way. We’re 
encouraging FCC to be as flexible as possible. 
 
And I’m simply in there just to try to see what . . . with the 
department to see if there’s anything we can do to help in terms 
of options, remembering that we don’t have a vehicle to lend 
money to these people any more. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I appreciate that. 
And it’s Farm Credit Corporation we’ve been talking about. But 
there are other concerns, similar concerns in the same area with 
the credit unions here in the province. 
 
And that’s what kind of distresses me because these were the 
institutions that were to assist co-operatively to maintain an 
economic base in rural areas, the things like land bank. And yet 
here people come to me and say what is happening? If there was 
some assistance, some way that we could continue to lease the 
land. 
 
But to have it offered up to others because people didn’t have 
the down payment . . . I don’t know whether you have some 
contact with that lending institution as well or the banks in the 
areas to meet with not only Farm Credit but perhaps these other 
financial institutions like the credit unions and banks might be 
involved as well to say hey, look folks, we have a real desperate 
situation in rural Saskatchewan in our agriculture, in the area of 

agriculture — the industry that’s the economic engine, the 
driver for this province. 
 
If agriculture shuts down — I don’t have to tell you that, Mr. 
Minister, you’ve got to know that — if agriculture folds, good 
grief, then we ask somebody to turn off the lights as we’re 
leaving and it’s bad enough now. So I guess in desperation 
these folks are trying to cling, trying to hold on to the 
opportunity to continue to maintain our status as a breadbasket 
of the world and be able to raise their families in small 
communities in rural Saskatchewan. But now they’re faced with 
yet another hurdle of having to deal with big institutions that 
don’t seem to have the same type of concern for the future of 
agriculture and the economy in this province. 
 
So I’m hoping that perhaps you might include these other 
organizations as well in your discussions to perhaps consider 
other options, extensions of leases. As you mentioned, the lease 
payments were probably about the same as what the mortgage 
payments would be. So what’s the difference if the money 
keeps coming in? At least the land is productive, is maintained, 
and is not just repossessed and left to mother nature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I don’t disagree with what you say 
in terms of the necessity to keep people on the land. In as far as 
ACS is concerned, we have almost wound down the leases. We 
have about 60,000 acres left. We’ve had very few cancellations 
and most of them are resolved just through flexibility. The 
banks and credit unions total — I can’t give you . . . I don’t 
want to give you individual amounts but — total 167 accounts, 
167 leases with 67,000 acres. So you’ll see that as far as ACS is 
concerned, the banks and credit unions, there are very few 
comparatively left. The major number is in Farm Credit 
Corporation. 
 
And all I can say is that we are working and talking with Farm 
Credit Corporation to try to be flexible. I’d encourage anybody 
that has a problem with the leases to become a member and join 
the, the lease, lease, farm . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Crown Land Tenants Association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thanks Ernie. 
 
Crown Land Tenants Association, and that way they will have 
up-to-date information as to what’s available to them. And like 
I say, we’ll be meeting with them and trying to help them out 
with the FCC to see if there’s some flexibilities. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There is some urgency 
to that because some of these leases are on the verge of expiring 
or have expired. And there is just a very brief window period. 
 
I just want to make one . . . mention one other thing with 
respect to the lease and mortgage payments, that in 1996 for 
some of these folks that have faithfully paid to maintain their 
financial responsibilities, there were increases of up to 30 per 
cent. So it’s not as if the people out there aren’t trying to meet 
their financial commitments. They want to keep farming. 
 
That’s the point I wanted to make. I appreciate your comments 
and thank you to you and your staff. I’ll defer to my colleague 
from Thunder Creek. 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good 
evening to the minister and his officials. 
 
I might as well start out this evening probably where I’d ended 
off with the minister last time we had spoke during an estimate 
session, and it was probably with respect to farm input costs 
and whatever initiatives that your department might be 
undertaking with respect to at least trying to monitor these farm 
input costs and taking it a step beyond. 
 
I’ve referred to it often enough when myself and my colleagues 
have presented petitions in this House time and time again 
where we feel, and so do the people of this province, that there 
is a watchdog role that could be played by governments, both 
federal and provincial. 
 
What specific initiatives are you planning on undertaking in this 
fiscal year? When is your next meeting with your provincial 
counterparts? And will the cost/price squeeze on the farm be at 
the top of the agenda? 
 
(1830) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well of course as you know, I’ve talked 
about this issue many times on the floor of this legislature and 
at the federal-provincial table and with my colleagues, and what 
we decided to do before we started talking much about it is 
show some leadership in that area. 
 
And you will know that we reduced crop insurance over the last 
three years — premiums — by 40 per cent. That has been a 
great asset. We’ve added new crops as well. The input costs 
from private sector have been reflecting the price of grain for 
many years. 
 
We have an agreement with other provinces to share statistics. 
Having said that, some of the other provinces aren’t really . . . 
it’s not on top of their priority list to do that. So we’ve initiated 
our own survey; it’ll be starting this late spring, summer, to try 
to do analysis in Saskatchewan of what’s happening here. 
 
And what else could I say about that? We know it’s a concern. 
The problem is that if you’re going to put any limits on . . . And 
all we can do in Saskatchewan — shouldn’t say “all we can do” 
— what we’re doing in Saskatchewan is two things. 
 
Number one, internal: reduce crop insurance by 40 per cent. 
We’ve removed the tax on fuel, totally on diesel and are rebated 
on gas — in fact it’s all rebated, I think it’s about $5 million 
that we don’t rebate — basically removed all the taxes on farm 
inputs. 
 
So we’re doing as much as we can possibly do here in 
Saskatchewan within our financial constraints to reduce farm 
input costs. As you will know, that this government puts in 
about $310 per capita to agriculture, and that includes fuel 
rebates and everything we do for agriculture. And the next 
nearest province is Alberta at $139 per capita. So we’re 
stretched to the max because we got small population and a 
large agriculture base here. 
 
If you’re going to effectively change the free enterprise system 
in terms of inputs, then I would ask for your advice on what we 

should do. Because I’m not sure that anyone in Ottawa is 
willing right now to stand up and put price controls on input 
costs which would lead to . . . you know where do you start and 
where do you stop? With fertilizer fuel, would you go to 
combines or tractors . . . so that becomes a bit of a bag of 
worms. 
 
So maybe you might enlighten us as to what you think we 
should do, more than what we’re already doing at putting in, 
well $310 per capita plus the AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) program which is another $70 per capita 
within the very tight budget constraints. And remembering the 
fact that Ottawa has, in the last . . . since 1995, reduced transfer 
payments to agriculture in Saskatchewan by $550 million 
annually. 
 
So we’re in a bit of a bind there, but I understand the problem. I 
appreciate you bringing it up. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
nobody on either side is advocating any price controls here. 
You ask what sort of solutions. Certainly some of things that we 
think that could be of assistance are things like such as we 
attempted to introduce in terms of private members’ legislation 
earlier today where we propose the establishment of a 
monitoring council. Again going back to what we’ve said time 
and time again over the past four or five years where we feel 
that the government’s role should be that of a watchdog role. 
 
I know the minister has had copies of correspondence between 
myself and many farm implement manufacturers, chemical 
manufacturers, or have expressed concerns on behalf of 
farmers. Can you outline for me if you now have a program in 
place where you, as Minister of Agriculture in this provincial 
government, are actively soliciting the support of these input 
manufacturers of all sorts to try and at least curb the increases 
in the costs of their products that they’re offering to the farm. 
Or have you undertaken any of that? 
 
Because I know last year I asked you this very thing and I was 
told that nothing had been undertaken. And at that time I had 
recommended, as I am again tonight, that I think there’s a role 
for government to play in that. 
 
I think if the private sector feels that in addition to individual 
farmers and farm groups looking over their shoulder so to 
speak, trying to monitor the prices, trying to ensure that these 
companies are putting their products into the foreign 
marketplace at what is the best possible price they can and still 
maintain some profit, but at least allow some farmers some 
breathing room when they’re being squeezed as much as they 
are right now. 
 
I really think that there is a role for you to play in this regard. 
I’d like to know how many of those sorts of initiatives have you 
undertaken since we’ve last spoke. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well as I said that we have been 
monitoring the situation and we’re going to be doing another 
input price survey because we believe that’s the best way to 
show to the private sector companies that there’s somebody 
watching them. Because if we monitor the price, they know that 
we know what the price will be from Shaunavon to Melfort and 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

any place in-between. 
 
And so that’s the route we’ve chosen. And that’s why I asked 
you, you know . . . maybe I could ask you how successful 
you’ve been in terms of lobbying them because this is a free 
market system. And it’s nice to think that we can get on the 
phone or write a letter to some of these folks and we’re going to 
change their minds. 
 
You won’t change their minds until they know they’re being 
watched, and they’ll be monitored. And that way the farmers, 
then we can disperse information to all the farmers. And it’s the 
consumer that’s going to make the difference, because they 
won’t be able to charge higher prices in one area than another if 
the consumer knows where the lower price is. 
 
Now this issue is very difficult because it is a free market 
system. And so the route we’ve chosen is to monitor and 
publish. We are very disappointed that your Liberal cousins in 
Ottawa have cut out their monitoring system. The StatsCanada 
surveys for farm inputs has been discontinued, I believe. And 
that’s unfortunate. 
 
So we’re trying to again backfill this and I think that we’re 
doing about as much as we can. Now if you can come up with 
any new ideas, we’re certainly willing to entertain them. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
minister. You’ve got our assurances that if federally the 
StatsCanada people have discontinued whatever efforts they 
were undertaking to monitor farm input costs, that we certainly 
will raise this as a concern as well. 
 
When you’re faced with headlines like we have in The Western 
Producer, most recent issue with respect to the struggle with 
input costs and studies showing farm expenses rising faster than 
revenues, it’s something that, as difficult as the issue may be, 
we have to make all attempts that we possibly can to try and 
rein in some of these costs that are increasing. 
 
Just as one example, I can quote from an individual, a farmer 
from the Hearne district in my riding, and I quote: 
 

We at age 60 will be done. We cannot operate on 1970 
commodity prices with 1999 input costs. We’ve done 
everything possible to become more efficient, yet our 
government gets less efficient and more costly to our 
industry. 

 
Now I take it he’s referring to not just your government, he’s 
referring to federal government as well. Because I think you 
have to acknowledge that we have done our share in terms of 
undertakings with respect to your federal counterpart and the 
federal government at large to do more for farmers out here. 
 
I don’t have to remind you that we were there last November 
when we went down to Ottawa. And at that time, as we do now, 
we were worried and we presented those worries that both 
levels of government would continue on with bickering and 
dickering and no money would end up in the farmers’ hands. 
It’s unfortunate but it’s probably six or eight months later and 
that has ended up being the case. 
 

We maintained all along, and we’re not sorry for it, that there 
was a role for the province to play in that whole issue. We 
maintained all along that we thought the appropriate 
cost-sharing arrangement was 60/40 between the federal and 
provincial government. We’ve not done any flip-flops on this 
issue. We’ve been firm all along. 
 
I know when we went to Ottawa, some individuals might . . . 
some parties may have rode on your coattails and for a short 
period of time agreed with your position that it was nothing but 
a federal issue. But we certainly never maintained that. We 
always felt there was a role for you to play and we still do to 
this day. And in a moment I’ll send a letter across to the 
minister. 
 
But it’s basically a summation of concerns with the AIDA 
program, concerns that my colleagues and myself receive on a 
continual basis from farmers across the province. A number of 
concerns, not only from the farmers but from the slew of 
accountants now that are charged with the responsibility of 
trying to complete these forms. 
 
We hear time and time again, right from the outset . . . we can 
take you back to . . . We had a meeting down in Vanguard last 
fall. Coming from that meeting there was a very strong opinion 
that there should be some acreage — cultivated acreage 
payment should have been the vehicle to try and distribute the 
income. And out of that meeting too came the suggestion, well 
maybe it has to be capped. 
 
But certainly there had to have been a better vehicle to try and 
put money in farmers’ hands sooner than later. This letter 
basically is a summary of some of those concerns. I’ll be 
sending it across to you here shortly. But I would like to know 
what you and your department have in place in terms of an 
alternate course of action. How can you get money into 
farmers’ hands sooner than this flawed program is going to do 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I would like, Mr. Chair, to make a 
comment on the last issue of input costs just so that it’s clear to 
everyone. We believe that the federal government has played a 
very significant role in input cost increases. 
 
The $320 million of Crow benefit that was removed by the 
Liberal government in Ottawa caused farmers’ input costs to go 
up by 156, I believe, per cent to 98 cents a bushel. The same 
time when the regulatory review process was discontinued, 
there has been an estimated loss for Saskatchewan alone of 
$110 million because the Liberal government in Ottawa 
discontinued that regulatory review process that was established 
under the transportation Act. They reduced, in 1995, the 
payments under the safety net program across Canada. 
Saskatchewan’s reduction was $80 million. 
 
So if you take the 320 million, the 110 million and the 80 
million annually, that adds up to about $550 million. Now I 
appreciate you being concerned about input costs, but I think 
that I really would appreciate you also — and maybe you have 
done this — sing loud and clear that if we want . . . because 
input costs is a free-market system and because the subsidy 
game is not a free market system in Europe and the US (United 
States). Canada must maintain its equivalent level, a 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

proportional level — let’s go to proportional level. We don’t 
expect them to be able to pay what the US can pay but 
proportional level. 
 
Well I understand and I agree with you on the input side, it’s 
really tough for farmers to compete, and that’s why we, when 
the federal government has taken away $550 million a year, we 
wouldn’t even need the AIDA program. And that’s why we 
have tried to backfill by reducing crop insurance costs, by 
making sure that there’s no tax on fuel except for about $5 
million, by removing the E&H (education and health) tax on 
horticultural and intensive livestock operations. 
 
So that’s why we have tried to backfill and then now we’ve 
talked about the AIDA program, and you say, you maintain that 
you agreed 60/40 right from the beginning. Well I can say that 
I, with all due respect, I totally disagree. Because what you’re 
saying when you agree with 60/40, you’re saying that you agree 
that Saskatchewan taxpayers, Saskatchewan people, should pay 
$70 per capita, through their taxes, and Ontario people should 
pay $4 per capita through their tax base. See I don’t agree with 
that, and I don’t know why . . . maybe you can explain to me 
why you do agree with that. 
 
When you say do we have an alternative plan? Well we had a 
plan; we presented it to the federal government. They rejected 
it. I mean the negotiations went on, and we eventually, because 
of pressure . . . like from you, were forced into going into a 
program that put Saskatchewan taxpayers at a disadvantage, and 
40 per cent of the jobs in this country are related to . . . in this 
province are related to agriculture. 
 
So what we were doing by agreeing to your 60/40 split, was 
taking those people of 40 per cent plus the others who were not 
directly involved and saying you have to pay a disproportionate 
share because you’re being punished for living in a province 
with a small tax base and a large land base. That’s why I fought 
so hard and held out so long on the AIDA program. 
 
One of the reasons we went into the AIDA program was 
because we wanted to do a NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) top up with money that we already had allocated, 
federal and provincial money — mostly federal money granted. 
So we were able to do that. 
 
(1845) 
 
I think that is an option. If you’re suggesting, as some are, that 
we as an option, we pull out of AIDA, I don’t think we can do 
that. In fact basically the agreement is signed, and if we were to 
though, what it would mean is that — and go to an acreage 
basis, and I don’t disagree with an acreage basis provided it’s 
guaranteed, it’s not countervailable, and there’s some 
discussion there — but we could go to a NISA top-up, which I 
think we could get away with. But if you’re saying just take our 
money out and go an alternative, our money, at $70 million 
annually, is $1.40 an acre. That’s not going to help the average 
person. 
 
So if you wanted to go to your idea of an acreage-based 
payment, or to another thing like a NISA top-up to get money 
more equally distributed, then you need a hundred cent dollars. 
That would mean you need the federal government to agree to 

change the program. 
 
I’ve asked, just for your information — and maybe you know 
this — when I was in Ottawa two weeks ago at world trade 
meetings, I asked the federal minister: is there any possibility 
for change for this year? His direct answer to me was no. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chairman, my colleague has suggested, 
before I send this letter over to you, that maybe it would be 
appropriate to read it in the record, and I agree. And then I’ll 
address some more questions to you after. But I’ll go on then: 
 

As you are aware, Mr. Minister, recently there have been 
increasing calls for the Saskatchewan government to pull 
out of the AIDA program. I’ve spoken with producers, 
accountants, and other concerned groups who have 
expressed concerns that the program does not address the 
needs of Saskatchewan farmers and the process of 
application and payment is convoluted and drawn out. 
Many of the producers who do qualify will have to wait 
until fall before they receive a payment. 
 
It’s been the Liberal caucus position since this crisis began 
last fall, that funds were needed in farmers’ hands 
immediately. Time, energy, and money has been wasted 
over the last eight months and farmers in this province are 
no further ahead. The new crop season is now underway 
and many producers in Saskatchewan are in no financial 
position to put seed into the ground, let alone pay for the 
cost of inputs to see crop maturity. 
 
Farmers, and it appears governments, are also confused 
with AIDA. I hear daily questions from producers 
regarding rumoured changes to the program, as well as 
inquiries made to the AIDA assistance line which have 
solicited uncertain and vague responses on how to 
complete the form. 
 
One hundred and forty million of Saskatchewan tax dollars 
are earmarked for this program. The government has a 
responsibility to farmers and all people in the province to 
ensure that Saskatchewan benefits from this program. If 
this is not happening, I urge you to reconsider how these 
funds can be spent to provide immediate relief and support 
for our farmers. 

 
And thus ends the letter, Mr. Minister, I’ll send this across to 
you right now. 
 
But to address some of the issues that you’ve already covered 
off because I provided basically a synopsis of that. You 
mentioned that you didn’t think — I don’t know if you used 
irresponsible with respect to us, but certainly you disagreed 
with what we said was what we thought would be appropriate in 
terms of a provincial government’s commitment. 
 
I can quote you a few interesting things that have been said in 
this legislature in years gone by. Things like what your Premier, 
then in opposition, has said with respect to what he thought 
cost-sharing arrangements should be between a federal and 
provincial government when it came to providing assistance to 
farmers faced with disaster situations. And your Premier in 
March, 1989 — March 22 to be exact— in the legislature to 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

Grant Devine regarding the federal-provincial program of the 
time. And he said and I quote: 
 

And if it isn’t 50-50, what amount of money are you 
prepared to offer in order to get this program up and 
running so that the farmers can get their much needed 
payments at this point? 

 
I can quote more of these, but the point being we are asking for 
you as a government to do the same sorts of things that you’ve 
asked governments in years gone by and that’s to accept that 
you have a responsibility to the farmers of this province. The 
monies, the $70 million you refer to year by year that still isn’t 
being distributed to farmers as we speak. We need to know that 
you might have some alternate mechanism on behalf of people 
who are saying now at this point in time they want to know if 
you’ve got an alternate mechanism to get that money into their 
hands. How can you get the province’s share of the total aid 
package commitment into farmer’s hands right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I’ve re-read the letter that was 
written into the record . . . read into the record and while it does 
identify some of the problems, it certainly put forward any 
solution. I’m not sure why you didn’t include a solution. 
 
Your last paragraph says, if this is not happening, I urge you to 
reconsider how these funds can be spent. I urge you to 
reconsider. My question is: what is your solution? 
 
You know, you can sit there . . . And I understand how it works 
in opposition. I was there for five years. But you can sit there 
and you can say, fix it, and forget about the pressure you put on 
to get in the program. Forget about the pressure you put on to 
go in 40 per cent. 
 
So while you offer no solution to the program, you can sit there 
and try to ride both ponies at once. But I’ll tell you what 
happens — the gap gets wider sometimes. And you get into a 
bit of a problem because you haven’t thought further enough, 
farther enough down the road. 
 
So you can’t say last fall and even now we said go into AIDA, 
but now that you’re in, you should do something else. That’s 
not credible. 
 
We went into this program. I’m not going to stand here and go 
over all the reasons why. You know. You’ve heard them ad 
nauseam. So we could get NISA top-up considerations for the 
next round of safety net agreements — all these things. And 
now you say farmers aren’t going to get money fast enough. 
 
Well the Liberal government in Ottawa has chosen this 
program. I couldn’t influence any change. You couldn’t 
influence any change. You started to, but then you said, well 
just put your money in. And you know that the federal minister 
said, no go. 
 
Now my question to you is: are you advocating that we pull our 
$70 million this year out of the AIDA program and pay it in 
some other manner? Is that what you’re asking? 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chairman, the minister seems to have 
lapses of memory because earlier this evening I referred to 

solutions that had been presented to us — and I’m sure as well 
as to yourself — rafts of letters. A lot of people suggesting per 
cultivated acre payment would have been more appropriate. 
Caps if necessary is another common suggestion. 
 
Surely to goodness your department has put some efforts 
towards determining some alternate vehicle of distributing some 
money. Don’t put the question back to us. Look at the resources 
around you right now, Mr. Minister. 
 
We as opposition don’t have the same resources to apply to this 
problem that you have at your command. So certainly, certainly 
I think it’s more beholding of you as government to come up 
with some appropriate solutions and some appropriate alternate 
possibilities for distributing this income? I’m not talking about 
you pulling $70 million out of farmers’ hands by any means. 
You can’t try and accuse us of that. What we’re saying is put it 
in their hands now. Do you have a vehicle? Have you made 
studies to determine an alternate vehicle to put the money in the 
farmers’ hands right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The answer is no, and you know that. 
The program has 850 people registered as of a few days ago . . . 
or applications in. You’re a little bit late. But the reason I want 
you to answer the question of do you . . . are you advocating us 
pulling our $70 million out, our 40 per cent out, and distributing 
it in some other manner? I have to know that because there are 
some people asking us to do that — very few but a few. And 
I’m saying that if we could do it on acreage basis it would be 
$1.40 an acre. That won’t help the problem and could put in 
jeopardy our future negotiations with the federal government on 
future safety nets. 
 
But I want to know what your position is on it because it’s 
important to me to know that. Because if you’re saying take the 
70 . . . I’m not saying that you said to take the 70 million out 
and just forget it. But I want to know if you mean take the 70 
million out and reallocate it on an acreage basis; take the 70 
million out and reallocate it through a NISA top-up; take the 70 
million out, put a whole new administration together I guess as 
we would have to for an acreage payment and use, you know, a 
percentage of that money for administration. 
 
But the question I ask and I ask the same of the official 
opposition is I have to know what your position is because 
when I’m dealing with this . . . I’ve taken the position to Ottawa 
saying is there any possible change? He says no. I’m saying, put 
full . . . the farmers out there to apply. The best you can for 
everyone is to apply. You don’t have to go to an accountant. Sit 
down, bite the bullet in five pages. I’m going to do that myself; 
I’m sure you are. But then we can do the analysis. 
 
And the federal minister has opened the door to possible 
changes next year. So the door is closed for any options this 
year. So the answer is no. While we have tried in the past to do 
other payments, to do it other ways, they said no. They still say 
no. So I’m past that now because it’s too late. What we’re doing 
now is trying to make sure people apply so they can do the 
analysis for next year’s program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
welcome you here with your officials here this evening. My 
colleague had to just step out for a moment to take a message. 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

However, I find the debate somewhat interesting for a few 
reasons. 
 
When I listen to you sit back and say there’s nothing we can do, 
that’s the point that my colleague and our caucus has been 
making for months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Yes, that’s exactly what you said, that 
there’s nothing you can do. There’s nothing you’ve attempted, 
nothing you are going to try and do. That’s clearly what you’re 
saying by your actions and basically your words. 
 
In fact, when we look at this AIDA program, do you accept it’s 
complicated, and do you accept that it’s expensive to do, and 
gives you absolutely no assurance? And I know you accept that. 
You’ve said so publicly, right? But yet you’re sitting back and 
saying, that somehow, somehow you really can’t adjust or you 
don’t want to become involved in any way of making this 
program better. 
 
And there’s the concern, Mr. Minister. Because we think back 
to last fall when there was discussions of, if there’s a program, 
who should do the program. And we were consistent all along. 
We were consistent because the farmers that had been talking to 
us, day in and day out, were telling us they needed help, they 
needed it now. And I have, I would think, hundreds of letters 
here that I’m going to share some of those with you in a 
moment. 
 
But when we look at how that played out last fall with you 
refusing to become involved. In fact you were quoted in the 
paper as saying there wasn’t a farm crisis. It was all but over. In 
fact it’s all but over. In some areas of the province there might 
be pockets. I remember you saying in the northwest there might 
be a little pocket, as though somehow the people in the 
southwest wouldn’t deserve again as they did in what was it, 
’92-93 — ’92 — when there was, you know, some serious 
problems in some areas of the southwest. And I had yourself 
down to tour that area and you saw with your own eyes the 
devastation in some areas and chose to do nothing. 
 
And so what my colleague, and what our caucus has been 
saying, is the mistake that you made was last fall, by saying 
we’re not going to be involved. We’re going to let the feds 
design and deliver a program. And I think back to if that was 
the view that was held when the first GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program came about, what would it have 
looked like in this province. Because the fact that there was a 
different GRIP program in each of the provinces, tells me that 
the provinces each sort of took the bull by the horns and said 
listen, we’ve got to design to best meet the needs of our 
particular situation in our province. We’re putting our money 
up, but here’s the design. 
 
You see, and this is where you failed miserably because you 
take these, you know, the Tories with you and in fact you hid 
behind them for awhile with their position that oh no, there 
shouldn’t be any provincial involvement although it’s an 
agriculture-based province; we really depend on agriculture. 
 
Now I find it interesting that the provinces where fisheries is 

important, the fisheries minister gets very involved; but here in 
an agriculture province our agriculture minister doesn’t get 
involved, the Premier doesn’t get involved. And we know what 
the Tories’ agenda was. There’s no money at all because they 
came out with a platform much too soon as we all admit, and 
they readily admit, and they forgot to put agriculture in there so 
they didn’t want any money coming from the province because 
they wanted, I don’t know, to run a tax agenda or whatever the 
Tories want to do nowadays. 
 
(1900) 
 
Then all of a sudden they thought, well you know we’re not up 
to speed here so we’ll say 70 and 30, 30 per cent province. We 
solidly . . . we’re saying, no it’s a 60/40, it’s a traditional split. 
It’s a traditional split that in fact has the province having major 
design of the program. 
 
Then of course they run around and say well maybe 30/70 
wasn’t right, maybe it’s 60/40 and then all of a sudden we listen 
to the member from Saltcoats in there haranguing and harassing 
you in question period says, oh it’s not nearly enough, it’s not 
nearly enough. And we sit back and have quite a chuckle as I’m 
sure everyone else in this province does at Tories. 
 
But that doesn’t take it off of your shoulders, Mr. Minister, 
because the fact is you sat back and did nothing, and now 
you’re saying well it’s because of what the Liberals did, they 
forced us into spending this money and oh, the program isn’t 
working. 
 
But you see, Mr. Minister, if you would have been proactive 
from day one and gotten involved and said, yes we accept that 
as an agriculture province. We have a role to play here, there’s a 
financial role and we’re going to get into this early and we’re 
going to be proactive and we’re going to design this program so 
it meets the needs of Saskatchewan farmers. That is what you 
should have done. 
 
Now I know the Tory caucus accused you of taking trips to 
Mexico and out marlin fishing and everything else when this 
here was being developed. I don’t believe you were. You were 
maybe on one of your cabinet junkets all right because you guys 
are gone all the time, but the fact of the matter is you should 
have been here to ensure that there was some design that 
worked for farmers, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I just want to touch on some letters in front of me. I’ve got 
a case of them here and there’s hundreds of letters that have 
been returned to a questionnaire that . . . that we sent out some 
months ago. I’ll read you a couple of the questions and tell you 
what the responses are so you can be in touch with what 
farmers are saying perhaps should be done, not just in this 
program but in branch lines, elevator closures, and the like. 
 
The first question is: do you believe the Saskatchewan and 
federal governments should quit their bickering and 
immediately provide joint financial help for cash-strapped 
farmers? 

 
You know, almost every return — hundreds of them — this is 
in my constituency alone, Wood River, said yes. Because at the 
time that’s all that they were watching is the federal and the 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

provincial governments arguing back and forth who should do 
what, you know. And, you know, and really the people are 
sitting back and accepting my first point is that why weren’t 
you involved from the word go? 
 
Second question: do you think governments should be doing 
more to address issues like unfair world trade subsidies and 
rising input costs? As my colleague has been raising with you 
not just today or this week or this session, he’s raised it on 
several occasions and in this term. Since 1995, I’ve heard him 
raise it in this House several times. Solidly, yes, you should be 
doing more. 
 
Another question on the form. If other provincial governments 
are willing to help fund long-term national income disaster 
program for farmers, should Saskatchewan government pay as 
well? Solidly yes; out of these hundreds almost every one of 
them are saying, yes, you should be involved. 
 
Should the government pass legislation calling for the 
immediate moratorium on grain . . . on elevator closures. Yes, 
they should pass legislation. 
 
And how many times have you guys stood up to say, oh that’s a 
federal responsibility. We can’t do anything about it. Well I say, 
shame on you, and so do these hundreds of people say shame on 
you for saying you can’t do anything about it as rural 
Saskatchewan is being bulldozed over. Of course, of course, 
you can do something about it. 
 
And you know our view, and the reason why it’s a major 
platform plank with us, is that yes, we will bring forward 
legislation when we’re government to say there’s going to be a 
process put in place to not allow the bulldozing of rural 
Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan grain elevators, without a 
fight. 
 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
supports us. SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) supports us. Every community and RM(rural 
municipality) in Saskatchewan supports us. 
 
So don’t stand there and say we’re not right by saying let’s quit 
this, this bulldozing of elevators until there’s some thought 
gone into this; that there is a process, some time delay; give the 
communities a chance to purchase these things to see if we 
can’t, firstly, keep them as elevators. You know, perhaps as 
seed cleaning plants. Speciality crop-holding facilities. Feed 
plants. I mean, the list goes on and on. 
 
Is there, is there perhaps an arrangement that could be made 
with the grain companies and the communities and RMs to keep 
it viable? Keep pressure on those that can make a decision on 
branch lines to keep the branch lines there. You know, there 
isn’t anyone in this province that doesn’t sit back and think the 
railroads and the grain companies are playing a horrible game 
with the nod of your head, Mr. Minister. They accept that things 
were worked out in the back rooms and, boy, would they ever 
like to know what involvement your government had in this too. 
You’re sitting back and doing nothing. 
 
And you know, at the end of the day if we’re wrong, if the 
people all throughout Saskatchewan are wrong and the law is 

wrong, I would ask you, Mr. Agriculture Minister, and the 
Premier, and whatever grain company — you know, the Wheat 
Pool who are already sending letters out publicly threatening 
that they’re going to campaign against us — I say have at it, go 
to town. If you people think that we’re wrong and you’re not 
prepared to stand up for rural Saskatchewan, then take us to 
court. 
 
But I’ll tell you the law is going to come in here, it’s coming on 
when we form government. And if you think it’s right, if you 
think it’s right, Mr. Minister, to challenge the law, do it. Do it if 
you think that’s where it’s at for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Should provincial and federal governments play a bigger role in 
stopping branch line abandonments? Yes. Hundreds are saying 
yes, you should. You shouldn’t just stand up and say in this 
House, well we can’t do anything on health care because of, I 
don’t know, some federal argument. Can’t do anything on 
post-secondary education, you know, because we have students 
that can’t afford education in this province, well, federal . . . 
Every answer that you give in this House, and it doesn’t matter 
the topic, whether it’s highways — highways is a provincial 
responsibility — but you people say, we can’t do anything 
because it’s a federal responsibility. You can’t do anything with 
branch lines because it’s a federal responsibility. 
 
And the people are starting to sit back and say, well you know, 
if you really don’t have power, if you don’t have control and 
you don’t have will, why don’t you get out of there and perhaps 
hire half a dozen good accountants to run government because 
that’s really what you’re all about? 
 
I’m going to quote from some of these letters just so you know 
what the people of Wood River and throughout Saskatchewan 
are saying. This one is from a fellow, Brian Carleton at 
Bracken. 
 

The payment should be on total acres. With the loss of the 
railroad we lose communities. With the loss of elevators 
we put pressure on highways. Let’s put pressure on grain 
companies and railroads to save our highways. 

 
That’s what the people of Bracken . . . and I’ll tell you, I don’t 
think there’s a community throughout Wood River and beyond 
that didn’t have several, several responses. 
 
There’s another fellow from Woodrow in regards to this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Allen Engel. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well no, Allen Engel wouldn’t be 
responding to this because I think when he’s not trying to be a 
candidate for your party he lives in Texas. However, this guy 
goes on to say: 
 

No money to operate on and I would have to walk away 
from the farm. And with no job I don’t know what to do or 
where to begin looking. 
 

You know, I’ve read every one of these letters. I encourage you, 
Mr. Minister, perhaps you’ll be busy with an election soon but 
if you . . . when you’re in opposition or when you’re not, you’re 
completely out of power, take the time to look through these 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

and then you’ll appreciate what the people are saying. 
 
You know, it’s not a good thing what’s happening here. Here’s 
another one. Ken Heatcoat, Assiniboia: 
 

Make the payment on cultivated acres and not on income 
or seeded acres. 
 

Several of these, you know, they’ve used several pages to fill 
out their remarks. I don’t hear anyone say, sit back, sit back and 
do nothing and complain about a program, but here’s our 
money and just as though you’re throwing it into the wind. 
 
That’s irresponsible and for you now to say that you don’t . . . 
you’re hands are tied, that’s irresponsible. 
 
Harold Hiltz of McCord: 
 

I won’t be able to pay my taxes and fuel bills. Also, our 
elevator closed on the first of December, 1998. When you 
ask the company about these things, they just give you the 
run-around. They say the only way that you can buy the 
elevator is if you move it. Yet we are working on a short 
line rail line. The company doesn’t want you to use the 
elevator for grain handling; they just want you to push 
them over and burn them. 

 
You know how many hundreds of times I’ve heard that 
comment? 
 
In fact, here’s several letters that were sent in from the Willow 
Bunch area. 
 

I am writing to express my concern regarding the number 
of grain elevators being closed and torn down in rural 
Saskatchewan. Agriculture is the mainstay of our economy 
in rural Saskatchewan. When elevators close it not only 
affects farmers in the area, it also has a severe negative 
impact on local businesses, schools, churches, rural 
municipalities and towns. 
 
Businesses close; people move away; schools and churches 
close; communities die. We cannot allow this to continue. 
 
As elected representatives in the government, I strongly 
urge you to take whatever measures are necessary to 
address this issue. If nothing is done rural communities 
will disappear. 
 

And this is a stack of letters that were sent in and I hate to guess 
how many we have from the Willow Bunch area alone. Here, 
Mr. Pete Ducharme, Boisvert, Bonneau. I’ll tell you, just in this 
package alone there must be about two dozen letters from the 
Willow Bunch area because they’re sitting there watching you 
allow their community to be bulldozed over. 
 
Here is one — Jerry Chisholm from Lafleche. And . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I know Jerry too. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You know Jerry. Good. Because Jerry 
asked me to read some parts of his letter. He’s got about three 
or four pages, but I’m just going to take a few of the parts that 

Jerry talked of. 
 

My farm suffered because of drought conditions last 
spring. I had a poor crop of hay and low yields of grain. 
Crop insurance was of little help because I could not afford 
the premiums and the coverage was low. By January 31, 
’99 I will have the following payments . . . 

 
I’m not going to list them but you can read them later, of his 
concerns and of those that he finds very difficult to make. I’ll 
go on: 
 

Problems that I am having is not all related to low grain 
prices for farm commodities. I lease farm land from the 
provincial government. My lease rent has increased 50 per 
cent. When the federal government paid out the Crow 
freight rate subsidy, the provincial government received 
the hundred per cent of the subsidy on the land they own. I 
was promised a share of this subsidy, and to this date I 
have received no payment. 

 
Well you’re saying it’s not true. You’re going to have this 
letter. I’ll leave Jerry’s letter on the top because I encourage you 
and your department to answer. He’s got several concerns in 
here, and that’s one I would like you to answer personally . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s great. 
 
I’ll go on: 
 

Because of this, my farm input costs have drastically 
increased in higher lease rent and having to pay very high 
freight and elevator handling charges. 
 
Rural communities are declining at an alarming rate 
because of the farm crisis — large farm operators, fewer 
farmers, elevator closures, rail line abandonments. All 
governments across Canada have to act now because 
talking about helping will be too late. 
 

And he ends by saying: 
 

From time to time I need help from my neighbours and 
they need help from me. This is called co-operation. Why 
can’t governments, provincial and federal, do the same and 
come up with immediate assistance because, if not, there 
won’t be any farm neighbours left to help each other. 

 
And in this letter in particular, Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask 
one of the pages to take it over just so you know it’s one that I 
need a response to, because it talks about other things — other 
than the elevator closures and branch line and the farm 
program. But there’s some things about your provincial lease 
rates that he deserves an answer to. 
 
This one I’ll send over now but you’ll get the whole case of 
them after a little while. 
 
Here’s another letter, from Shaunavon: 
 

By closure of elevator and rail lines as there most likely 
will be fewer . . . no farmers which will kill the smaller 
communities and towns. It seems our government does not 
believe agriculture is important to our province any more. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

Here’s one — Roger Morgan from Kincaid. I think Roger’s the 
mayor out there. 
 

I expect elevator closures which will impact the immediate 
village by losing over 25 per cent of our tax base. As it is, 
we have an extremely small tax base. This will decimate 
our community. 

 
(1915) 
 
Here’s another one. Thibault from Ponteix. And I found some 
of these comments quite interesting and I think need to be said 
in here to you, on record, Mr. Minister, of what people feel. 
 

We were shafted with increases on our power, gas, and 
natural gas, taxes, and on and on, with this famous NDP 
government which are robbing us blind with increased 
costs that are not needed. 

 
Another quote: 
 

I have a son that wants to farm, trying to take over my 
farm. How can he? This government does not believe in 
farmers. Since our NDP government has been in power, 
they have done nothing for the farmers but increased costs. 
 

Another quote in his letter: 
 

It is very sad to see a government that does not care any 
more about farmers, any more than this. Again if the 
contracts of GRIP would not have been breached by this 
NDP government and finally discontinued completely, 
today our farmers would not be in a crisis situation. We as 
farmers could budget for the future, as we knew year after 
year what our bottom line would be. 
 

And another quote: 
 

This crisis money should be paid per acre and not 
according to your income. 
 

And that is the message that’s been coming loud and clear for 
hundreds, hundreds of these letters. Here’s another one from 
Willow Bunch, and there . . . here’s a quote on this one: 
 

It could have and should be an acreage payment. If they 
don’t want the large farm corporations to get everything, 
then put a ceiling of something like a thousand cultivated 
acres onto it. 
 

And to finish, and I think this sums it up for these hundreds of 
letters in this case that I have: 
 

No railroads, no elevators, no roads, no school. No point in 
staying. 
 

And, Mr. Premier . . . or, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh yes. 
 
That will . . . I think that says it all, Mr. Minister. I think it says 
it all about what your inaction has done. You’ve done nothing 
but chirp away in regards to rail lines. But what have you 
accomplished? You’ve accomplished nothing. Why? Because 

you weren’t sincere and you weren’t really trying. You haven’t 
really tried . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . About elevator 
closures? Well you’re not prepared to break . . . you’re not 
prepared to make a law that isn’t just or whatever you’re 
saying. You’re more than prepared though to break GRIP 
contracts, or I can go on and on about the amount of laws that 
your government has broken since 1991. But yet when people 
ask: are you prepared to put a law in place that will perhaps 
help save rural Saskatchewan? No, no you’re not prepared to do 
that, are you? 
 
So with that, Mr. Minister, I guess you don’t even need to 
respond. I think those letters say everything that need to be said. 
You don’t need to respond to me. You need to respond to those 
hundreds of people that you have those letters of. Because that’s 
the view, that’s what people are thinking and saying out there. 
You can say you’re hands are tied, or you’re too much like 
these Tories that you just don’t know what you should be doing. 
But the people out there are saying no you have a role to play 
and you should be playing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I know that the member won’t 
want me to respond but I’m going to respond just a little bit — 
just a little bit. Now he says we’re into it because we have some 
time restraints, but I’m just going to take a couple of minutes. I 
promise him I won’t go beyond the allotted time. And I know 
he doesn’t want me to respond because he would like the record 
to show that his facts are true, but I’m sorry much of what he 
said is simply not true. In fact I get the letters and I understand, 
I understand the problem. 
 
But I want to point out a few things. One of the things . . . the 
first thing I’ll point out is the headline in these letters says: let’s 
keep the wheels turning on our farmers. Well I’ll tell you that’s 
exactly what the federal Liberals have done, they’ve driven over 
the farmers and I’ll tell you why. If it hadn’t been — and at the 
risk of sounding like I’m bragging and I do not want it to sound 
that way — but at the last federal-provincial meeting in July of 
1998 in Ontario had I not sat at the table supported by Manitoba 
and said we’re not leaving until we get a farm aid program on 
the discussion table, because there wasn’t any until then, we 
wouldn’t have had one, we would not have had one. Because I 
said I’m not leaving until the federal minister says it’s a 
discussion point on the agenda. And that is what happened and 
I’m glad I did that because at least we got something now. 
 
But we talked about cost-sharing, we talked about program 
design, your federal cousins wouldn’t listen. You talk about 
something that I’m going to have to correct because I’ve just 
listened to it too long from the opposition parties. And after you 
say well I declared the crisis over. I mean anybody with half a 
brain and one arm could figure out that that’s not true . . . 
(inaudible) . . . yes that’s right, half a brain and one arm could 
figure out that’s not true. Because there was one particularly 
bad reporting incident, and I know the opposition likes to jump 
on that but you didn’t bother to check out if it was true or not. 
You keep repeating it. The reason is because there’s an old 
saying that they say you know — in fact I remember my 
grandfather first telling me this, he says — a lie will be around 
the world twice before the truth has it shoes on. And that’s what 
you’re depending on as far that is concerned. So you know you 
can say those things. 
 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

But here’s the point I want to make. You said time and time 
again just put in 40 per cent — just put in your 40 per cent. 
Now you say it’s not working. What’s your alternative? I mean 
just think about this. Just putting your 40 per cent until the 
program’s in place and it’s all operational, and now you say it’s 
not working, you should do something else. That’s not credible. 
That’s not credible. 
 
And you know what you talk about the federal fisheries. Well 
the federal government, your federal Liberal government, put a 
100 per cent of the dollars into federal fisheries in the first 
go-round — 100 per cent of the dollars. And you want 
Saskatchewan to put 40 per cent in. No I don’t quite understand 
the credibility there. 
 
And you know the thing I want to talk . . . end on is this. You 
still haven’t told me what your opinion is or your policy is. I 
mean, if you had a good policy, and I’m sure that you’re going 
to say you will have one, you would have somebody running 
against me in my constituency when you know there’s a 
pending election now or October or whatever it might be — you 
don’t have anybody because you don’t have any concrete 
policy. You can send the letters out and you can have them sent 
in. That’s a good exit. That’s a good exercise . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You wish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well he says, you wish. Now they’re 
going to try . . . maybe not run a Liberal, try to get a two-way 
race. That’s the nice thing to do, yes. But if you’ve got no 
policy you can’t expect people to run for you in rural areas. 
 
The last two points I’ll make just to make this very brief is that 
your Liberal government in Ottawa — you talk about farm 
input, you talk about helping farmers — they’ve cut $550 
million out annually since 1995. They cut 320 on the Crow 
benefit. They cut 110 on the deregulation of the railroads. They 
cut 80 million out of cutting back of the safety net program. Mr. 
Chair, the federal government has gone from 1991-92, $2.3 
billion of transfers to Saskatchewan to half a million — 2.3 
billion to half a million. That’s about a 78 per cent or so 
reduction. I don’t know the numbers exactly. But you can’t 
stand there with no policy, have your federal cousins running 
over, turning the wheels on our farmers as you said in your 
thing, and pretend that you’re going to have some influence in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know I appreciate bringing up the input cost factor. I 
appreciate you putting letters out to the farmers because all 
information is welcome, but you can’t get away with saying that 
you know the answers when you don’t have a policy. And your 
federal cousins sat there and you sat there while they did it, cut 
550 million annually and have reduced . . . the federal 
government has reduced spending to Saskatchewan from 2.3 
billion to half a million. That’s incredible. So I just wanted to 
answer some of those points just to make sure for the record 
that there was some counterbalance to what you said. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, just a couple of 
comments back, you talked about being in Ontario, and in fact 
you were one of the ministers or the minister that was 
hammering away and there had to be a program. And it begs the 
question, Mr. Minister, what did you do immediately after 

saying that? There’s got to be a program and I can’t wait to get 
out of the room and not be part of its design to make sure that 
Saskatchewan farmers are going to be dealt with fairly. 
 
It makes no sense what you’re saying. You’re trying to take 
credit for this program, but you’re coming back here and saying 
the program’s no good. What does that say about you? Doesn’t 
say very much, does it? The fact of the matter is you’re saying, 
well we don’t have a program or a platform. 
 
Well it’s been very clear. We’re prepared to stand up with every 
community and every RM in Saskatchewan to stop the crazy 
elevator bulldozing that your government supports, and on that 
one point alone you’re saying, no, no, no. We can’t do that. We 
don’t want to step on the toes of maybe your friends in the 
Wheat Pool. No, it’s the railroads, and when you’re at a railroad 
meeting, no it’s the elevators. 
 
You know it just shows how little, maybe little input you have. 
Right? In your own government. What is it? Just stand up for 
farmers in some way. And how many times have you stood up 
to say well, you know, it’s the Crow rate, you know, the 
subsidy was paid out all wrong. And then you’ve fallen back 
saying that was such a huge mistake and then you come back 
here as Agriculture minister and promote hog barns and saying 
yes, we have to have all these feed operations in our own 
province and thanks to changes to the Crow benefit, we’re able 
to do feeding things here. Depending on the crowd you’re 
talking to, you have a different message. 
 
And I think that gets you into trouble. If I can give you any 
suggestion to help you out as a minister, is to try and be a little 
more consistent. Be a little more consistent. Consistency means 
a lot to the people, and it really shows in spades with our own 
caucus. 
 
For four or five years we have been very focused on what the 
issues of the people of this province are. It’s health care. It’s 
making sure our young people are properly educated here in 
Saskatchewan and they have opportunities here in 
Saskatchewan, and that there is a rural Saskatchewan for them 
to be in. And that there’s roads in rural Saskatchewan which 
your government sits back and laughs at because we’re 
prepared to put every cent of fuel tax into our roads and 
highways and streets and infrastructure. And you think that’s a 
joke. 
 
What is that you’re doing — what is it that you’re doing? 
You’re saying, well, you know, what else is in your platform? I 
encourage you . . . at least the Tories come out with a platform. 
Maybe it’s one by last November they wish wasn’t out there 
because it was so outdated — it was so outdated, so out of 
touch, and the feds had already accomplished over half the 
things by the first two months it was out, of things in their 
platform. 
 
But you, sir, you don’t even have a platform. And you’re 
standing up and saying, well shame on you, what’s in your 
platform? I say shame on you, you’re in government, what’s in 
your platform? When are you going to come clean with this, 
you know? 
 
So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, just stand up and just 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

look the camera right in the eye and say, you know, we believe 
in trying to save one elevator. Start with one and you’ll find it 
gets easier as you go. Can you save one elevator? Just name the 
town, okay, because there was what, 235 elevators announced 
affecting 170 communities that the Pool announced? Can you 
stand up, Mr. Minister, and just say I’m going to go to bat and 
start to try and just save one. And we’ll help you, you know, 
then the next and the next. Can you take that step? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You make the symbolic gesture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chair, there really wasn’t 
much of a question there. And I’m going to thank the officials 
that have been here with me tonight. 
 
But before I do that, I just want to say that on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan over the last three years as the 
Minister of Agriculture, I think that we’ve done . . . I’ve got to 
know a lot of people around this province on top of the other 10 
years that I was around here. And I’ve a very good repertoire 
with the industries and I think the agricultural industry has got a 
great future in Saskatchewan. There’s some rocky roads, but all 
in all it’s got a great future. 
 
And I really want to thank my department staff for the work 
they do on behalf of the farmers of this province because that’s 
so important. And we’ll continue to do that. As you witnessed 
tonight, the information is readily available through the 
department staff. And I thank them. And I thank the members 
for their questions. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, we too would like to thank, 
you know, you for coming here and answering whatever 
questions you can. It really wasn’t so much the questions as us 
trying to encourage you to do things where we see that you’re 
really falling short. 
 
Are we saying that you or your department is a wholesale 
failure? Not at all. You’ve done some very good things, Mr. 
Minister. And I congratulate you for that. Whether it ends up 
being good at the end of the day, or not good . . . You know, 
you’ve really promoted the hog industry in this province. 
Hopefully that will work out for you and all of us. 
 
(1930) 
 
You, in my view, have really been behind the elk industry. I 
talk to many of these people. On their behalf, I want to 
congratulate you. I think there’s a few areas that you could 
maybe get a little bit better there, but by and large I think you 
deserve some credit, and I give you that credit when I’m talking 
to these people. 
 
But what I am saying, Mr. Minister, is there’s a few areas. Read 
the letters; you’ll see what they are — elevators, branch lines, 
new programs. You know, just try and do a little more there. 
 
With that, I want to thank your officials for coming here tonight 
and you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Subvote (AG01) agreed to. 

Subvotes (AG02), (AG05), (AG03), (AG06), (AG07), (AG08), 
(AG04), (AG12), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG03), (AG07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvotes (AG13), (AG12) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1998-99 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Subvote (AG07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the Premier to introduce his officials 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members 
of the committee. I have seated to my left the deputy minister to 
the Executive Council, Dr. Gregory Marchildon; to my right is 
the chief of staff, Ms. Judy Samuelson. Behind Dr. Marchildon 
is Bonita Heidt, who is director of administration — I hope I 
have the title right. And behind me is the executive assistant to 
the deputy minister, Jim Nicol. 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Premier, welcome, and to your officials. We hope to have an 
exchange of some questions and ideas, and of course, some 
answers, Mr. Premier, as we move along through this evening’s 
session. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party caucus looks forward to 
spending the next few hours discussing the issues facing the 
province, especially since you haven’t seen or heard much 
during question period throughout this session. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for starters, I just want to make some brief 
opening comments before our entire caucus begins to question 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

the Premier in more detail regarding his government’s policies. 
 
Mr. Premier, this session has been a bit short in many ways. It’s 
been a bit short of new ideas from your government, a bit short 
of your vision for the future, and a bit short of accountability by 
either yourself or your government for your own record. 
 
We have not seen a Premier or a government interested in 
talking about their record. And we can certainly understand 
why. We have not seen a governing party laying out their plans 
for the future. Instead we have watched as the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) desperately tries to re-fight elections long 
since settled. 
 
As we head towards the new century, we see a government 
clearly looking backwards. The NDP is stuck in the past and it 
has no plans for the present and no vision for the future. And 
that’s why it’s time for a change, Mr. Premier. 
 
We’ve watched recently as the NDP has hit the panic button 
resorting to personal attacks and an American-style, negative, 
ad campaign. Because, Mr. Chair, that’s what old, tired out 
governments do. When they want to avoid talking about their 
own record; when they have nothing to put on the table as far as 
new ideas, that’s when the personal mudslinging begins. It’s a 
sad and pathetic sign of a government in trouble. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the personal attacks on the Saskatchewan 
Party have continued and the outright falsehoods about our 
platform perpetuated, you know what’s happened. Our 
membership has more than doubled in the last 10 . . . in the last 
year to 10,000 members; 10,000 members after less than two 
years in existence. 
 
That speaks to our leader, Mr. Elwin Hermanson, and that 
speaks to our platform . . . the platform of our party. And you 
know, Mr. Chair, that also speaks to the frustration of the 
people, the frustration that the people have with you, Mr. 
Premier, and your government. 
 
Mr. Chair, throughout this session the Saskatchewan Party has 
been referring to eight areas where Saskatchewan is at the 
bottom or near the bottom of the pack in all of Canada. We 
have presented these over and over again, hoping that the 
members opposite would put forward a plan to address these 
issues — put forward some ideas how to move Saskatchewan 
up that ladder. But we’ve seen none of that. 
 
Let’s look at taxes, job creation, health care, crime, welfare, 
population growth, retail sales, and highways. Saskatchewan’s 
at or near the bottom of the pile in all of these. And of course 
there are other areas where this government is failing the people 
of Saskatchewan — education and agriculture just to name two. 
 
In all of these areas, Saskatchewan trails the pack. And we hear 
nothing from the government except the same excuses we’ve 
heard since 1995. Their only solution is to find someone else to 
blame. Eight years after they came to power, they still take no 
responsibility for what is happening in Saskatchewan today. 
 
I think we saw a typical example of this recently when the 
government signed its memorandum of understanding with the 
nurses. There was the Premier smiling for the photographers, 

thumbs up. 
 
But when negotiations hit yet another rough patch, where was 
the Premier then? Not to be seen. Now the government had no 
responsibility in these negotiations. It’s become all too typical 
of the leadership or rather the lack of leadership we’ve come to 
expect from the government and this Premier. 
 
Mr. Chair, the number one issue facing this province is the high 
tax policy of the members opposite. In this year’s budget the 
NDP failed to put forward any plans for long-term sustainable 
and affordable tax relief. Yes, they talk about their desire for tax 
relief, but that’s all it is — talk. 
 
Admittedly that’s an improvement over what we hear from the 
labour party . . . no, I mean the Liberal Party which seems to 
think the sky’s the limit when it comes to taxes. 
 
Our tax rate in Saskatchewan, the second highest in the country, 
has killed economic development and job creation in this 
province. We are last in job creation — absolutely last. Since 
November, 1991 the number of jobs in Saskatchewan has 
grown by some 23,000. In that same period, Alberta has created 
300,000 new jobs — 13 jobs in Alberta to 1 job in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1945) 
 
Over the last year, the number of jobs in Saskatchewan has 
been dropping. We’re the only province to go backwards and 
the government takes no responsibility. The NDP still doesn’t 
get it. Government intervention doesn’t work, especially an 
NDP government’s intervention. The millions of dollars lost in 
the NDP’s foray into the potato farming is only the latest 
example. 
 
We maintain that the only way to job creation in this province is 
lowering the tax burden on people and businesses. We’ve seen 
the government’s tax take go up by $1 billion since 1991 — $1 
billion. Utility rates have increased 19 times since the NDP 
came to power — 19 such increases for SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, SaskTel. That’s a horrendous amount of increases 
in this period of time. 
 
And yet the government maintains this has no effect on our 
economy. Well respectfully we disagree with you, Mr. Premier, 
and so do the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what have we gotten for these high taxes? Better health 
care? No. Better highways? No. Better education? No. All 
we’ve seen is the economy of this province grind to a halt. All 
we’ve seen is our youth continuing to move out to search for 
opportunities. All we’ve seen is our seniors leaving the 
province they helped build in search of a reasonable standard of 
living. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ll be raising many, many issues with you 
tonight, and I’m hoping you are prepared to discuss your own 
record — something you have not been willing to do for eight 
years. I hope we hear your vision for the future — something 
else we have not heard. 
 
With that, Mr. Premier, and before my colleagues begin to 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

question you on specific areas of government for which you are 
responsible, I ask that you do just that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the specific request of 
the member opposite is that we take accountability and accept 
our record. And I tell the member here as I’ve told the 
journalists and the public elsewhere — in fact even this 
afternoon as we were doing what may or may not be the end of 
session, wrap-up interviews — we take the responsibility of our 
record very seriously. Because from a government point of 
view in any election campaign — for that matter at any time — 
there are two issues which are involved. 
 
You have to defend what you have done. And you have to put 
forward a vision of what you are doing. And if you don’t 
believe that, let me just assure you that we have every intention 
of defending our record. 
 
I’m not going to take much time in the examples that I want to 
say about defending our record other than to point to perhaps 
two areas. One that you raised was taxes. We’re proud of our 
record on tax reduction. We balanced the budget in 1995. And 
every year since 1995 we cut taxes. 
 
In 1995 and ’96 income tax was cut — that’s our record. In 
1997 provincial sales tax was cut from 9 to 7, and the items that 
are taxable were reduced — that’s our record. In 1998 we cut 
income tax again — that’s our record. This year we reduced the 
sales tax from 7 to 6 per cent — that’s our record. In total since 
the budget was balanced in 1995, we’ve cuts sales tax by 33 per 
cent overall, and we’ve cut income tax by 10 per cent overall 
for the average family — that’s our record. 
 
Now what’s the vision? The vision is more of the same. Our 
vision is to have a balanced approach to government. We 
believe that now that we’re in surplus — at least not in deficit 
— that for every surplus dollar we have what I call roughly the 
one-third, one-third, one-third guideline. 
 
One-third, roughly speaking, for tax reduction. These aren’t 
watertight compartments. One-third, roughly speaking, for new 
investments like health care — 11 per cent bump up this year. 
And one-third, roughly speaking, for tax reduction — the 1 per 
cent on the PST (provincial sales tax). And as our economy 
grows and as we get healthier, we’re going to be able to inject 
more money on that balanced approach — that’s our record. 
 
Our economic record is equally very appealing. We have 
increased employment in 1998 by about 4,422 . . . 42 people. 
We have made 30,000 new jobs since 1991. There was a slight 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member says oh . . . a slight 
drop back from the last three months or six months of 1998, but 
we’re back up in that regards. We have announced recently 
something which you have not pursued, a job creation strategy 
in the forestry which would amount to 10,000 new jobs, with an 
investment of $850 million, $850 million, most of which is 
private money or partnered money in some form or another. 
 
Our population has been growing since 1991. We’re now at a 
million people and about 25,000. And our future vision is more 
of the same — diversification, value-added. We want to be able 
to make sure that we get the natural resources that we have the 
bounty of, and make sure we value-add and diversify. Research 

and development — I could mention the synchrotron as an 
example of that. That is a Canadian first. No other province has 
it. Canada is the only G-7 country that doesn’t have a 
synchrotron. We have a synchrotron now. 
 
The Ag-biotechnology, Innovation Place. We are one of five 
centres of excellence in the world. We have it. We’re going to 
be building better, new varieties of crops, more 
disease-resistant, more frost-resistant. We’re going to be 
providing more opportunities for farmers at the farm gate. 
We’re doing the same thing in farm implement manufacturing. 
We’re doing the same thing in connection with food processing. 
Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods — we’re not doing it, they’re 
expanding in an alliance with Schneiders. 
 
I can tell you with the Alliance Pipeline. The Alliance Pipeline 
is spending 750 to $800 million in Saskatchewan alone. It’s the 
largest expenditure of any from the natural gas route through 
Alberta, BC (British Columbia); BC . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, no, Saskatchewan, right here, because it comes right to 
IPSCO. IPSCO prepares the pipeline. You don’t like the facts 
but that’s the case, and not only that, does it go . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Alberta money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — A person says it’s Alberta money. It 
may be Alberta money. It’s being spent in Saskatchewan 
creating Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
We want money from everywhere, whether it comes from 
Alberta, whether it comes from the United States, any good 
investment. You may not — we do. That Alliance Pipeline is 
something which goes right into the Chicago basin in the 
United States, so much so that the Canadian embassy people 
want, not only at the request of Alliance and the Canadian 
embassy, for this government to be present in Washington, DC, 
when this operation gets formally launched — actually it’s 
formally launched now — but up and running. And I could go 
on and on. 
 
Now if you ask me have we reached heaven on earth? The 
answer is no, we have not. Is there more work to do? The 
answer is yes. But when you compare that record to whatever 
record your party is advocating, I will not mention for the 
moment what the predecessor party did, but let’s just take what 
your party itself is advocating. 
 
I can simply sum up my remarks by this very simple answer. 
One point eight billion dollars you will add to the debt after 
four years, according to The Way Up — that’s the name of your 
document; it’s really the way down — for 1,900 new jobs, 
1,900 new jobs. Mr. Chairman, four years, 1,900 jobs compared 
to 30,000 jobs prepared here. We’ll defend our record and we’ll 
defend our vision and I have every confidence that the people of 
Saskatchewan will make the right choice. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Premier, estimates so 
far has been somewhat interesting and somewhat worthwhile. 
We’ve talked to other members of cabinet about issues that 
involved their particular departments. It was sometimes 
interesting and the odd time it was worthwhile. 
 
For you, Mr. Premier, we have questions that are unique to your 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

position and they’ll be fairly simple and fairly upfront, and 
hopefully the answers that are forthcoming are a little more 
accurate than your interpretation of The Way Up, sir, because as 
you know, WEFA is a group that you yourself have used and 
your government has used and they’re the ones that go ahead 
and justify that program. And that basically goes to say that the 
same people that you use do not know anything, and I don’t 
think you’re prepared to say that. 
 
Mr. Premier, as you yourself have said that before too long 
we’re going to have an election. And a lot of people, including 
a lot of people in your own party I’m sure, are starting to 
speculate about your future. So let’s start off by a couple of 
questions on that issue. 
 
Will you definitely be leading your party into the next election? 
And if so, do you intend to serve out your full term as 
opposition leader after the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to exhibit 
control to what I’m sure is a humorous question by the hon. 
member. And as one of my colleagues says, you’ve got to 
laugh. But it’s pretty hard to laugh because I think the hon. 
member is absolutely dead serious in his question. Get up and 
tell me that I’m wrong in that regard, I say to the member from 
Rosthern. 
 
You know, this is an example of how the question is so off 
base. Can the hon. member get up and tell me what his situation 
will be with respect to health three months from now, three 
years from now, or four years from now? Can you tell me that? 
Can you tell me what your position is going to be? 
 
I can tell you what my intended position is. My intended 
position is to continue what I’ve been doing for 32 years in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I have been providing the best in 
terms of public policy, which you may not agree with, but I see. 
I’ve been contributing at a provincial and, immodestly 
speaking, somewhat at a national level for 32 years to try and 
improve the quality of life. Tomorrow I’m in Saskatoon with 
the federal government announcing a national agenda for 
program of kids on poverty dealing with the inner-core city 
needs and other concerns, and there’ll be another announcement 
as well. 
 
I’ve devoted my life to this, and I continue to do so so long as 
God is willing and my wife permits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, first of all you didn’t 
listen to the question because it very specifically talked about 
your intentions. So you didn’t have to go off and pontificate 
about something else on that particular issue. 
 
However, you said that there’s going to be something 
happening and some announcements you’re going to make and 
your concern for certain segments of your society. Probably, 
Mr. Premier, if you lived in your constituency, you might know 
what those situations are a little better than you do where you’re 
at right now. 
 
Speaking of your constituency and what you intend to do, I 

recall that I think there was a time in the past where your 
constituency decided that you weren’t going to serve again. It 
could happen one more time, so I don’t think it’s for you to 
chuckle. Because both your wife and the good Lord may have a 
part to play in that. 
 
Mr. Premier, one rumour floating around, and it’s been all over 
the province and I’m sure you’ve heard it — if not, you’re 
going to get it right now — is that you’re interested in the 
position of Governor General. 
 
That appointment, Mr. Premier, that appointment will be made 
this fall. Mr. Premier, are you interested in that position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again I’m going to 
resist . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’d have my vote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I think that’s the kiss of death, to the 
hon. member of Kindersley. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I don’t think I’m here to 
answer rumours, of which there are thousands and hundreds 
about everybody in this Chamber and otherwise. I’m here to 
defend the estimates of the Department of the Executive 
Council. 
 
But I want to tell you right now without any equivocation since 
you’re on this, and I’ll just make my caveat about retaining my 
right on the rules with respect to the Assembly on Executive 
Council. I’ll just make this one answer and make it once only. 
 
I am neither seeking the job of Governor General, nor want it, 
nor if offered it would accept it, and if somehow by 
parliamentary decree was deigned it, I’d resign. 
 
My service is, so long as it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Thank you very much. So long as the good people of Riversdale 
say as your right and other factors that anybody is involved in 
political life permit, my job is here for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, that was a very astute 
answer because it covered my next question and that was, if it 
was offered to you would you take it? And I think we also heard 
that round of applause when you made the statement that you 
would resign. 
 
Mr. Premier, something dealing most definitely with the 
position that you hold, because you were saying these questions 
were a little off to one side. The next ones are not. 
 
I’d like to ask you a couple of questions, Mr. Premier, about 
Tommy Douglas House and how it functions under the 
provisions of The Non-Profit Corporations Act, 1995 and The 
Elections Act, 1996. 
 
Tommy Douglas House operated for over 20 years as a 
non-profit membership corporation. However, Tommy Douglas 
House accepted donations from the public, donations that 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

eventually flowed through to the NDP. The Non-profit 
Corporation Act, 1995 states that a corporation that solicits 
donations is actually supposed to be a charitable corporation, 
not a membership corporation. 
 
(2000) 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Premier, earlier today the director of 
corporations branch revived Tommy Douglas House and 
deemed it to be a charitable corporation. Under The Non-profit 
Corporations Act, 1995 charities are required to disclose a lot 
more financial information than membership corporations. 
 
Mr. Premier, now that Tommy Douglas House has been deemed 
a charity, will you disclose all of its financial records, donors, 
and how the donations . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The Chair has been listening to 
this and I don’t see a tie-in that I was hoping the hon. member 
from Rosthern, if he had a question for Executive Council. This 
has nothing to do with Executive Council and the running of 
government. And why the Premier is here is to answer 
questions about Executive Council. This is an outside 
organization, outside of Executive Council, outside of 
government, and therefore I rule the question out of order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Premier, under The Elections Act, 1996 
as you’re being responsible for the taxpayers, for tax 
allowances that are made, as people give to charities, that is 
your responsibility. 
 
Under that heading, Mr. Premier, will you disclose all of the 
financial records, donors, and donations and how they were 
used from Tommy Douglas House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I say with the greatest 
of respect, I do not run Tommy Douglas House. The New 
Democratic Party or some emanations thereof do. And I’m a 
little bit surprised about your statement about the reviving of it 
as a charitable organization because I think there have been 
previous attempts by some people to revive it, and I think you 
know who those people might be. 
 
But I’m not here to answer questions about the New 
Democratic Party any more than I expect the members opposite 
in this forum to answer questions about the Saskatchewan Party 
or about a PC (Progressive Conservative) metro fund of $2.1 
million. 
 
Those questions are answered in other forums. I’m here to 
answer the questions of how the Department of the Executive 
Council operates and to speak to general government policy 
department by department. That’s the tradition here. And I’m 
not going answer any questions with respect to Tommy 
Douglas. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — With a request to your answer, sir. How did 
you know that there were attempts to revive it if you have 
nothing to do with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I have nothing to with it? I know that 
you — well I won’t say you — but people on your side had 
been endeavouring to revive it for the point of view of trying to 

get exactly the questions that you’re asking in this House before 
this House or in some other forum. That’s in common 
knowledge all over the place, the legal circles and everywhere 
else. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s interesting for someone that apparently 
doesn’t know anything about it how you know so much 
information on it. It looks like you’ve been checking very 
carefully, sir, to see what is going on there. 
 
Mr. Premier, Tommy Douglas House articles of dissolution 
state that all of its records are to be held by the Democratic 
Party for a period of six years. You, sir, are the Leader of the 
New Democratic Party. That means you control the records of 
Tommy Douglas House and you are responsible for them on . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. The Chair has ruled on this line of 
questioning already. There’s a different venue for pursuing this 
line of questioning. It is not in this Assembly. The Chair has 
made a ruling that the Premier’s here to answer questions 
pertaining to the running of government, Executive Council or 
any other department of government. 
 
And I warn again there’s another venue for that and it is not in 
this Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I guess you can 
ask the questions, I’ll just keep ruling them out of order. 
 
But we’re not getting anywhere here. So I would ask the hon. 
member to get into Executive Council and government 
questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Premier, are you responsible for this 
province and for the laws of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, this is a ridiculous 
question. I am responsible as you are for the passage of the laws 
in this Legislative Assembly. Their enforcement and 
applicability lie elsewhere to the extent that they lie within the 
purview of the Assembly. As for example in the case of the 
member from Maple Creek, then we can take some action. That 
is the law. That is the position. That’s the procedure and you 
know that. 
 
And if you don’t know that, then give your head a shake as to 
why you’re sitting as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly). 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, sir, we’ll take that down another road. 
Are you responsible for the Attorney General, and are you 
responsible for the administration of the laws of this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The answer is no, I am not. I am 
responsible for the appointment of the Attorney General. The 
Attorney General and the Attorney General’s department is 
responsible for the administration of the laws of this land under 
the constitution, both federally and provincially. 
 
Now as Premier I can move the Attorney General, I have 
moved the Attorney General, I can make changes in 
administrative departments. Those are powers of the Premiers, 
but it is within the context of the RCM Police, the Regina City 
Police, the prosecutors, and the Justice department; but the 
responsibility for the administration of the laws lies under the 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

responsibility of the Attorney General. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development is sworn to office and 
is responsible for the functionings of the Department of 
Economic Development. Why else do you have estimates where 
you call Economic Development and have the minister answer 
questions for X number of hours, or you just finished the 
Department of Agriculture, because they’re responsible, they 
have oaths of office. 
 
I sit as an equal around the cabinet table with the one exception 
of exceptional powers, with the one exceptional powers, of the 
power of appointment. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You, sir, as you said: you have the power to 
appoint, you have the power to hire, you have the power to fire 
individuals within that jurisdiction that you just discussed. And 
in that you are responsible for how the laws of this province are 
carried out. And in that it is your responsibility to answer the 
questions on what is happening with those funds in the New 
Democratic Party because you are responsible for those, sir. 
 
So I ask you again. Are you prepared to release those records on 
Tommy Douglas House, either yourself or through some of 
your officials? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. That is the same question that was 
put before and ruled out of order. I will remind the hon. 
member from Rosthern there is a different venue for following 
this line of questioning and it is not in this Assembly and I will 
not allow it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Premier, this is the Premier’s estimates 
and that is a situation where you are expected to answer the 
questions that are brought by the opposition to you on various 
issues within this province. 
 
Now possibly you choose not to want to answer the questions 
that are being asked. And I have no doubt that you don’t want 
to answer them because you have a very good idea, sir, where 
those are going to lead. Because as you said in your beginning, 
and your first answers, you indicated very definitely you knew 
about all the search that was being done at the Tommy Douglas 
House. So you kept your finger and your ear on that issue very 
closely, sir. So for you to sit there and ask me you don’t want to 
answer or can’t answer, both of those are incorrect. You can’t 
answer those because you do know what the answers are. 
 
Mr. Premier, Tommy Douglas House is a charity. The ruling 
has been made by the corporations branch. People have a right 
to know how their charities collect their money. It’s been a 
major issue throughout this whole land — not just 
Saskatchewan — throughout all of Canada how charities collect 
their money, how they spend their money, and how well the 
money is taken care of. 
 
People have a right to know how their charities are collected 
and who collects them, and how the charities spend their 
money, and how they release that information. Because that’s 
been a major issue, as I already said, throughout this country 
and all other charities. Tommy Douglas House is a charity. Will 
you, sir, release that information? 
 

The Chair: — Once again I will have to rule that question out 
of order. The hon. member has been warned several times and if 
he continues down this line of questioning then I will recognize 
another member. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, Mr. Premier, we’ll switch gears 
somewhat. The New Democratic Party itself was incorporated 
as a charitable corporation under The Non-profit Corporations 
Act, 1995. You, sir, are listed as a director of that corporation. 
The New Democratic Party is also a registered political party 
under The Elections Act, 1996 and so now we’re discussing 
very definitely the jurisdictions of what we’re to discuss here 
today — The Elections Act, 1996. And you, of course, are also 
leader of that party. 
 
Mr. Premier, could you explain the relationship between the 
New Democratic Party, the corporation and the New 
Democratic Party, the political party because you’re involved in 
both. Specifically are these two separate entities or are they one 
and the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — This is in the same line of questioning 
based on your ruling and I will ask you: you tell us what the 
relationship is between the Sask Party and those who control 
the PC metro $2.1 million fund. You know all about it, and who 
are they, how much money is in there, how much money has 
gone to the Sask Party — tell me about it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I have no idea how much is in there. And, sir, 
I can tell you one other thing, sir — and I would hope you 
would be as honest, sir, and I hope you would be as forthright, 
sir — we have not received one cent from that fund and we will 
not. And you can sit there and laugh and chuckle, throw up your 
arms as you did last year when you had questions asked . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I will go back to my ruling 
that there’s a different . . . and I will rule the Premier’s question 
out of order even though it was put in the wrong context. 
 
And therefore I ask all members that this line of questioning is 
not going to continue and we’ll go to another member if this 
line is going to continue. I’ve ruled on it four times now and I 
think that that’s enough. This line of questioning is not 
permitted in this Assembly. 
 
The Premier’s here, as I’ve said before, to answer questions 
about the government and Executive Council, his department, 
his staff, the running of government. And I would ask the hon. 
member to stay within those guidelines. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, thank you. And I’m sure this time 
we’re going to be perfectly within whatever the guidelines 
happen to be. 
 
Dealing with the expenses and the way the money is spent that 
come out of the taxpayers’ funds to deal with constituency 
office expenditures — those fit exactly under the Premier’s 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Premier, from 1986 to 1991 you shared a constituency 
office with John Brockelbank. You and Mr. Brockelbank used 
your secretarial allowances to pay a number of different 
constituency secretaries. You usually had two secretaries on 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

staff at any given time. Now beginning in 1987, you also began 
authorizing monthly payments of $410 each from your 
secretarial allowance to something called office management 
services. Those payments continued through until at least 
March of 1991. The description of these services is simply 
listed as miscellaneous contractual services. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have been unable to find any record of a 
business called office management services. No record in the 
corporation branch. No listing in the Saskatoon phone book at 
that time. No record of office management services ever 
obtaining a business licence from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Premier, who is office management services? 
 
The Chair: — Order. The question being put, I’m going to 
have to rule it out of order also. Because I don’t think the 
Premier is here as a private member, and I think we’re into 
questioning along the accounts of a private member of the 
Assembly. 
 
The Premier’s here to answer questions on Executive Council, 
the operation of government. You’re asking questions of a 
private member and the operation of an allowance of a private 
member, and that’s why I’m going to rule it out of order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The question is very specifically related to 
how taxpayers’ dollars are spent in this particular province, and 
to that extent the question is: why is there no public record of 
the company entitled office management services? 
 
The Chair: — Well I will rule it out of order again, because I 
believe — we have a difference here — but I believe that you 
are on to a private member’s private allowances and we’re here 
tonight for Executive Council, the operation of Executive 
Council and government policy. And that’s where the question 
will go. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, I’d like to go to a different avenue then. And you 
talked in your opening remarks, Mr. Premier, about your great 
record from the last eight years. Well, Mr. Premier, I was a 
farmer before I was elected an MLA, and there’s a lot of 
farmers in Saskatchewan that are not too happy with your 
record. 
 
Mr. Premier, let’s go through a little of your record with 
agriculture. You wouldn’t answer the other questions. Let’s see 
if you can answer these. Part of your record was GRIP in 1991. 
There’s an election coming so I think that it’s really important 
that we go back over your record. 
 
You cancelled GRIP with contracts with farmers in this 
province that cost every farmer in this province probably an 
average of 40 to $50,000. Mr. Premier, those farmers are not 
forgetting that and it’s election time. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Premier, then you went on to cut funding for agriculture 
after 1991 till the present day from $1.1. billion to $240 million, 
and you’re talking about what a wonderful record you had. 
Farmers are not happy with you, Mr. Premier. 

Then you went on in your downloading, and the only way you 
knew how to balance books was to raise taxes and download on 
everybody in this province. Municipalities were downloaded 
on, and guess what? That caused farmers’ taxes to increase. Up 
went the farmers’ taxes. 
 
Education funding cuts, Mr. Premier, same thing. Your way of 
doing it, you cut funding for education. In fact, this year’s a 
prime example. You had the budget. You bragged about the $13 
million you’re putting in for Education, the problem being it 
was about half of what trustees and school divisions need to 
break even this year, Mr. Premier. 
 
Guess what that does to the farming community in 
Saskatchewan. It raises taxes. It puts more load on the farmers 
of this province. So again, Mr. Premier, the farmers are not very 
happy with you. 
 
Then comes along this AIDA program, Mr. Premier. Because 
farmers are hurting badly, didn’t just start this year, Mr. Premier 
— because of the things I’ve already said, the hurt has been 
going on them since 1991. Now with the prices of commodities 
going down, we need help in the farming sector. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, what did you do? You sent a boy to do a 
man’s job. And you sent him out with no allowance. And I’m 
not belittling the Agriculture minister, Mr. Premier, but because 
you give him no money to go down East and come to an 
agreement with Ottawa for an aid package for Saskatchewan, he 
was useless down there because he couldn’t get them seriously 
to the table. There was nothing he could do. His hands were 
tied. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to read a little quote out of the paper just 
for you. And it’s a quote by Mark Wyatt, I think it’s November 
6, ’98, Mr. Premier. And I quote: 
 

According to Roy Romanow, an important yardstick by 
which a Saskatchewan premier should be measured is how 
much farm relief they can pry out of Ottawa. 
 
It was a standard (which) Romanow developed during the 
early 1990s, while serving in opposition to former 
Conservative Premier Grant Devine. 
 
According to the Romanow ruler, the Saskatchewan 
premier must obtain the full amount of assistance 
demanded by producers (or in reality by the president of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool). 
 
One hundred per cent is the only passing grade and there’s 
no acceptable excuse for coming up short. 
 
“I did my best” doesn’t cut it. Budgetary constraints are 
irrelevant. Long-term solutions don’t address today’s 
problems. You either bring home the entire lump, or you’re 
a chump. 
 

Well, Mr. Premier, you can decide where you fit in that 
category. The farmers of Saskatchewan, come this election, are 
going to give you your answer. 
 
Mr. Premier, one payout in the ’80s was $850 million. You add 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

inflation to that this time, we here in the province needed one 
and a half billion. Not for all of this country, we needed that 
here in Saskatchewan and we certainly didn’t need it with an 
AIDA program. We should have had it in an acreage payment 
so everybody would have got it. 
 
And we’re stuck with an AIDA program, Mr. Premier, because 
your Agriculture minister couldn’t convince them going with no 
money to bring up a decent program. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, where were you through all this? You didn’t 
go to your buddy, Jean, and say Jean, we need help here in 
Saskatchewan. You disappeared, Mr. Premier. Instead of doing 
what you say in the quotes when you were in opposition, you 
were in your little bubble and disappeared. 
 
Mr. Premier, why would you not get involved and help the 
farmers of Saskatchewan through these hard times? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to 
answer this question and speak to this very important issue. 
 
I want to begin by saying that the provincial government in 
Saskatchewan resisted signing on to the AIDA program and we 
still hold serious reservations about the AIDA program, much 
along the lines of the reason that the hon. member from 
Saltcoats and farming members of have told us. We hold 
serious reservations based on a number of concerns. 
 
The one obvious example is that it’s based on the three-year 
average of ’97, ’96, and ’95. Seventy per cent, if you’re 
droughted out, 70 per cent of the three-year average is still zero, 
and it does not meet the needs of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
At the end of the day, our choice was very, very simple. We 
either sign in — if the member’s interested in the answer — we 
either sign in on a program which gives the farmers $1 full on 
the AIDA program, flawed as it is. Or in the alternative, we do 
not submit our 40 cents and the farmers get 60 cents on the 
AIDA plan. We decided to go the full $1 on the plan. That was 
our approach. 
 
We also said at the time that we’re going to hold the federal 
government responsible for the plan to work, and we are going 
to do so. And we also said that we’re going pursue the other 
farm issues — short lines; the rail-line abandonment; support 
for the Canadian Wheat Board; the monitoring of input costs; 
making sure that there’s a level playing field in United 
States/European subsidies wars; and that Canada should step up 
to the plate in doing so. 
 
I think that’s a sensible position. And I think if you had stood 
with us in the House, putting forward that position, we could 
have made a great deal of progress. 
 
What happened? I’m quoting now from the November 13, 1998 
Leader-Post. Quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson agreed with 
Cline that Ottawa, not Saskatchewan, should be providing 
cash to help farmers. 

I don’t know if the hon. member from Saltcoats is listening or 
pays any attention, but that’s exactly what he said. Then what 
does he say later on, on December 8, 1998, your leader: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson is in Ottawa 
this week (remember when he was in Ottawa this week) 
trying to persuade federal MPs to support his party’s plan 
for a $1 billion farm bailout that would be split 70-30 by 
Ottawa and the Saskatchewan government. 
 

One billion. Big deal. The plan is 1.5 billion and your leader 
was in there pushing for one billion. We got 1.5 and your 
people are saying, don’t worry about giving them money; 
they’ve got the money, undermining it all the way down the 
operation. 
 
Not only that. If you take a look at your agriculture policies, 
you take a look at your agricultural policies, if you take a look 
at your agricultural policies, your leader, when he was a 
Member of Parliament, he said at that point . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . a member of the Reform Party as somebody 
wanted to know. His line was that it was time that we get into 
the 21st century and that farmers should not be dependent upon 
“bailouts”. 
 
That’s exactly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, this is not 
new. This is exactly the line of Preston Manning and this was 
the exact line of Elwin Hermanson. No bailouts. Let’s get into a 
business-oriented farming. 
 
Here’s a resolution: 
 

Saskatchewan Party will encourage and pursue private 
sector value-added opportunities for the ag sector at every 
opportunity. 

 
That is going to be your approach. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You bet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You bet. Not a penny for farmers but 
value-added. Value-added is a good idea — we’re all for that. 
But not . . . (inaudible) . . . My point in answering the question, 
and I’ll sit down because I’ve been a little bit too long in 
answering it, is that what the member speaks and what the party 
opposite does are two different things. 
 
The party speaks as if it’s in support of farmers, but in reality it 
acts in contempt of the farmers. It supports decapping the 1999 
freight rates, it supports the abandonment of the Crow rate, it 
supports the question of other abandonments. We heard nothing 
on infrastructure from the federal government. All of this 
amounts to $650 million. 
 
And the hon. member says call an election. There will be an 
election. And I’m inviting the people . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, soon enough. And I’m inviting the people 
of Saskatchewan to say there are alternatives. 
 
A lot of people in Saskatchewan are saying there are no 
alternatives. I’m not buying that. There are alternatives, and 
we’re going to ask the people to take a look at your alternatives 
and your plan, and we’re going to invite that of the Liberal 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

Party and invite them to take a look at our record. 
 
And I am satisfied, as I said to the Leader of the Opposition, the 
people of Saskatchewan will do the correct thing and support 
the government that with their help brought them out of deficit, 
took us away from the brink of bankruptcy, brought us right to 
the point where we now have a stronger economy, a growing 
population, tax reduction, job creation and help for farmers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, last weekend there was a trade show in Melfort and an 
elderly gentleman came up to our booth and wanted to talk. 
And he is a retired farmer, a recent widower, and he moved to 
Melfort to retire. And the first thing he said to me when he 
came up to the booth was, Rod, when is something going to 
happen to get our province competitive in taxes. 
 
And what he said to me was that if we don’t do something soon, 
people like himself who are retired and trying to make ends 
meet now on a fixed income are going to have an increasingly 
difficult time. And his final statement to me, I thought was very 
telling, Mr. Premier, because he said this — he said if it doesn’t 
improve soon, I will be leaving this province and moving to 
Alberta where my children already are at. 
 
And that unfortunately is the story I hear and I’m sure you hear, 
if you’re listening, far too often. We simply must do something 
about the high level of taxes that people in this province are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Premier, the recent chamber of commerce convention in 
Moose Jaw in The Leader-Post article talking about it said the 
three biggest issues facing this province are taxes, taxes, taxes. 
Mary Ann McFadyen, the executive director of the chamber 
said it’s the single biggest issue in this province. They said it’s a 
missed opportunity. There was no meaningful tax relief in the 
budget. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, WEFA Canada . . . and 
you are very familiar I am sure with WEFA Canada. Your 
Deputy Premier, when they came to our convention to talk 
about our platform, when asked about WEFA Canada, he said 
that WEFA Canada was as legitimate as it could be. They are an 
international forecasting agency that your own Finance 
department has used and is using. 
 
WEFA Canada said this, and I quote: 
 

Personal disposable income per capita in Saskatchewan is 
in danger of following below that of the Atlantic provinces. 
Tax reductions can be a direct and powerful tool permitting 
the households of Saskatchewan to escape this dubious 
distinction. 

 
They went on to say that: 
 

Income tax reductions increase the incentive to join the 
labour force, to work longer, and to work more effectively. 
Such increased productivity is the only route to a sustained 
increase in our standard of living. Sales tax reductions 

increase the incentive to purchase. By increasing aggregate 
demand they increase economic growth and job creation. 

 
Mr. Premier, all people around this province are saying similar 
things. I’m sure you’re familiar with our newly nominated 
candidate, Mr. John Brennan, the former dean of the College of 
Commerce. And he said, Mr. Premier, that he was tired of 
teaching young men and women in this province, only to see 
them leave in order to pursue their careers and to build the 
province or the state where they set residency in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those cries are coming from retired people in my 
constituency. They’re coming from a former dean of the 
College of Commerce. They’re coming from agencies like the 
chamber of commerce, they’re coming from the taxpayers 
association, they’re coming from the Canadian Federation of 
Small Business. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, they’re coming 
everywhere. 
 
When will you accept the fact that your government has 
balanced the budget on the backs of taxpayers, and unless we 
start moving that down much more aggressively with a 
long-term plan, that this province is in big trouble? That we 
have to move forward, Mr. Premier? We have to do so today. 
We need a long-term plan of meaningful tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this question 
raised by the hon. member is a very important question, and it’s 
an important question for a whole number of reasons. Not only 
in terms of practical economic business reasons, but also in 
terms of philosophic reasons. And I’ll say a word about both of 
those if I may very briefly. 
 
First of all I want to begin by telling the hon. member what I’ve 
been telling people in the province of Saskatchewan now. We 
believe that we have to continue to lower our taxes in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We strongly believe that taxes as a 
component of industrial activity is a very important 
consideration. 
 
But I want to say to the hon. member opposite that it isn’t the 
only consideration of economic development. In the province of 
Newfoundland, they have instituted a 10-year freeze on any 
new taxes with respect to any new corporation that should care 
to locate in Newfoundland. This is a depressed part of the 
country. I wish them the very best in economic development. 
 
We will see, however, whether or not the taxes-only proposition 
— and here’s my philosophical point coming up to you — will 
work in British Columbia . . . in Newfoundland. 
 
Because I believe that economic development is conditioned 
upon a number of factors, taxes being one. A good, 
well-educated and motivated workforce being another. Thirdly 
a good infrastructure system, whether it’s schools or hospitals 
or roads. I think quality of life in terms of the kind of province 
we have and the kinds of things we can do. A variety of factors. 
A question of whether or not we have the resources from which 
we can value-add. 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

I do not believe that this is a, to use a gruesome example, 
one-shot-only solution. If it was a one-shot solution only, then 
people like in Newfoundland would have it. And you are, in 
your party, advocating the one-shot solution — taxes, taxes, 
taxes, taxes. And you are, with the greatest of respect, oblivious 
to what we have done. 
 
And I’ll repeat this very briefly. E&H lowered from 9 to 6 per 
cent; the personal income tax reductions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, we have the second lowest income tax in 
all of Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you don’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, we do. Who’s lower than us? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No. Manitoba’s areas of tax are larger 
than ours. That’s right. And they didn’t lower their income tax, 
their PST either. The income tax they lowered by 1 point, 1 
point, at 48.5 is their base. We’re at 48 this year. Well that’s the 
way they’re talking. You don’t believe me; take a look at the 
. . . I mean it doesn’t matter with these people, Mr. Chairman, 
because the facts basically don’t count. 
 
I’m reading from the Toronto Globe and Mail — Toronto 
Globe and Mail — not Roy Romanow. Provincial rates on 
income tax as a percentage of basic federal tax: Newfoundland, 
69 per cent; Nova Scotia, 57.5; Prince Edward Island, 58.5; 
New Brunswick, 60; Quebec administers its own system; 
Ontario is lower at 40. Ontario is . . . Let me just make . . . Just 
let . . . Member from Kindersley, listen. 
 
Ontario . . . Could I just make a point here. Ontario at 40.5 is 
lower than us; Manitoba, 48.5; Saskatchewan, 48; we’re lower 
than Manitoba; Alberta is lower than us at 44; and BC is at 
49.5. 
 
In other words, we are the third lowest on income tax. We are 
the second lowest on the PST tax. Those are the Globe and Mail 
figures, not Department of Finance, although they’re very 
accurate. Those are the figures that The Globe and Mail got 
from the federal sources which are there. 
 
Now let me just say the philosophic point before I take my 
chair. I’ll make two other points, comparisons. I want to give 
this to the member from Melfort who’s in business. 
 
When you talk about getting business and attracting business, 
you have to have comparators. Income tax, tax credits, health 
premiums, retail sales, gasoline tax, mortgage costs, property 
taxes, and so forth, electricity. The Department of Finance has 
these numbers. Every department of every provincial 
government has these numbers and we compare. 
 
Now for a family of four at $75,000 total income, here’s what it 
is. Calgary, at the end of the day, their tax level is 17,676. And 
in Saskatoon the tax level is 17,053 — we’re lower. In Toronto, 
it’s 22,105. Which brings me to my last point, and that is 
Toronto. 
 
Whatever happens in the Ontario election happens for the 

Ontario people to decide. Here’s what the business groups . . . 
The member from Melfort, if he would care to hear me out on 
this, may be well advised to listen to this. And if I may say with 
the greatest of respect, the chamber of commerce may be well 
advised to listen to this too. 
 
Ontario chamber pans provincial budget . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well John Brennan of course is so fixed in his 
ways now for the last 40 years, he’s fossilized on this issue. 
He’s fossilized on this issue. 
 
But I will cite what the chamber of commerce in Ontario says. 
It says the following: 
 

Business groups and financial market analysts, the 
apparent allies of the Mike Harris government left the 
budget presentation clearly disappointed, quote: “We do 
like tax cuts. We certainly do.” But listen, Mr. Member 
from Melfort: “But we like balanced budgets better.” Doug 
Robson, president of the Ontario Chamber of Commerce, 
and the Scotia Bank’s chief economist, Warren Jestin, had 
the same complaint: 

 
But the reality is right now today 20 cents out of every tax 
dollar you’re spending to Queen’s Park is going on debt 
service in Queen’s Park, and I think that that is too high. It 
is one of the highest among the provinces. 
 

The hon. member is not listening to my answer, but I repeat to 
you this is exactly what the business community is saying. And 
there’s the difference. You have an imbalanced approach which 
does not work. It didn’t work in the ’80s and it doesn’t work 
now. Your approach is tax reduction, tax reduction, tax 
reduction, tax reduction, and at the end of the day $1.8 billion 
added to the debt. And you’ll have the same responses even by 
the John Brennan’s of the world as the chamber of commerce of 
Ontario has toward the Mike Harris budget. 
 
What we need in this province is a balanced approach where we 
tackle that debt as best as we can, where we continue the 
infrastructure as best as we can, where we lower taxes — I’m in 
agreement with you — as best as we can, and where we come 
out equal, namely not add to the deficit. Ontario added to the 
deficit. The debt is $120 billion in Ontario. Are you advocating 
that we follow that line? It seems like you are. And I tell you, 
you can advocate it, you can advocate it, but I’ll tell you what I 
think the people of Saskatchewan will say. The people of 
Saskatchewan will say the following — been there, seen that, 
done that, no thank you we don’t want to have anything to do 
with it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, 
indeed the balanced approach is the responsible approach. And 
that balanced approach means that when you exercise power 
you also have to accept responsibility for your actions, and for 
eight years you have refused to accept the responsibilities for 
the things you have done to this province. 
 
You talk a lot about accessibility in health care, about the five 
principles of the Canada Health Act. Well accessibility is one of 
those and we have the worst accessibility in Canada — 28 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

weeks, Mr. Premier, to get surgery; 21 days to get cancer 
treatments. Unheard of across the rest of North America, Mr. 
Premier, and that’s your responsibility and that’s your record. 
 
We just went through a nurses’ strike because of your 
intervention because you didn’t know what was going on there. 
You’ve got the past-president of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) in your cabinet and yet you don’t know what’s going 
on in health care. You don’t know that there’s a nursing 
shortage. You don’t know what the working conditions are for 
nurses. Mr. Premier, that’s your responsibility. You want the 
power but you don’t want to accept the responsibility. 
 
You know you talked about the Synchrotron. We already have 
one here in this province, Mr. Premier, and that’s Tommy 
Douglas, because he’s spinning so fast in his grave from the 
way you’re destroying health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have inflicted on the people of Saskatchewan, 
the health care in Saskatchewan, destruction, pain, and anguish. 
Destruction, pain and anguish to the families that have had to 
wait to get into your facilities; that have had to wait for the 
surgeries; that can’t get into the emergency wards; that can’t get 
their critical cancer care; can‘t get MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging); can’t get CT (computerized tomography) scans; and 
can’t simply get access to a hospital bed. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan are fed up with the 
chaos that you have inflicted on the health care system, and the 
people of Saskatchewan while they are angry, they also have 
the solution. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan are waiting to provide 
their own solution to the sickness in the health care system. And 
that cure, Mr. Premier, will be delivered by the people of 
Saskatchewan by removing you from office. To remove that 
virus that is contaminating health care and creating chaos, and 
that is you and your NDP government. Mr. Premier, call the 
election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again this is a very 
important issue because health is important to everybody in 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s the most important thing. Now the 
hon. member has been very critical of me. That’s fair enough. I 
hope he doesn’t take offence or get a little too brittlely if I come 
back with a bit of a response about what your position is on 
health care. 
 
I have here on February 19, 1994 from the House of Commons, 
it is not yet as widely known in the province of Saskatchewan 
as it will be known very shortly, the following statement in 
Hansard of the Commons Debates by Mr. Hermanson, when he 
was a member of the Reform Party: 
 

I know that most Canadians place a high priority on health 
care. I would just like to relate a little about what is 
happening in my own province of Saskatchewan. We have 
governments that liked to build monuments, that liked to 
build hospitals. We probably have more hospitals per 
capita in our province than in any other part of Canada. 
Unfortunately we now have no money to operate those 
hospitals. Our priorities were probably wrong, (Mr. 
Hermanson said then). In fact I’m sure they were wrong. 

Now did you read . . . did you hear what I read? This will be 
around the province of Saskatchewan very shortly . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You go ahead. Then Mr. Hermanson 
gets elected in a dead of night, 125 massive leadership race, and 
they sit down and they develop a constitution platform — now 
just hang on — a constitution and a platform. 
 
And here I have from the Regina Leader-Post of November 17, 
1997, fast-forward three years later. And you think anything has 
changed with Mr. Hermanson? No. Quote: 
 

A plan to invite private health providers to the province to 
reduce waiting lists was one of the policies that passed 
without any opposition at your convention. 

 
Maybe you voted for it. 
 

During a panel discussion Saturday, party organizer Brian 
Fitzpatrick called the five fundamental principles behind 
medicare “mindless slogans” that stand in the way of 
innovative health care solutions like private clinics. 

 
Mindless slogans, the Canada Health Act, that is your party 
resolution. Now chronologically, Mr. Chairman, you know 
what I’m getting at. You have Mr. Hermanson talking about the 
fact that he did not believe in these hospitals. Now they have 
moved to saying that the Canada Health Act is mindless 
slogans. 
 
And now fast forward to today. Mr. Hermanson goes to the new 
party, United Alternative, proposal. You know this is the 
attempt with the Reformers, where Mr. Hermanson in some 
ways, psychologically and personally, still his heart lies, I have 
no doubt about it. And I respect his opinions in that regard and I 
think he’s a very honourable and decent gentleman, but he’s a 
Reformer at heart, Reformer/Tory at heart. What he is not is a 
Liberal. 
 
He goes to the United Alternative and he says, he says the 
following on February 23, 1999: “I think that the people in 
Saskatchewan can watch with some interest and positive 
expectation of better things to come.” Referring to the United 
Alternative. But get this on health care. Hermanson also likes 
one of the new party’s first proposals — first proposals — to 
have the federal government . . . federal government, surrender 
its responsibility for health care to the provinces. That too has 
not been widely publicized but will be. 
 
Now I’m going to put these three together and if it comes down 
to the question of doing away with the Canada Health Act, Mr. 
Chairman, and ladies and gentlemen of this Legislative 
Assembly, and to the people of Saskatchewan, the Canada 
Health Act being abolished, and this, if it ever should be, a 
Saskatchewan Party premier at this desk, leading the 
federal-provincial charge, the federal-provincial discussions to 
do away with the Canada Health Act, tell me which member in 
this House would stand up today and say, we would get $2.5 
million from the federal government as we did in this budget for 
health care if they don’t have the Canada Health Act and their 
involvement in provincial health care. 
 
More importantly, if you do away with the Canada Health Act, 
the question that the member from Cannington predicated, 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

namely accessibility, all the problems and waiting lists goes 
right out the window because the Canada Health Act has those 
five essential principles as the fundamental law of Canada for 
all provinces unless you are a Sask-a-Tory. That is exactly their 
position. That is their position. They are going to do it. 
 
(2045) 
 
And there’s something else about this . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, no. Now the Leader of the Opposition is 
waving at me their program called The Way Up — the way, 
way, way out and up. And in the platform they say something 
different. But I have the quotations and they will be distributed. 
 
Then he comes back and he says this, October 30, 1998 . . . He 
says something else and perhaps if the hon. member from 
Cannington gets up to answer a follow-up question or ask a 
follow-up question he might comment on this. Hermanson says, 
quote: 
 

If in fact the Saskatchewan Party pledges to audit the 
health care system (you betcha), in fact an audit is done 
and we need to pump more money into health care. It gives 
us more ammunition to go to Ottawa with it. 
 

Oh boy, we have heard the audits before, Texas-style audits. 
These might be Arkansas-style audits. They’re going to be in 
Saskatchewan. Tory-Party- style audits, that’s what they’re 
going to be. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, when they compare positions, the 
people of Saskatchewan, don’t ever forget that the people of 
Saskatchewan have a comparison. This year’s budget — 11 per 
cent more for health care; $195 million cash more for health 
care; more for cancer treatment; more for elective surgeries; 
more for mobile CAT scanners; more for renal dialysis in rural 
Saskatchewan; more for mobile CAT scanners in rural 
Saskatchewan; taking a look at the integrated renal program, 
diabetes program, mental health program, health services 
program for the North. And I could go on and on. 
 
That is what our program is. What’s their program? Do away 
with the Canada Health Act and something else. Zap, you are 
frozen for five years; in their budget, zap, you are frozen for 
five years. 
 
Health care workers, SEIU (Service Employees’ International 
Union), people of the province of Saskatchewan, if we have 
made mistakes in health care, and we have, I want us to be 
judged not by the perfection and the ideal. I want us to be 
judged by the alternative. And the alternative is the 
Saskatchewan Party’s commitment to freeze health care for five 
years, freeze health care for five years. Zap! You are frozen. 
 
And when that gets out to the people of Saskatchewan, I have 
absolutely no doubt whatsoever where they are going to vote. 
They’re going to vote for the party that invented medicare, 
that’s renewing medicare, that supports medicare, and provides 
the best medicare system in all of Canada right here in 
Saskatchewan, right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, when 
we hear the word “zapped”, I think the people of this province 
have been hearing it for the last eight years. Right after you 
took over you zapped 52 hospitals; you zapped the Plains 
hospital; you zapped the GRIP contract. You zapped everything 
that rural Saskatchewan stood for including our roads and our 
schools and our hospitals. You are the king of zapping, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Premier, you also talked about getting the 
message that you want to have out around this province. You’ve 
taken quotes out of this paper and quotes out of that paper and 
now you tell us you’re going to send it around the province. 
Well you know what? I believe you. I believe you’re going to 
use taxpayers’ dollars to put whatever information you want to 
have them to have right across this province. You can put this 
word and this word together, and it doesn’t matter if it’s true; 
what it matters is they get the word that you want out. 
 
Mr. Premier, this week I had an opportunity to speak to a 
person that I feel is very wise and has a lot of respect for many 
people. And this person told me that, she quoted to me 
something that says: 
 

A people that cherishes its privileges more than its 
principles are in danger of losing both. 
 

And when I think about that, Mr. Premier, I think about this 
government of yours and I say: a government that cherishes its 
privilege of governing more than it cherishes its principles — 
and that principle for you is supposed to be socialism; it’s 
supposed to be something where you look after the vulnerable 
people of this society. Mr. Premier, if you really cherish your 
principles, then some of the things that you are doing wouldn't 
be happening. And you’re going to lose them both. You’re 
going to lose the governing of this province because people 
can’t believe you any more. They can’t trust you. 
 
Mr. Premier, out in rural Saskatchewan . . . I’m sure that your 
people that represent areas in rural Saskatchewan are telling you 
rural Saskatchewan doesn’t believe what your government is 
saying. They don’t believe that you care about anything out in 
that area. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, the social services recipients in this province 
— the ones that you are supposed to be standing up for, the 
ones that you tell them that I am the only one with a heart and a 
conscience, I’m the one that’s going to be looking after you, 
should be worried about everybody else — those people can’t 
even get off social services any more. The numbers have 
increased since you’ve got into this government. They’ve 
increased 20 per cent and higher. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve got people out there, social workers who 
are overworked to the point of exhaustion just like the nurses 
are overworked to the point of exhaustion. And we’ve got 
people who would love to be off welfare but they can’t get off 
because there’s no jobs, there’s no opportunities, and there’s no 
hope for them. 
 
So we’ve got the most vulnerable people in Saskatchewan are 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

stuck with you because you won’t give them any hope and . . . 
You know what else you won’t give them — is you won’t allow 
them to be equal. You won’t allow them to show that they can 
have some responsibility because they are kept under your 
thumb. 
 
Mr. Premier, rural Saskatchewan people, people on social 
services, and the Aboriginal people of this province need to be 
allowed to have some responsibility. They want to go to work. 
They want to be considered equal. And they don’t want to just 
take whatever you have left over after you invest money in 
Guyana and Channel Lake and SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) and whatever else comes along 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Premier, give everybody a chance. Lower the taxes. Let 
people have for once a chance to have a voice in this province, 
and let all of our people be free of the burden of taxation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m assuming that the 
heart of the question of the member is a repetition stated 
differently . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuse me, if I may 
just answer it. Stated in a different way than the member from 
Melfort because her argument is, she ended up by saying lower 
the taxes and give the people a choice and lower the taxes. 
 
Now I’m not going to repeat my arguments about taxes because 
we’ve lowered the taxes. I think that message is there. You can 
accept it or not accept it — it is there. I admit that we need to 
lower it more and we’re going to work to try to lower it more 
— there’s no doubt about that. 
 
But I want to say to the hon. member opposite that when we 
talk about choices and to give the people choices, you had a 
choice when you got elected a Liberal and you jumped in the 
middle of the night to the Saskatchewan Party. Why didn’t you 
give them the choice to say yes or no to what you did? 
 
Why did you not, member from Saltcoats, why did you not? 
Why did you not do what the hon. member from Athabasca did 
— the honourable way? Why did you run from that choice? Tell 
me why? Why did you do that? 
 
Why is it that you refused to go to the electorate and tell the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Don’t worry about the election. We’re going to call the election 
quickly enough. Your arguments are absolutely . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We didn’t have . . . (inaudible) . . . two 
years ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Something, you got that Way Up thing 
again? 
 
You know what that should be renamed? Not something . . . not 
the way up. It should be something’s up. That’s what it should 
be renamed. Something’s up. Oh, oh, something’s up. 
 
Now I want to say, I want to say on the social assistance 
situation specifically the following. And this was a press release 
from the government: 

The Social Services minister, Harry Van Mulligen, today 
released figures showing 4.5 per cent decline in the number 
of households receiving social assistance in southeastern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Province-wide the caseload has dropped from 35,631 at the 
end of December ’97, to 34,000 at the end of December 
1998. And this is consistent with an overall trend of 
declining caseloads that began in 1994. Caseload is down 
since 1994. And just this past year the income security 
caseload fell by more than 4 per cent. 

 
Now should it be 10 per cent or 15 per cent? The answer is yes. 
Nobody wants to have a situation where people are earning 
their money with respect to caseloads on social assistance. 
That’s why we’ve instituted a vision for the future called 
building independence. Training people, making sure they get 
off the trap of social welfare, making sure there’s jobs and a 
growing economy. And it seems to be working — it seems to be 
working. 
 
But I tell you what we will not do. We will not do what the 
Saskatchewan Party advocates — and that is to punish the 
poorest of the poor. We’re not going to say, off the case rolls, 
like that, and good luck to you. That we will not do because 
that’s not the Saskatchewan way of compassion and caring. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Premier, I’ve watched this evening with great interest, your 
responses or lack thereof, certainly with respect to the member 
from Rosthern and your reluctance to answer them and the 
appeals to the Chair, and those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Premier, it reminds me, I think, of a government in its latter 
days. Yes, that’s true. Yes, that’s true. A government that’s 
tired. A government that has a record in health care that’s a 
complete disaster and the people of Saskatchewan know it. One 
that used to run around this province and say they are the great 
protectors of health care. 
 
And yet you, sir, closed 52 hospitals in this province. You, sir, 
closed the Plains hospital. You, sir, caused the nurses strike in 
this province. You, sir, have resulted . . . your policies have 
resulted in the longest waiting lists in all of Canada. The worst 
record in terms of health care in all of Canada. That’s your 
record in health care. And you stand before the people of 
Saskatchewan and defend that. 
 
That’s your record in health care. What’s your record in 
agriculture? No plan whatsoever. Nothing. By your own 
measuring stick, you’re a complete failure when it comes to 
delivering for agriculture. When it comes to highways in this 
province we have the worst possible stretches of highways 
anywhere, I would say, in Canada, if not all of North America. 
 
When it comes to job creation in Saskatchewan or in Canada, 
we are the worst. Newfoundland, the Rock, has a better record 
in terms of job creation by far than you do, sir. 
 
We have the worst record in item after item after item. And yet 
one thing that we do have that you seem to be proud of, is the 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

tax load. You stand and say that we the second lowest taxes in 
Canada, and yet every person in this province knows 
emphatically that we have the second highest when you take 
into terms all the tax load that people have to bear. 
 
Yes, perhaps if you want to look at one isolated little piece of 
tax, yes, you might be able to point to an example of where we 
are the second lowest. In fact in your arguments in the budget, 
you talk about, of provinces with sales tax, we are the lowest. 
And yet people all across this province know that that’s just a 
whole bunch of malarkey. They know that all they have to do is 
drive a few miles west of here and they can enter a province 
that has no sales tax whatsoever. 
 
And that kind of doublespeak that you’re so famous for, so 
famous for, doesn’t cut it any longer with the people of 
Saskatchewan. Eight years in office, eight years. And all that 
you have to offer the people of Saskatchewan any longer, is the 
same tired old excuses. It’s not my fault. Blame somebody else. 
Blame the federal government. Blame the previous 
administration. Blame the Saskatchewan Party. Blame the 
Liberal Party. Blame the independent members. Blame the 
media. Blame Conrad Black. Blame anyone that you can think 
about. Blame anyone in this province that you can think about 
and yet take no responsibility whatsoever for what you’ve done 
in office. 
 
You know, I remember in 1991 when you were elected, sir. I 
remember very well. You were a government that came to 
office with ideas and plans. And I give you credit for that. I 
don’t agree, I didn’t agree with many of the things and still 
don’t to this day, but at least you had a plan, at least you had 
ideas at that time. You came into this legislature, I recall very 
clearly, bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, and you had focus. There 
was no question about it. You had focus. 
 
It may have been focus on entirely the wrong things by closing 
hospitals and stripping farmers of their livelihood in the GRIP 
contracts, but at least you had some degree of focus. Your focus 
on things like GRIP, hospital closures, turning highways back 
into gravel the member from Rosetown Elrose advocated at that 
time but at least you had some sort of plan before . . . to put 
before the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what do got today to offer? What do you have today to 
offer to the people of Saskatchewan? What do you have in 
terms of a platform, in terms of a plan to put before the people 
of Saskatchewan? You balanced the budget, yes; but how did 
you do it? You did it through raising utility rates. You did 
through it through raising taxes and every kind of revenue that 
you could possibly raise here in this province. Yes, you dropped 
the PST from 9 per cent down to 6 per cent, and that’s to be 
congratulated and that’s something this side of the House has 
been advocating right since 1991. 
 
(2100) 
 
But, Mr. Premier, you were the one who put it there in the first 
place. And all of the tired, old excuses about the 1980s aren’t 
cutting it any longer with the people of Saskatchewan. Your 
second term has been an unmitigated disaster for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve been faced with things . . . you used to 
talk about GigaText. 

Well maybe you’d like to talk about NST (Network Services of 
Chicago) tonight. Maybe you’d like to talk about Channel Lake 
tonight. Maybe you’d like to talk about Guyana tonight. Maybe 
you’d like to talk about raising potatoes over at Beechy and 
Lucky Lake tonight. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
would like to hear about tonight, Mr. Premier, is why, why did 
you get into those kind of ventures when all you did . . . your 
entire existence over the last number of years was criticize 
everything anybody had ever done in this province before that 
didn’t work out. And now you have all of those kinds yourself 
that haven’t worked out in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Premier, you’ve been in politics a long time, 
you’ve been in politics almost as long as I’ve been alive — 
almost as long as I’ve been alive — 32 years you’ve been in 
government in one fashion or another. And it reminds me a 
little bit . . . it reminds me a lot of my father in a lot of ways. 
And I think it reminds a lot of people about their parents, their 
father, or their mother, or their grandfather, when they talk 
about the transition of power. You know it’s difficult, sir, it’s 
always difficult on farms or in a business or anything like that 
to look at the transfer of power, to look at those kinds of things 
because people don’t want to relinquish whatever power 
they’ve been given. 
 
Mr. Premier, we all must ask ourselves I guess from time to 
time how long should we hang on. How long should we hang 
on? We all have to ask ourselves that from time to time. 
Thirty-two years, 32 years illustrious service to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they thank you for that. Now it’s time, Mr. 
Premier, to think about change. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ve heard it said that real power is not something 
that you’re given; it’s something that you take. The people of 
Saskatchewan awarded you power, they gave you power, and I 
think they’re close to wanting to take it away. The people of 
Saskatchewan gave you power, and now I think the people of 
Saskatchewan want an opportunity to take it back from you. 
 
A government, Mr. Premier, and yourself reminds me this 
evening a little bit like an aging prizefighter, lashing out at 
everybody and anything that’s in front of them, just simply, just 
simply not wanting to step aside. Just simply not wanting to 
step aside. Even Wayne Gretzky, Mr. Premier, I’ll remind you, 
has gone away from the NHL (National Hockey League) these 
days. 
 
I think, Mr. Premier, you’re reluctant to look at the latest 
contenders. I think you’re reluctant to look at the Saskatchewan 
Party and see it exactly the way the people of Saskatchewan see 
it, and that is a party that believes in hopes and dreams and 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think it’s time that you looked at your future. I 
think it’s time you looked at your future. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan think it’s time you looked at your future. 
 
Over the years, sir, in private conversation with you, and you’ll 
know this for sure, you’ve given me from time to time some 
political advice. Some of it was even good advice. Some of it 
was even good advice. Let me, Mr. Premier, let me, Mr. 
Premier, honestly give you a little advice tonight. 
 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

I think it’s time for you to think about that transfer of power. I 
think it’s time. I think the Young Turks, I think the Young 
Turks opposite, right in your own very benches, are thinking 
it’s time for you to think about the transfer of power. Whether 
it’s the House Leader, the Deputy Premier, the Finance 
minister, or all the others that have their unofficial leadership 
campaigns kicked off, I think it’s time that you started thinking 
about that, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I also think it’s time that you started thinking 
about the election campaign that the people of Saskatchewan 
are asking for. I think it’s time you started thinking about that. 
You’ve already kicked off . . . you’ve already kicked off a 
negative ad campaign. Something I didn’t believe that you 
would ever do, sir, was resort to American-style attack ads in 
your campaign. 
 
And the member from Shaunavon chirps from his seat. The 
member from Shaunavon always chirping from his seat. Well I 
say to you, sir — I say to you, sir — that come this election 
you’re going to be in a lot of trouble down there. You’re going 
to be in a lot of trouble down there, Mr. Shaunavon. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The Liberal Party in complete disarray. In their 
party they’ve got members like the member from North 
Battleford that isn’t allowed to speak, isn’t allowed to ask 
questions in question period, openly is defiant of the House 
Leader. They’re saying to the media on every occasion that he 
can think of that he doesn’t agree with the platform that that 
member has come up with. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m sure you’re aware of that here in this province 
that the Liberal Party is disappearing. They’re down into single 
digits in the polls these days, in spite of the fact that they’ve got 
a record that says that they want to raise taxes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you imagine going into an election campaign, Mr. Premier, 
an election campaign that’s saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan, we want to raise taxes. Hard to believe. Hard to 
believe. A little advice for you people, talking about raising 
taxes at election time is going to get you un-elected, sir. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, the 
member chirps from his seat about his platform. His platform is 
four pages out of the budget estimates ripped out and a couple 
of little notes beside it. It’s been called “How to Make 
Government Stupider” by some of the columnists here in 
Saskatchewan. And this is a platform that he says we would 
rather have. We wouldn’t trade you platforms for anything, sir. 
 
Just like I’m not surprised that the Premier of the province 
booted you out of his . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I would encourage the . . . Order. 
Order. Order. I would encourage, if a couple of members want 
to have a private chat, they’re welcome to do so. They’re 
welcome to do so but this is Executive Council estimates. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, the last, 
the last election we had you won in magnificent style and 
everyone recognizes that. I think this election campaign is 

going to be a whole lot different. It appears that you’re going to 
go to the people of Saskatchewan very soon and I think that’s 
what they want. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan also deserve some answers 
about a number of things. And I understand that the media are 
going to be asking you some questions about a few things like 
management services that you’ve had over the years; like 
Tommy Douglas House and how the operations of it operated 
over the last number of years. They’re very interested in those 
comments, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, since we can’t ask those kinds of questions in 
here, I don’t know what the appropriate forum is. Apparently 
you think there is an appropriate forum. The appropriate forum 
apparently will be in a scrum outside before the . . . as the 
House closes down this evening. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan want you to honour 
your commitment to go to the people in June. You’ve said 
consistently, you’re going to go to the people of Saskatchewan 
on a timetable of every four years and that’s exactly what they 
want. 
 
I think they also want you to stop the attack ads. I think they 
also want you to defend your record. I think you also . . . They 
want you to bring forward your record and let it be judged 
against The Way Up. I think they want you to say in very, very 
plain terms what your future and what the future of the NDP is 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m going to close by just saying that the people 
want you to honour your pledge to go to an election. They will 
have opportunity to judge — yes. They will have opportunity to 
cast judgment on each and every single one of us in terms of 
whether they want us re-elected or not. 
 
Our platform I believe will stand the test of time and stand the 
scrutiny that the people of Saskatchewan will give it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Our platform speaks to opportunity; it speaks to 
hope; and it speaks to dreams. Our platform speaks to what the 
people of Saskatchewan are talking about all across this 
province in terms of tax relief, in terms of job creation, in terms 
of agriculture, in terms of education, in terms of health care, and 
all the other priorities that they have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, we believe . . . Mr. Premier, we believe in hope. 
We don’t believe in envy or jealousy like your party. We 
believe in dreams — not in holding people back like what you 
want to do to the people of Saskatchewan. We believe in 
opportunity, Mr. Premier — not in big government like what 
you believe in. We believe the people of Saskatchewan are 
asking for and now are demanding an election. 
 
Mr. Premier, eight years in office as the Premier of this 
province is a long time. A nation builder for some 32 years is a 
long time. It’s time now to think about the transfer of power. 
The people of Saskatchewan, I think, want that decision to be 
made right now, Mr. Premier. 
 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Mr. Premier, I’ll close by asking you: are you going to call an 
election very, very soon in the next few weeks so that the 
people of Saskatchewan have opportunity to judge your record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I must confess that in 
all my years as is pointed out by the hon. member from 
Kindersley who I find quite entertaining, and I think one of the 
more talented members of that caucus over there. I say this on a 
personal basis. I’ve tried to encourage him to stay in public life 
although I think almost everything that he stands for I totally 
disagree. 
 
I will say one thing. I don’t think in all my years of public life, 
in all my . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well don’t be so 
arrogant. His voters have got to decide whether he’s going to 
stay or not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, maybe I did. But, 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve never had so many people from the 
opposition party caring after my very best interests as much as I 
have from the member from Kindersley. Boy, I should step out 
like Gretzky— that’d be great, you know, for me. I should get a 
succession going — that’d be great for me. I really know that 
you feel very, very warmly for my best interests so I thank you 
for those comments. 
 
Let me be very brief on the question. I want to say a few things 
before I answer your question specifically. You talk about a 
negative ad. You can characterize it that way. Some people 
have characterized it that way. So who cares, I mean, if the 
reporters have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No not our 
supporters. 
 
What we have done, Mr. Chairman, on this ad is told the people 
what The Way Up will leave the province of Saskatchewan — 
$1.8 billion added to the debt. That’s the statement; that’s the 
truth. If it’s negative don’t blame me, I didn’t write your 
platform — blame yourself and the people who wrote it. I 
didn’t say: zap, you’re frozen for five years. It’s telling the 
people the absolute facts. 
 
Two other quick points I want to make and then I’ll close — 
three points actually very quickly. On the question of our 
record, I mean I’ve said already right from day one we’re going 
to be campaigning on our record. There’s no way a government, 
even if they wanted to run from the record, can’t but campaign 
their record. And we don’t want to run from our record, we 
want to tell the people. 
 
Here’s what our record says partly on economic growth — not 
from the Saskatchewan Party, not from the Liberal Party, not 
from partisans, not even from the journalists. This is April 1, 
1999: “This province, second only to Alberta, has significantly 
succeeded in lowering its debt,” said Mary Webb, senior 
economist for Scotiabank, Wednesday, March 31. 
 
(2115) 
 
“The departing Tories left the New Democrats a $15 billion 
debt in 1991. Saskatchewan found the revenues to replace the 
lost federal receipts for health and education,” Webb said. “It’s 
been a model of balancing.” So says the senior economist for 
Scotiabank. So says the senior economist for the Scotiabank. 

I’ll give you one more; there are many. “Saskatchewan is 
entering its sixth straight year of economic growth,” the 
Investment Dealers Association say. They credited the 
economic growth to sound financial management by the 
provincial government. 
 
Quote: “The province in our view has moved consistently in the 
right direction in the last few years,” says Ian Russell of the 
IDA, the Investment Dealers Association, Regina Leader-Post, 
May 14, 1998. That’s part of our record. You’re doggone right 
we’re going to be talking about our record. 
 
But now the second last point before I talk about the election. 
My advice to you, sir, because I have my best interests for you 
too at heart. 
 
I have an article here from The Press Review, Tuesday March 
30, 1999, an editorial by Verna Thompson, the editor of the 
particular journal. I know the member from Kindersley is very 
familiar with it. It’s a little bit of a long passage but I think all 
members and all people of Saskatchewan should know what it 
says. 
 
She said she attended a Saskatchewan Party meeting. And this 
is what she writes, and I’m going to read it to you: 
 

Doom and gloom . . . doom and gloom reigned. In the past 
few days I’ve been at two Saskatchewan Party meetings 
and one NDP meeting. I’ve come away from both 
Saskatchewan Party meetings depressed and ready to slit 
my wrists with my fingernails. 

 
I’m going to repeat that because they’re not listening. 
 

I came away from both . . . 
 
Actually . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. The more I 
think of it, I think this . . . I think this might make this a good ad 
piece here. 
 

I have come away form both Saskatchewan Party meetings 
depressed and ready to slit my wrists with my fingernails. I 
came away from the NDP meeting . . . I came away from 
the NDP meeting on a three-day high. 
 
If the Kerrobert health care meeting is any indication, the 
Saskatchewan Party with this series of meetings is 
spreading doom and gloom and fear throughout rural 
Saskatchewan. Fear of hospital closures, fear of lack of 
services, fear the two-tier health system already exists in 
many minds, one for urban, one for rural, will worsen. 
Perhaps spreading fear is there main aim. 

 
She says: “I hope not.” 
 
I want to stop from the quotation to say to Ms. Thompson: she 
asks the question perhaps spreading fear is their main aim. I 
say, Ms. Thompson, I say, members of this House, I say people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, not perhaps — that is their 
main aim because there’s nothing else to sell in a positive vision 
when you’re talking about a vision. 
 
And then she goes on to this, and this is the heart . . . the part 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

. . . the point I want you to take to heart. She says: 
 

It’s fine to point out the government shortcomings. That’s 
the job of opposition after all. But I would hope that in the 
future the meetings can be given a more positive spin. Tell 
the horror stories, blast the government, but then be 
positive about the future and about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s platform. 
 
My advice to the Saskatchewan Party for what it’s worth is 
don’t send people away into the night depressed and afraid 
like you tried to do today. Send them out on a high note 
excited about what you think you can do. 
 

And the reason that they’ve never been able to do it, Mr. 
Chairman, is because they don’t have a high note. They don’t 
have a philosophy. They don’t have a Saskatchewan way of 
caring or compassion. They don’t have a vision except tax cuts, 
treat the poorest of the poor meanly and without any 
compassion and sympathy, and attack and attack and attack. 
That’s why the editorial of Ms. Verna Thompson is written. Not 
Roy Romanow. Right from rural Saskatchewan, right from rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now finally, as for the election. An election is coming. An 
election will be coming so much so that based on what these 
people know their polling numbers are, it will be too fast for 
them whenever it takes place. 
 
Because fundamentally, what the people of Saskatchewan 
know, fundamentally, at the core of the Achilles heel and at 
their very weakness of the Saskatchewan Party is this: they 
know that there was a fraudulent concoction of Liberals and 
Conservatives who got together in the middle of the night, 
whose principles are not known, the deals of which are not 
made known. They know that it lacks credibility and 
authenticity. They know that in addition to that, that their 
policies are too extreme, they’re too imbalanced, they are too 
narrow, and they will run third in this provincial election. I 
guarantee you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the Premier, I 
too have been sitting and listening with great deal of interest to 
the debate and some of it which unfortunately eluded to a 
debate about integrity on either side of this House. And I guess 
that’s what, that’s what bothers me, that we have to debate 
those kind of issues and ask those kind of questions when we do 
have people in the province who are now so confused about 
who is really in this premises with honesty, integrity, and trust. 
I think they’re becoming more and more cynical as to the 
purposes, the reasons that some of these people . . . is it their 
own self-interest or is it actually the people of the province. 
 
And I guess the other thing that’s confusing to the people as 
well and we talk . . . Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, I’ve seen the 
Premier refer to some previous comments and statements and 
he’s heard some of these before and they are his. And once 
again it begs the question, when commitments are made and not 
kept, it raises a concern about whether or not there should be a 
continuing support for a government that makes commitments 
and then doesn’t keep them. 

And let me . . . I’d just like to quote from Hansard, April 22, 
1991: 
 

. . . Mr. Speaker, in terms of my objectives, before I 
adjourn the debate, I want to just say a brief word about the 
business of the quality of life as part of our agenda. I’ve 
talked about these five points in the context of our 
philosophy as a contrast of what they’ve done over 9 to 10 
years. (This is when the Premier was the Leader of the 
Opposition.) Quality of life, that’s what politics is all about 
at the end of the day. That’s why we want the financial 
house in order so that we can manage our programs the 
way our community, called Saskatchewan, wants it. That’s 
why we want to create jobs and keep the farmers working 
and the small towns surviving. 

 
It doesn’t seem to be happening. That opportunity’s been given 
and it doesn’t seem to be happening. I’ll continue with the 
quote: 
 

Quality of life for our families, and their children, and their 
children, and for our neighbours and our communities. 

 
Unfortunately since that time a lot of those children and their 
children have had to leave this province. Our philosophy of the 
’90s — people helping people. That’s the way we’ve always 
done it in this province. That’s what it’s all about and there’s a 
big agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an outrage and a blight on this great province 
of Saskatchewan that today we have either the second highest 
or the highest rate of poverty of anybody in Canada. Has that 
improved? I think people are asking today, 10 years later, 
almost 10 years later. Has that in fact improved? I don’t think 
so and that’s what’s confusing to our electorate. That’s why 
people don’t trust any politicians any more. 
 
I go on with the quote: 
 

I never thought I’d say that. I never thought in my years of 
politics that the growth industry was food banks, thanks to 
those people opposite (speaking about the Tories who were 
in power during those years), either uncaring or forgetting 
of this. That’s quality of life. Children who do not have 
nourishment or opportunities to grow. Think of the social 
and other problems which are attached to it. And these 
people are smug in giving the amount for child poverty 
which is equal to the salary of Mr. Chuck Childers. 
 

Those were the comments on that day . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Childers, Childers, whatever. “Equality and 
fairness; there’s a big agenda for quality of life.” And I agree. 
 
What’s changed? And your comments going on about the 
terrible state of health care and the closure of beds and the 
closure of hospitals. I guess it’s confusing, it’s confusing 
because nothing has changed. What’s become better in this last 
eight years? 
 
After those kinds of statements and commitments were made, 
hospitals were closed. Our health care system has been turned 
into turmoil. A commitment in the 1995 election to fight to 
keep the Plains open — that was a commitment made by 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

members on the government side, members running for election 
arm in arm with the Premier, that they would fight to save the 
Plains hospital. 
 
That’s what confuses people, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. They 
are wondering why after 120,000 people from across this 
province said: please, don’t close that hospital we so 
desperately need. Did the government listen? No, they didn’t. 
Mr. Premier, people virtually begged — were pleading right 
across the province. 
 
That was bad enough. That was an ill-thought-out decision. 
There couldn’t have been a plan. There couldn’t have been. 
 
I’m going to quote again from that teahouse in Lebret, a unique 
little teahouse and craft house, where it says on the wall: 
“Action without a vision is a nightmare.” And that’s obviously 
what’s happened with our health care system, particularly the 
Plains. 
 
People don’t understand why it was closed. But the thing they 
don’t understand even more so is why it was closed a year in 
advance of other facilities that could have accommodated our 
sick, reduced our waiting lists? Why it was closed a year in 
advance of its targeted date? Why were people confused and 
having to wear hard hats while looking for places they needed 
to go for diagnostic treatment and surgery within the Regina 
General Hospital, a facility where there still is no light at the 
end of the tunnel as when it’s going to be actually completed. 
 
People don’t have a place to park, they don’t have accessibility 
to that hospital. And yet a year in advance you close a facility 
that should have been there for the people of this province. 
 
You know, I just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I did lose 
it for a minute. This really distresses me as to why 
commitments are made and actions taken without any real 
plans, and it throws everybody in a great deal of chaos. 
 
Yet . . . And I’ve heard it earlier. I mean there’s been some 
bantering back and forth and it reminded me of the comment 
that the facts, although interesting, are irrelevant. And I think 
that comment was made a little earlier. 
 
The doom and gloom and fear that we’ve been accused of, the 
Liberal caucus has been accused of spreading, has not been 
doom and gloom. It has come from front-line health care 
workers. Comments that I expressed this morning as a result of 
a letter to the editor from a front-line health care worker, from a 
doctor. Doctors and nurses who are telling us that we’ve got a 
serious problem. 
 
Our nursing problem is not one that just happened overnight. 
Mr. Premier, there were 600 nurses fired back in 1993 or 1994. 
What was the justification? What kind of plan was in place? 
Who in their right mind — was there anybody thinking — that 
we could just eliminate 600 nurses and then rely on recovering 
those very vital and essential services? 
 
I don’t know about you, sir, but it bothers me. It distresses me 
because we’re not getting younger in years. And I hope I won’t 
need the services of some of those very valuable people, at least 
not in the immediate future. I hope it’s a long time down the 

road, both for you and I and all the colleagues here in the 
legislature. 
 
But when the time comes, it just scares the living daylights out 
of me that by that time we may have some good highways, but 
when the ambulance gets us without hitting any bumps to the 
hospital, there won’t be anybody there to greet us. We won’t 
have the surgeons. We won’t have the specialists. We won’t 
have the nurses to take care of us when we need to be looked 
after, when we can’t look after ourselves. 
 
So I just want to emphasize the fact that we have been speaking 
about the priorities of people of this province. We have been 
talking about health care. We’ve been talking about highways. 
We’ve been talking about education for our young people. We 
need to have some comfort for people to assure them that they 
will be able to continue to live in this great province to survive, 
to have some economic activity that will give them some hope 
for the future, Mr. Premier. 
 
(2130) 
 
And I . . . There’s no need for you to respond. I just want you to 
be aware that the priorities that we have for consideration of the 
future of the people of this province are those of the people of 
this province — no hidden agendas, no personal agendas, but 
those issues that people have come to us with, have written to 
us, have called us, and have asked to bring to your attention. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Subvotes (EX01), (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08), 
(EX06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. May it be: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1999, 
the sum of $398,522,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2000, the sum of $4,252,950,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Before putting the question to the resolution that 
the Government House Leader has moved, this being the last 
chance that I will have at the mike that I would like to say a few 
thank you’s to some people. And many people inside and 
outside this building, as everybody knows, are responsible for 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

making a session run smoothly and keeping it going. I do want 
to take a moment to thank some of those people. 
 
Firstly of course, the pages who spoil the members of the 
Legislative Assembly by keeping your water supplied and 
running errands to and from. I certainly want to thank Melanie, 
Sheena, Kris, Dean and Darcy for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Also in Journals that write up things every day 
and then keep things even and on an even keel, there’s Marilyn 
and also a special one to Rose Zerr who will not be here when 
we come back. I understand that Rose is retiring after some 30 
years and I want to take this opportunity to thank her for her 
past work in this Assembly and in this building and wish her all 
the best in her retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Also I guess to thank Hansard who, in my 
opinion, operate under very stressed conditions. They operate in 
another building, outside of the building because of the 
renovations. Also the people in our caucus offices; the staff in 
the Speaker’s office, Linda, Margaret and Rhonda; and of 
course in the Clerk’s office, Pam, Monique and Pam; 
broadcasting, Gary and Ihor and Kerry; visitors’ services; the 
library; financial services; and of course Pat Shaw and the 
security people within the building. 
 
And of course for me as the Chair and as Deputy Speaker, one 
of the most important for us to thank is the Clerks at the Table. 
That without them we would be less consistent and so I want to 
take a special thank you to Gwenn and Greg and Meta at the 
Table, along with my Co-Chair and the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I also want to thank the hon. member from 
Regina Coronation Park who co-chairs the committees with me 
and does a good job with me. And also the help that I’ve got 
from Speaker Hagel. Also thank you to the members and to 
your families for the time they spent behind the scenes. 
 
So I want to say a minute that I realize that there may be in fact 
. . . I hear rumours that there may be an election before we 
come back here, and as in most elections there’s going to be 
some changes made. I’ve enjoyed serving in this legislature 
with all of you and I wish you all the best in the upcoming 
election — all members. 
 
And to those who are not running again, thank you for your 
service to your constituents, to the people of Saskatchewan. In 
my opinion you’ve been part of the greatest institution in our 
province and I’m delighted to say that it’s been my greatest gain 
to have been able to serve with you. 
 
With that, I wish everyone a good summer. Once again, all the 
best in . . . if the rumours of an election are true. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Pursuant to an order of the 
Assembly I move: 
 

That Bill No. 45, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 1999 and on 
March 31, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By order of the Assembly and under 
rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a second and third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave, 
to move to motions to return (debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(2145) 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 4 
 

Ms. Draude: — I move an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return (debatable) no. 4. Seconded by the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 5 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 5 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: (1) the number of District 
Health Boards that have completed and submitted their 
three-year strategic plan to the provincial government; (2) 
the necessary elements set out by the provincial 
government that are to be included in these three-year 
strategic plans; (3) when the districts were to have their 
three-year strategic plans completed and submitted to the 
provincial government. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

Return No. 6 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
of Kindersley, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 
return no. 6: 
 

To the Minister of Health, the total costs of production and 
placement of the anti-nurses advertising campaign 
currently (previously) run by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 10 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Kindersley, an Order of the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 10. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, before we vote on this motion 
I just wanted to make a comment. I’d like to bring to your 
attention that this year that there were 65 written questions 
asked of the government. Three of these were not dealt with 
simply because the members were not here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of those 65, all the rest have been dealt with. And all but one 
has been answered. And there have also not been any 
amendments, Mr. Speaker. And that speaks well to the 
members who have set the questions because it meant that they 
certainly were not ambiguous and the departments were able to 
answer the questions. 
 
I want to mention that, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 
committed to making democracy work. We are trying to do this 
in order to be able to continue to improve confidence of the 
public in politicians and in this legislature by making the 
information available as timely as possible. We want to put the 
floodlight on the issues rather than trying to sweep them under 
the rug, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In all over the past two sessions with the exception of the three 
we have dealt with 146 questions. That’s meant we’ve dealt 
with 143 questions and answered all but two of them, and we’ll 
be answering this one as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by 
the member from Regina Victoria: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we were going to try to sneak out without our 

thank you’s, but actually I think we would rather say our thank 
you’s before we sneak out. So I would like to begin by thanking 
a number of people and I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition 
or the House Leader on the opposite side would like to do the 
same. 
 
I’d like to begin first of all by thanking all of the hon. members. 
Although we obviously have our differences within this 
Chamber, we are here to serve our constituents and the people 
of the province. 
 
I’d also like to thank the House Leaders, particularly the 
member from Cannington who I think has the patience of Job 
and I really appreciate his patience in dealing with some of our 
issues. 
 
I’d like to thank the Speaker for your impartial rulings and for 
keeping us at least partially in order throughout this process. 
 
I’d like to thank the Legislative Assembly staff, particularly the 
Clerk of the Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk, who ably advises all of 
us and she is ably assisted as well by Greg Putz, Margaret 
Woods, Monique Lovatt, and Pam Scott. And of course, 
without ever having to draw his sabre once, the very capable 
Patrick Shaw, the Sergeant-at-Arms and his security staff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — As well, we have five very capable 
young people, pages of the Assembly, who I would like to 
mention by name: Melanie Bratkoski, Darcy Criddle, Dean 
Mulhall, Kris Parker, Sheena Simonson, and I’m sure we’d like 
to thank them for their service to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I’d also like to thank the Hansard 
staff: Judy Brennan, Donelda Klein, and the staff who report on 
everything that we say in the Chamber, sometimes to our great 
pleasure and sometimes not as pleasing to us, but I’d like to 
thank them as well. 
 
I’d like to thank the Journals staff, the visitor services staff, the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, Garnet Holtzmann. And I’d 
also like to thank all of the other people in the building who 
keep this place running — the ministers’ offices, the caucus 
offices, our constituency offices out there, House business 
offices, Executive Council, and anybody else who I may have 
missed. 
 
And just before I close I’d like to thank Marian Powell and the 
Legislative Library, the cafeteria staff, the SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) staff. I 
guess we should thank the press for the number of times that 
they get the story right for us. And if we don’t want to rely on 
the press for our reports we can watch directly on television 
what’s happening, so I’d like to thank Gary Ward and his staff 
for their work they do. 
 
In closing I wish all members well as we return to our 
constituencies and are accountable to the real bosses, the people 
of Saskatchewan. So I wish you all well and we’ll see . . . we 
will be back and we will see some of you. 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s indeed an honour and a privilege to rise on behalf 
of my colleagues to issue a few thank you’s as well. And I 
know a number of them will be repetitious in nature but I think 
we have that flexibility tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by thanking you. I know you are 
the first elected Speaker of this Assembly and I can tell you 
very, very sincerely on behalf of our caucus we have 
appreciated the role that you have played. I think the kind of 
responsibility that you brought to that chair has indeed 
encouraged myself as an individual to recognize just how strong 
democracy is and the fact that we have that ability to function in 
this House because of your role. And I want to thank you and 
your staff very, very sincerely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I want to recognize the Clerk’s office of 
course, with Gwenn and Greg and Margaret. Thank you very 
much for your help. It’s been a great assistance to us. To you, 
Gwenn, congratulations on your 25 years in your involvement 
in this House and congratulations on many more. 
 
To the pages, as indicated, to Melanie, Darcy, Dean, Kris and 
Sheena, thank you very much for your help. As my colleague 
has indicated, you’re not true members of the Assembly until 
you’ve become pirates — for whatever that means. 
 
I want to thank Pam Scott and Monique also for their 
assistance. Collectively, of course, Mr. Speaker, all the people 
in financial services — and I don’t want to name all of those — 
have been very, very helpful in terms of making sure that we do 
things correctly and we appreciate that. 
 
To all the staff at Hansard, I appreciate their fine work. To 
Journals staff, to the Visitor Services staff, to the cafeteria staff: 
all have helped make our stay here at the Legislative Assembly 
very, very enjoyable. 
 
Special mention I think has been made by the Deputy Speaker, 
of a lady by the name of Rose Zerr, who of course after, I 
believe, 30 years of service is now retiring. Rose, we wish you 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Three gentlemen in broadcast services of 
course spend a lot of hours watching television screens and 
making sure that we have an excellent broadcast system that is 
around the province. And I know, Mr. Speaker, you are trying 
to encourage the spread of that system, and we want to see that 
happen right across the province. So to Gary and Ihor and 
Kerry, thank you very much for all that you have done. 
 
Sergeant Pat Shaw and all of the commissioners in the building 
who keep us safe and make sure that the building functions 
well, we want to thank you. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very, very important all of us rely 
on our staffs. And I want to sincerely thank Reg Downs, our 

chief of staff, and all of the people that work here in the 
Assembly with us, in our caucus office, and back home in our 
constituency offices. They are our right hand arms, of course, 
and we want to make sure that they are thanked for all of their 
wonderful contributions. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, to all of the members opposite and to all 
of the colleagues . . . my colleagues on this side of the House, 
I’ve enjoyed the four years that we have been here very, very 
much. I’ve cherished the fact that we are here to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan and that it has indeed been an honour 
and a privilege to stand in this House, to be part of democracy 
and the running of the province of Saskatchewan. I, along with 
my colleagues, take, I think, a very special degree of pride in 
representing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the House Leader for the government has indicated, we do 
anticipate a general election and we want to ensure that we have 
an honourable election. And on behalf of my colleagues, I want 
to wish everyone well. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All the people that 
were mentioned, I would like to extend on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus our sincere appreciation. 
 
To you, Mr. Speaker, just one extra little bit of 
acknowledgement. With all due respect to your predecessors, 
you have brought a great deal of vitality not only in the House 
but also to the rural areas where . . . where young people at the 
schools really appreciate and enjoy having visited with you. 
 
So I thank you for that. I think it’s very important. 
 
I just had a thought. I know that I’ve been cautioned and sort of 
told to be very brief, and I’m going to be. Just to extend all my 
sincere best wishes to everybody as well. Just to have people 
remember that the reason we’re here is to criticize behaviour 
and not people, and I think we should remember that in our 
mutual respect for one another. 
 
And I’m hoping, as I’m sure everybody is, that we will once 
again be given the grave responsibility of representing our 
constituents — the people that employ us. I sincerely mean that. 
 
And I wish everybody well. I’m going to miss some of you. 
 
Finally, a thank you to the ministerial staff who respond on 
behalf of their cabinet ministers to those issues that we bring to 
them from our constituencies on behalf of our constituents and 
their responses to that. I appreciate that very much, as do the 
people I represent. 
 
Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2200) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair would ask if it would be acceptable 
to the members of the Assembly to also make comments before 
putting the question. If there is no objection. 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1999 

The Chair would like to join you in acknowledging the support 
of a number of people. And I understand that I will be 
somewhat repetitive to some of your remarks as well. But I 
would first of all like to recognize someone who is seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, and I appreciate the recognition you’ve also 
given her. 
 
I’d like to just add a little bit to the information about her 
contribution to the Assembly, not just now but over a period of 
time. I’m referring of course to Rose Zerr who is seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, together with her colleague from Journals, 
Marilyn Kotylak. 
 
And, hon. members, with the adjournment of the House this 
day, that this day will mark the last sitting day in the career of 
the Legislative Assembly’s longest serving staff member, Rose 
Zerr. Rose has served the Legislative Assembly as Journals 
Clerk for 30 years which has already been remarked, and she 
will be retiring on June 30 of this year. 
 
The Journals Clerk is responsible on a daily basis for the 
overnight production of the Votes and Proceedings and the 
order paper, and at the close of the session, the Journals Clerk is 
responsible for the preparation of the Journals of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, the volume that constitutes the legal 
and the official record of the business conducted by this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And almost single-handedly, Rose Zerr has piloted the Journals 
branch through successive changes in production technology 
from clip and paste mock-ups to hot lead printing, through 
paper tape readers and linotron typesetters, and through three 
successively more sophisticated computer publishing systems to 
the current of desktop publishing and Internet distribution. 
 
Rose’s knowledge of Journals makes her our resident expert on 
the practices and the precedents and the history of the House 
proceedings. She will be greatly missed, believe me, and I 
would ask her to stand and to receive your appreciation for her 
service during this session and for the past 30 years, and we 
wish her well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — May I join you as well in expressing 
appreciation to Marian Powell and the Legislative Library staff 
who nourished our minds during the session, as well as Trent 
Brears and the staff in the Dome Cafeteria who nourished our 
tummies. To Marilyn Borowski and Linda Kaminski and the 
staff of financial services, administrative services, who have 
ensured that we’ve always had the resources to serve our 
constituents and we’ve had them in a timely manner. 
 
I also want to, on your behalf, send thank you’s to Marianne 
Morgan who has done a commendable job filling in leading the 
visitor services, and her staff; to Garnet Holtzmann, Alisson 
Gartner and Kathy Beck of the Legislative Law Clerk’s office; 
to Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat Shaw and the security staff who 
provide the security with such dignity; to Gary Ward, Ihor 
Sywanyk, and Kerry Bond in the broadcast services as has been 
mentioned who are sending the same signal extremely 
effectively across the province. 
 

And also to the tireless troupers at Hansard, under the 
leadership of Judy Brennan and Donelda Klein. Hon. members, 
Hansard is produced and on-line within short hours of 
adjournment each day. And this is a work that is done with 
good cheer by the unsung heroes of the session, and in many 
ways they are the dynamic team who are the backbone of the 
public record of our proceedings. 
 
I also want to send my thanks to Monique Lovatt and Pam Scott 
and the Clerk’s office. 
 
And to also say thanks to the staff of the Speaker’s office for 
their daily assistance in facilitating the access of the members to 
the Speaker — to Margaret Kleisinger, Linda Spence, and 
Rhonda Romanuk. Some have called them superb and others 
have called them incredible, and who am I to argue with that. 
 
Hon. members you’ve recognized the work of our pages and I’d 
like to reintroduce them to you this evening the same way we 
did on the first day of the fourth session of the twenty-third 
legislature and to ask them to stand and individually receive, 
finally your appreciation for the service to you over the session. 
 
And let me then reintroduce them to you again in the order that 
I did on day one: Melanie Bratkoski; is Darcy here tonight, so 
to Darcy Criddle as well; and to Dean Mulhall; and Kris Parker; 
and finally Sheena Simonson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I join you as well in expressing appreciation 
to the work of the Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, for this session and the 
past 25 years, but particularly for the four sessions that it has 
been my privilege to serve as your presiding officer. To Deputy 
Clerk, Greg Putz, as well to Assistant Clerk, Meta Woods, who 
have provided sound and reliable procedural advice to you and 
to me. 
 
Hon. members, it’s been my privilege to serve this House with 
very capable support and the services of the Deputy Speaker 
and the Deputy Chair of Committees. It has been our objective 
as presiding officers to be a team that prides ourself in serving 
you with fairness and with consistency. And I thank the other 
presiding officers for your efforts. 
 
And finally, hon. members, I want to say my final word of 
thanks to you as this may be the final meeting of the 
twenty-third legislature. Let me say thank you to you all for 
your service to the people of Saskatchewan — especially to 
those of you hon. members who will not be standing for 
re-election. To those of you standing again, I hope that the 
process of democracy will serve both you and your constituents 
well. 
 
And finally, hon. members, those of us elected to serve in this 
twenty-third legislature have been concerned for some time 
about the respect that the people of this great province have for 
this noble institution. And surely we have no right to expect that 
those people will hold higher respect for the institution than we 
exhibit toward each other. 
 
And in that regard I have noted that during this session, hon. 
members, you have been vigorous in your participation, to state 



May 6, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

the obvious, but equally true. And perhaps more importantly, 
you have avoided character attacks and generally conducted 
your business with a high level of respect for one another and 
for this institution. I commend your commitment. 
 
And I thank you for the honour that you have given me to serve 
as your Chair and your representative and I say thank you to 
you all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 10:09 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 21 - The Coroners Act, 1999 
Bill No. 5 - The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1999 
Bill No. 20 - The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 

1999 
Bill No. 2 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 19 - The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 1 - The Child and Family Services Amendment 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 15 - The University of Regina Amendment Act, 

1999 
Bill No. 302 - The Group Medical Services Act, 1999 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts Act 
Bill No. 304 - The Saskatchewan Medical Association Act 
Bill No. 301 - The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 22 - The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act 
Bill No. 29 - The Health Information Protection Act 
Bill No. 26 - The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 16 - The Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 32 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

1999 
Bill No. 33 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 34 - The Education and Health Tax Amendment 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 40 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 35 - The Land Information Services Facilitation Act 
Bill No. 30 - The Cemeteries Act, 1999 
Bill No. 31 - The Funeral and Cremation Services Act 
Bill No. 37 - The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 38 - The Litter Control Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 39 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 11 - The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 
Bill No. 41 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 1999 
Bill No. 42 - The New Generation Co-operatives Act 
Bill No. 43 - The New Generation Co-operatives 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1999 / Loi de 
1999 apportant des modifications corrélatives à 
la loi intitulée The New Generation 

Co-operatives Act 
Bill No. 36 - The Animal Protection Act, 1999 
Bill No. 44 - The Midwifery Act 
Bill No. 25 - The Education Amendment Act, 1999 / Loi de 

1999 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 45 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 
1999 and on March 31, 2000 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:14 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned until the 
call of the Chair. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:16 p.m. 
 
 


