





























































Hansard: December 13, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 December 13, 1999 
 

159 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could just reiterate 
some of the comments I made before adjournment . . . Even 
though the members opposite said they’ve heard it before, I’ll 
repeat it one more time, at least the part about the special, 
talented person that we have in our community, amongst many 
others. 
 
As I had indicated earlier, we have an artist by the name of Ms. 
Jacquie Berting who works with lamp-worked glass. And as I 
mentioned earlier, she’s created a creation called Glass Wheat 
Field which has toured across Canada. It’s made up of 14,000 
waist-high glass wheat stalks, each individually hand cut and 
lamp worked. Her work is a symbol of hope, dedicated to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, and that’s something that we 
certainly need at this point in our history. 
 
If I could turn my attention, Mr. Speaker, to a few comments on 
the health care services that we have in this province today — 
or don’t have as my colleague says. 
 
During the last decade, rural Saskatchewan has seen an erosion 
of health services. Closures of hospitals and losses of doctors 
are all too common. In the past we could find many medical 
services in many of our communities. Now we are forced to 
travel longer distances, mainly to large urban centres. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I heard a member from the government 
side of the House say that there is no basis to many of the 
complaints we hear about our health care system. In fact the 
member went on to say that a lot of the complaints were, and I 
quote, “figments of people’s imaginations.” Figments of 
people’s imaginations — is that the government’s position on 
hospital closures, long waiting lists, and reduced services, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order. Order please. I 
would ask that all hon. members please keep it down so that we 
can hear the speech from the hon. member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, since 
being elected I have had more complaints about health care than 
any other topic. Things such as waiting 10 to 12 months for 
elective surgery, being on the operating table and then told to get 
dressed and go home because there’s no bed for you. Are these 
figments of the people’s imagination? I think not. 
 

Seniors make up a good portion of the residents in our towns and 
villages. During the election campaign, senior after senior 
voiced their concerns over the never-ending utility rate 
increases that we’ve seen in the last eight years. 
 
Comments such as “every time my power and gas bill goes up I 
have less money to spend on food and clothing since I’m living 
on a fixed income” were routinely heard on the doorsteps. 
 
Seniors also have concerns over long-term care and home care. 
And even when the NDP (New Democratic Party) decided to 
add more long-term care beds, they continued to play their 
games with their partners, the local municipal governments. 
Take the case of the Golden Acres project in Wynyard where 
the portion that was to be a hundred per cent funded by local 
municipalities has nearly doubled from $435,000 to $800,000. 
What they have done is they’ve shifted cost-shared items to the 
locally funded responsibilities. 
 
As the student numbers continue to decline in our rural schools, 
new and innovative ways must be found to ensure that our 
students have proper access to the education system. We cannot 
afford to have a two-tier system that disadvantages students 
from rural Saskatchewan. At the same time, however, we must 
address the issue of education tax on farmland. I was happy to 
see that the government is finally going to look at this problem. 
However, until there’s evidence of this in the budget, the jury is 
still out. 
 
Post-secondary education is often more costly for rural students 
simply because education and training facilities are not 
available in their hometowns. Methods must be found to bring 
more training courses to rural centres. Often there are the 
physical resources available and all that’s needed is the supplies 
and instructors. This is already happening to some extent and I 
encourage the expansion of this type of training wherever 
possible. 
 
We have four First Nation communities located within the 
boundaries of Last Mountain-Touchwood. I have seen the 
successes and failures of First Nations people. I know the sense 
of hopelessness that some of their young people have. It is my 
hope that I can play a small part in helping First Nation people 
have more successes than failures. And to that extent I pledge to 
work with these communities in the way they deem suitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the beginning of this address, 
Last Mountain-Touchwood has a history, a long history, of 
being very politically aware. For 50 years the riding was 
considered a bellwether riding as we always elected a member 
to the government side of the Assembly. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I 
said 50 years. But that all changed September 16. Prior to ’95, 
Wynyard and area were added to Last Mountain-Touchwood as 
part of the constituency reorganization. Since 1944, Wynyard 
has always been represented by a CCF-NDP (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) — that is, until 
September 16, 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what caused such a dramatic shift in voting 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

patterns? Perhaps the comments of a lifelong NDP supporter 
can explain. He commented, and I quote, “these guys (referring 
to the government) don’t give a damn about rural 
Saskatchewan, and they don’t listen to the people”. As the 
election night showed, a lot of people felt the same way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, please. I’d just ask 
the member to choose his words judiciously. 
 
Mr. Hart: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I know this province 
can accomplish much more. We have all the ingredients to be a 
have province. We have the people. We have the resources. We 
have the technology. What we lack is vision and political will. 
And that, Mr. Speaker is what we in the Saskatchewan Party will 
provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment put forth by 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is, I say most 
sincerely, a real pleasure to be able to stand in this House again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I have to admit I thought a lot about what I 
should say and what I could say at the start of this twenty-fourth 
legislature. 
 
It’s been interesting times, obviously, since the election. It has 
been very interesting watching on this side of the House as 
we’ve brought two parties together to form a government, a 
coalition government, for the first time in 70 years. It’s been an 
interesting time to be here and witness as we try to bring 
Saskatchewan into the new century. 
 
And I have to say that I’m very, very pleased to be back as the 
representative for Regina South. The members opposite clearly 
believed I wouldn’t be. I dare say some members on our side 
dared or perhaps hoped that I wouldn’t be. But I am in fact very 
pleased to be back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — The election . . . I have to say I enjoyed this 
election. And perhaps that’s a strange thing to say, considering 
how the result turned out. But I enjoyed very much the dialogue 
that in Regina South we had with various constituents about 
what they believed should be happening, what we should be 
doing differently, and their sense of where the province should 
be going as we got ready to enter the new century. 
 
I was very, very enthused by the positive approach so many 
people had in my riding, their real sense of hope and optimism 
about where our province was going. And I think that that is 
something . . . it’s a message I don’t want lost in this debate. 
This is something I don’t want lost in this debate because 
despite how dark things are at times in our province, I think all 
of us still believe things will get better. And that was certainly 
the case during the election. 
 

I heard time and again people certainly expressed concern about 
health care; they certainly expressed concern that we need to 
make a higher priority of tax reduction. But there was 
underlying that a sense of confidence that Saskatchewan people 
had the ability, had the resources, and had the sense of direction 
that we could in fact remould this province and get it ready for 
the 21st century. I was very encouraged by that. That’s not to 
say that this was an easy election. Regina South, as you know, 
is always an interesting and very, very involved riding. People 
have a great interest in politics; they follow it relatively closely; 
and they have numerous opinions. There is often a very big 
difference of opinion within the constituency as to what the 
direction should be taken. 
 
The coalition government is a real positive in this regard. It 
allows both of the parties — the Liberal Party and the New 
Democratic Party, the New Democratic Party which I represent 
— it allows us the opportunity to refashion some of our election 
platform to something that is more acceptable with the 
population. 
 
The problem with going out into an election, and the members 
opposite will know this, is that you put forward what you think 
is your best possible platform and often you get feedback from 
that during that campaign. And it’s always a debate. I’ve 
listened over this past week as members opposite have gone 
after the member for Saskatoon Northwest for some of his 
election commitments. And it is a real conundrum if you think 
about it. Because we campaign on the one hand on a platform 
that we put forth saying this is what we want to do, and yet the 
people also expect us to listen to what they’ve told us in the 
campaign. And they expect us to make the changes to be more 
in line with what they believe. 
 
This coalition and this opportunity to be here now in this 
legislature provides us with an opportunity to refashion — I 
think on all sides — for all parties to come forward with a 
platform and with policy which will meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people and meet those desires. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — That’s not just something on our side, Mr. 
Speaker. This, too, is an opportunity for the Saskatchewan Party 
opposite. Clearly their party did not receive the support in urban 
Saskatchewan it had hoped for. I know that they had certainly 
targeted my riding and they had hoped for greater support there 
than what they ended up with. This gives them a chance, too, to 
divorce the parts of their platform that were clearly unpopular, 
clearly unsuccessful, and left them without representation in 
some 32 seats. This gives them that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 
and I hope that they step away from the political rhetoric, and I 
hope they step away from the inflammatory comments, and I 
hope that they take the opportunity to review how it is that they 
can make their policies acceptable to all the people of 
Saskatchewan as we are trying to do on this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it would be easy for us to 
simply say now that there are 32 of us on this side of the House, 
that this — representing primarily urban ridings — that our 
objective is to do the best possible that we can for urban 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

Saskatchewan that sent us here. But not a single speaker has 
said that on this side. Every single speaker on this side of the 
House that has spoken thus far — and I think the ministers in 
the question period answers— have shown that we have a real 
desire to represent all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And in this regard we will fundamentally 
differ, fundamentally differ from the government of Grant 
Devine in 1986 that found itself in similar, although somewhat 
different circumstances. That scorched-earth policy that that 
government embarked on, that mean-spirited attack on urban 
Saskatchewan — there will be no such action on this side, even 
though we find ourselves in presently difficult circumstances 
with under-representation in the rural areas. 
 
And the fact that in this legislature, a short week ago, that we 
gathered for a historic meeting of the Agriculture Committee, 
that we invited farm leaders to come on to the floor of this 
Assembly and present their case, I think says a lot about how 
we are interested in hearing, in learning, in listening, and in 
representing rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this legislature will no doubt be 
a very interesting one over the next four years of its life. It’s 
interesting because we have an opportunity to really come and 
move beyond just the political rhetoric. We do have an 
opportunity to work on a new platform, on new policies. We’re 
at a very historic opportunity. 
 
And I think the question is whether the members opposite can 
in fact set aside the meanness, set aside the partisanship and 
actually come to the Assembly with the desire to work on 
policy. It is difficult — and none of the members opposite, with 
the exception of the member from Moosomin, have ever sat in 
the government — it is difficult for a governing party to come 
forward and say that it has made mistakes. We’ve come forward 
and said that we’ve made mistakes, and we understand that. 
 
Well the member from Watrous sits in the back row and heckles 
— and that’s welcome, welcome to the House, I’d like to 
welcome her — and says no, in fact, that we did not . . . we 
have never admitted a mistake, this isn’t true. We’ve admitted 
that we’ve made mistakes. The fact that we lost so many 
members, and I have to say the fact that on election night I 
watched so many friends go down to defeat, is difficult. But I 
like to think that we’ve learned from that. I welcome tonight the 
presence of Vi Stanger who I consider to be a very good friend 
and a very capable member for the constituency of 
Lloydminster for some eight years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say, earlier today we 
welcomed the fact that the former member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood was here in the House. And I look at 
these people and I think it’s refreshing that they continue to still 
feel such a commitment to the political life of this province that 

they are interested in coming here and watching this. 
 
I thought it was sad to see the members opposite heckle Vi 
Stanger when she came into the House tonight. I’m not really 
sure that that shows the type of sportsmanship or gamesmanship 
or respect, frankly, for this Assembly that we would expect 
from a party that talks so much about it. When we get to the 
point that we’re heckling the former members who come to 
witness our proceedings, I think it’s sad because we’re 
watching a party opposite talk about how it wants to reinvent 
itself. It’s supposed to represent the best of what’s 
Saskatchewan and yet all I see is a rather mean-spirited 
approach and it’s unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, before I leave the topic of the 
election, I want to say that there are a couple of other issues I’ve 
heard over the last couple of weeks . . . or last week as we’ve 
listened to debate. 
 
The members opposite have time and again said the people of 
Saskatchewan elected a minority government. The people of 
Saskatchewan elected 58 members to come to this Assembly. 
Every single member in this House — every single member in 
this House — won the right to sit in this Assembly. The fact 
that we would find two parties of like view who want to form a 
government I think speaks a great deal about the positive, 
optimistic approach that we can have as we get ready to go into 
this new century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I want to welcome, in particular, the new 
member for Saskatoon Northwest to the House. Grant 
Whitmore, the previous member, was a good personal friend of 
mine and I’m certainly saddened that Grant is not joining us 
here. But I join with the Premier and others who have said that 
the member for Northwest does bring a very sincere and new 
perspective to government. And I welcome that because I think 
that we need that and we welcome that as a government. 
 
I also want to welcome my good friend, the member from North 
Battleford, over to this side of the House. The member, as all 
members who served in the previous legislature will know, has 
a very — I hate to say the word good — but he has sometimes a 
very good sense of humour, although often I found myself at 
the other end of it or the point of his jokes, but that is fine. I 
find that he as well brings a very sincere interest in making 
government work and making this province better. And having 
watched that through cabinet planning sessions and other 
discussions, I want to tell you that I really do feel good about 
the agenda that this government is laying forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss at this point if I didn’t also 
congratulate you on your re-election as the member from 
Melville and your appointment, or your election, as Speaker of 
the Assembly. It is indeed a high honour, one enjoyed by very 
few members. And so on behalf of myself and my constituents, 
a most sincere congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Let me turn for a second — for a few 
minutes rather — to the agenda that this coalition government, 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

this NDP-led coalition government has developed. And I think 
that it speaks volumes about what we believe for Saskatchewan, 
and it speaks volumes about what we learned on September 16 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member opposite says 
we learned nothing and yet his leader is quoted in the paper as 
saying we took half of their platform and implemented it. 
 
I read through the card that was sent around with the Throne 
Speech. The first one talks about helping families make ends 
meet. And there are three points under here, the Partnership for 
Prosperity economic development plan that we’re working on. 
And I think that it is real positive. It is something that, as we 
move forward, we will continue to see why Saskatchewan 
business, Saskatchewan workers, and Saskatchewan people 
continue to support this government. It is a positive economic 
agenda. It is an economic agenda that in the past has allowed 
Saskatchewan to lead this nation in economic growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And it’s something that the members 
opposite often forget. We have a tendency to dwell too much on 
the negatives. Granted we like to dwell on the things that we 
can change, that we can improve, but we should also stand and 
recognize the fact that Saskatchewan has been a leader in this 
nation in economic growth. Even today, with the serious 
problems facing rural Saskatchewan, there’s still a prediction 
that the Saskatchewan economy will grow. 
 
This is a positive sign. It’s a sign that our economy is more 
diversified today than it has been at any point in its history. It’s 
a sign that Saskatchewan people are continuing to work. It’s a 
sign that Saskatchewan is taking advantage of the resource 
wealth it has in front of it. It’s a sign that this province can meet 
the needs of its people as we enter into the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one thing that we did hear loud and clear, 
though, is Saskatchewan taxpayers said that they wanted . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleague from Regina South. Colleagues in the legislature on 
both sides, it’s my great pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to all members, two very special 
people in your gallery. We have seated up there Norma Ash and 
her grandson, Tyler Ash. These two people did tremendous 
work through . . . Some of this debate is about an election. I’m 
delighted to report that they were volunteers in the good 
constituency of Regina Coronation Park, and I ask all members 
to welcome Norma and Tyler. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as I had the floor I will take 
advantage of the opportunity to also introduce two members 
who are seated behind the bar, two former members . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I didn’t know I needed leave, as I 
had the floor. But I’ll request leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t aware 
that when I had the floor making my textual comments that I 
needed leave to continue. But I would like to introduce a very 
good friend of mine, Sharon Murrell, who represented the 
Battleford-Cut Knife riding during the last Assembly, as well as 
the former member from Redberry, Mr. Walter Jess. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I take it I don’t need leave to continue my 
comments. I don’t dare ask for them for fear they wouldn’t be 
given. 
 
But as I return to the subject before us, the Throne Speech, I do 
want to talk a little bit about the income tax situation. People, 
particularly in Regina South, brought up time and again the fact 
that they wanted us to reduce personal income taxes. Over the 
past five budgets, since the budget was balanced by this NDP 
government, since the budget was balanced, we have reduced 
taxes in every one of those years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that we will continue on in that 
direction: to reduce taxes. People have told us that what they 
want is they want to see a reduction in income taxes. We agree. 
The method by which we go about reducing those, though, is of 
some discussion, and I’m very pleased that we have received 
the report from the personal income tax . . . that we have 
received the report of the personal income tax review 
commission. I think that it puts forward some very interesting 
points. It is a plan which in large part I support. Personally I 
believe that it meets the needs of the Regina South 
constituency. 
 
There are, of course, some issues that we are going to have to 
give some thought to. The question of expanding the sales tax, 
the question of what items that it should be applied to, as well 
as the depth of those cuts, is certainly of interest, and I hear of 
some debate in my constituency. 
 
I am, however, optimistic because at this point the discussion is 
about what the form of that tax cut should take and not whether 
or not there should be one. And that is in fact a very positive 
sign, and I think says a lot again about the direction this 
government is going in. 
 
The plan before us, obviously put forward by Jack Vicq and his 
committee, is a very aggressive one which will potentially put 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

70 per cent of Saskatchewan’s people on par with Alberta 
taxpayers. That’s worth repeating because the party opposite, 
although it called itself the Saskatchewan Party during the last 
legislature, certainly talked a great deal about Alberta. Let me 
repeat this: 70 per cent of Saskatchewan taxpayers would be on 
par with Alberta on taxes but they would continue to enjoy 
Saskatchewan’s medicare. This is the positive, that we are 
looking at a proposal which today can give us Saskatchewan’s 
medicare, continue to fund Saskatchewan’s social programs and 
our safety net, but allow Saskatchewan people significant tax 
reduction. 
 
That’s not to say there aren’t detractors and that’s not to say 
there isn’t some legitimate debate about what we do on the sales 
tax. But in the coming months as we prepare for the budget this 
spring, that is what the debate in this province will focus in on, 
is to what extent do we balance out an expanded sales tax on the 
one hand and a significant reduction in income tax on the other. 
 
The good news is we can tell Saskatchewan people that yet 
again under an NDP government there will be significant tax 
reduction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, people in Regina South felt 
confident in this election that the economy was headed in the 
right direction. They agreed that we were in a position now to 
be able to more aggressively cut taxes. 
 
On the whole, I represent one of the more affluent ridings in the 
province. I want to tell you that they are also concerned about 
those who are not in such a good position and those people in 
our province that do not share the wealth as equally as the rest 
of us do and do not share our opportunities. 
 
I was particularly pleased, and I know many others were, to 
hear a report a few weeks ago that showed that Saskatchewan 
was the only province in Canada, the only province in Canada 
to reduce the rate of child poverty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Ten years after the Parliament of Canada 
voted to get rid of child poverty, the only province that has 
succeeded in reducing it is not wealthy Alberta, it is not tax-cut 
Ontario, it is not British Columbia, it is not any one of the 
provinces except Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And if anything, I think anything says that 
this Premier and this government deserve to govern another 
four years, it’s the success on that alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, there aren’t a lot of poor kids 
in my riding, but there are a lot of people that understand the 
real cost of poverty to our communities. And there’s a lot of 
people who look at it, not simply at what the benefit is to them, 
but they look at Saskatchewan as a large community. That’s 
why I’m pleased that they support issues like our action plan for 

children. That’s why I’m pleased they support our initiatives in 
the community schools. And frankly representing an entirely 
urban riding . . . that’s why I’m pleased that they support the 
call for a billion dollars in farm aid for ailing farm families. 
 
That’s what Saskatchewan’s about. It’s not a divisive province. 
It’s not a province that says, just what’s in it for me or how does 
it benefit me most. It’s a province that everyone looks at and 
says, we’re a million people. Yes, we’re a large, diversified 
economy, but you know they’re still my neighbours, and I’m 
still my brother’s keeper. And I think that that is a real positive 
and a real attribute, and it says a lot about the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it also says a lot about 
what the Saskatchewan Party has got to ask themselves in the 
coming months because in order to truly live up to the name, 
the Saskatchewan Party, they will need, in fact, to start 
appealing to all of Saskatchewan. It’s not simply good enough 
to appeal to one base. It’s not simply good enough to divide 
rural against urban, Indian against white; poor against affluent. 
That’s not the way for us to be able to pull together as a 
province. That may be the way that some people are able to 
gain political success, but that is not what Saskatchewan people 
expect from their leaders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is a challenge for 
this 24th legislature . . . is to find a way for us to bridge our 
geographic constituencies and the special interests and the 
various interests that affect us so that we can find a way to 
come up with public policy and legislation and projects that are 
in fact able to address all the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first speech I ever gave in this Assembly I was 
very pleased to be able to second the address in reply to the 
Throne Speech, a job very ably done this time by my new 
colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland. And I want to say at that 
point, members who were here in the 23rd legislature will 
remember that I spoke at some length about post-secondary 
education. I am very pleased that over that time period much 
has happened in post-secondary education, and I am very 
pleased that we are in the position to be able to move forward 
into a new direction in terms of dealing with post-secondary 
education. 
 
The University of Regina abuts my riding although it’s not 
actually in it, and we watch on an almost daily basis that 
campus changes as we see new buildings going up. Certainly 
the growth and development of the research park has been a 
very, very positive thing in southern Regina. 
 
Indeed it will be a very positive thing for southern 
Saskatchewan with the new Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre which is being constructed. This will, as members 
opposite likely know, will enable us to move more new 
technology in and hopefully expand and lengthen the amount of 
time which our oil reserves will be able to be used. This should 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

also provide us with an opportunity to find more 
environmentally friendly mechanisms of extracting and using 
those petroleum resources. Regina is very, very pleased to see 
this kind of growth. We are obviously very happy to have it in 
this technology centre located in Regina, and we are very 
pleased about the role that the Opportunities Corporation, the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, and our universities 
are playing in terms of developing that. 
 
I am also pleased though that we have not simply done as 
previous governments have, and looked at it in terms of 
building monuments as a way of dealing with post-secondary 
education. The fact that the two parties have gathered together 
on this side of the Assembly as a coalition government, both 
dedicated themselves to tuition relief, I think speaks a great deal 
also about our view of where Saskatchewan should be. 
 
Saskatchewan people have, for generations, put a very high 
emphasis on education. Families that I know have come from 
other countries have really instilled in them, in their children, 
the need to continue on with their education and they put a high 
priority on it. Hence, why we have such a wonderful institution 
in the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. It really is a 
testament to the foresight of political leaders, both in this 
legislature and throughout our communities, in terms of 
developing that sense of learning, that sense of scholarship, that 
Saskatchewan people have. 
 
Clearly today the University of Regina is another centre of 
excellence in our country and provides a great access to many 
people in southern Saskatchewan and throughout the nation to 
come and study and learn and add to Saskatchewan’s cultural 
and academic life. 
 
The fact that the Liberal and New Democratic parties would 
both put forward platforms to try and make our post-secondary 
educational institutions more financially accessible I think is a 
very positive initiative. I can tell you that, as I was campaigning 
on the doorsteps, it is not the most popular initiative, but it was 
certainly a very progressive one. 
 
Again this is a case where a lot of the debate was over how we 
should best reduce the cost of education, and not a debate about 
whether we should reduce it at all. This is in fact one of the 
reasons why I believe the Saskatchewan Party found little 
support in our major communities, and not simply Saskatoon 
and Regina, P.A. (Prince Albert), and Moose Jaw at this point 
I’m talking about, but other communities. 
 
The community of Weyburn is an example. That city — a large 
urban centre, a small urban centre, whatever you care to call it 
— did not support the Saskatchewan Party. And yet it’s 
interesting that the members opposite neglect to mention that. 
 
One of the other challenges the members opposite will have is 
in fact to ensure that as they stand and talk and represent their 
ridings that they are representing all of their ridings, all of their 
constituency. 
 
I listened to the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy speak this 
afternoon and read off to us — which was good because I 
hadn’t seen them — read off the poll results for various of the 
rural polls in her riding, with the obvious view that what we 

should do is pay attention to this because we did not fare well in 
them at all. However I thought it interesting that she neglected 
to read off the poll results from the city of Weyburn which 
incidentally she also represents. 
 
But I hope that at some point the members opposite, as they set 
aside their bravado and actually get down to the business of 
doing the work for their constituents, will in fact attempt to 
involve all the constituents, those that voted for them and those 
that voted against them, in their decision making. I know that 
that is a challenge all of us have. I can tell you it is a difficult 
thing, particularly for new members. I was elected to this 
legislature for the first time in 1995 and it was again a difficult 
election. There was a lot of different views on what should be 
done. It was a very close election. 
 
We’ve worked hard over that time period and I’ve worked very 
hard to try and gain a better appreciation for those who didn’t 
vote for me, and I’ve tried to represent them as well as those 
who voted with me. It really is a real test that members 
opposite, particularly the new ones, will have and it is a 
challenge. But I think we all need to remember that we do 
represent all of the people, all of the constituents, not simply 
those who happened to vote with our party. 
 
I say that not to lecture the members opposite but simply to 
offer to all new members throughout the Assembly that this is 
really a challenge. When I was elected to this House in 1995, I 
was 26 years old and I was a . . . It is hard to now think of 
myself as a more senior member of the Assembly, but I hope 
that I can tell you personally, Mr. Speaker, that I hope that I 
have learned from that term that the people afforded me so early 
in my life and I hope that I will be able to serve the people of 
Regina South ably and fairly over the next four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak very briefly on one other issue and 
that is the issue of agriculture. I am not by any means a farm 
boy. I grew up in small-town Saskatchewan, in Kindersley, as a 
child and lived there for most of my boyhood and clearly have 
some understanding of rural issues. But it is . . . the task that we 
find ourselves with today, looking at the agricultural situation, 
is a daunting one. It is one in which the solutions are not nearly 
as simple as the members opposite may wish us to believe. 
 
I want them to know that all of us on this side, including those 
of us that represent affluent urban ridings, are deeply concerned 
about this issue and very interested in making sure that 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry and Saskatchewan farm 
families are well represented. 
 
I’ve told you some about my experience during the campaign 
door knocking. What I didn’t tell you is that . . . personally it 
was a very difficult campaign for me in that my grandfather 
died on September 2, which as members will know fell in the 
middle of the campaign. My grandfather farmed at Alsask all of 
his life. He moved to Canada in 1925 and took up farming in 
Alsask, served as a RM (rural municipality) councillor in the 
RM of Milton, and with the exception of two years during the 
Depression, spent his entire time basically in Alsask. He was a 
proud . . . proud to be a farmer, he was a proud member of the 
Wheat Pool, and a proud supporter of the CCF and the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought it was interesting that . . . well I will tell 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

this story; I wasn’t going to. During the campaign when my 
grandfather died, we had some debate in the family about what 
to do for services. Part of the family, particularly the 
grandchildren that were still in farming, were trying to get the 
crops off; others of us, myself in particular, were involved in 
the election campaign. And because the campaign was, at that 
point, difficult in Regina South and we were in quite a fight, 
there was some discussion that I wasn’t involved in, by the 
family, as to what we would do about funeral arrangements. 
 
The decision was, from my aunts and uncles and my parents, 
that they had wanted those kids, those grandkids who were 
involved in farming, to stay on the fields. They had wanted to 
bring in the crop. They wanted those of us, myself in particular, 
who were involved in political life to continue to work in that 
because they thought that that was a good, living, ongoing 
testament to what my grandfather’s life was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — We respected those wishes and I continued 
campaigning that weekend. But I can tell you that it is 
something that I really do still wonder about because I do feel a 
sense of remorse for having missed that service. 
 
I was interested to listen to the comments from the new member 
for Estevan the other day, and she read a statement about living 
on the farm that is, I thought, very poetic. It was also the back 
of my grandfather’s memorial service program. And so I 
thought back to that and it was . . . I do believe that all of us, no 
matter where we live in Saskatchewan, do still feel a real 
commitment to our farm roots. And I want to thank the member 
for Estevan for including that in her speech. It was very 
thought-provoking and I found it very touching to hear it again. 
 
I hope the members opposite, as they look across at us, 
representing Saskatoon and Regina and P.A. and Moose Jaw 
ridings — sorry to my colleague from Yorkton and the North, 
Yorkton, Meadow Lake, and other communities — I hope they 
don’t simply look at us as city slickers who are somehow 
removed and distant. I hope that they do take us sincerely at our 
word that we are interested in the problems of rural 
Saskatchewan and are interested in moving forward and 
working towards those changes. That’s not to say we’re going 
to not from time to time disagree. You can be an urban-based 
party and have the best agriculture policy and perhaps see no 
reward and gain nothing out of it. You can be a party that 
represents rural Saskatchewan and perhaps have a somewhat 
less good agriculture platform, from a public policy standpoint, 
and perhaps you reap more reward. But I think all 58 of us in 
this Assembly are very interested in fixing the farm situation in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say that I do 
welcome this opportunity to stand in this legislature as a 
member of the 24th Assembly to represent once again a very 
fine constituency, one that I have a great affection for — the 
constituency of Regina South — and represent the good people 
there. And I wish you and other members all the best. Thank 
you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am honoured here today, Mr. Speaker, to be able to stand before 
you and this Assembly to the first session of the 24th legislature. 
 
As the ending of 1999 draws to a close, a new beginning of the 
new year of optimism and hope awaits us. I want to take this time 
also, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate all the members of the 
Assembly on their victories as MLAs and also, Mr. Speaker, to 
congratulate yourself on your position of House Speaker. I also 
want to take this time to congratulate Lynda Haverstock on her 
announcement of her position as the upcoming Lieutenant 
Governor. And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my family — 
my wife, Sheila, my sons, Micky and Deny, my oldest son, 
Newton, and his fiancee, Tanya, and the love of my life, my 
granddaughter, Shaylynn. I want to thank them, Mr. Speaker, for 
their encouragement and help they gave me during my quest as an 
MLA. I also want to thank my election executive and the 
constituency members for all the help they did in making my 
dream come true. 
 
(1945) 
 
I want to thank my mother for entrenching in me the difference 
between right and wrong, and to know the difference between the 
words yes and no. I want to thank my brothers and my sister for 
. . . there’s too many of them to name as I come from a large 
family. There are seven brothers and one sister in my family. 
Half of them live in Alberta, working. The other half live in 
Saskatchewan. They are farmers. The reason they are farmers is 
because once you’re tied down to the farm in Saskatchewan 
now it’s pretty hard to get rid of. And as years come, it’s going 
to be harder to sell that farm. 
 
We are losing so many, many young people to our neighbouring 
provinces. Why? The reason is, is because here there are no 
jobs, and there’s too much taxes like PST (provincial sales tax). 
That’s why they’re going elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency is a very large area in 
north-central Saskatchewan. It stretches from west of Glaslyn to 
near the outskirts of Prince Albert. It stretches north to Big 
River and south to Duck Lake. In my constituency, there are 
three major centres: Big River, Shellbrook, and my hometown 
of Spiritwood where still today I am mayor as the member from 
North Battleford pointed out. As mayor of the town, I can 
frequently see government off-loading onto municipalities. It is 
getting tough. It is getting to be a point that government, urban 
and municipal, have to do more for their citizens with less 
dollars. 
 
I also own and operate a family recreation business. I am a 
small businessman. I know the problems of small business. PST 
is killing our small towns. I don’t mind going broke if I’ve done 
it on my own accord, but I hate when governments share in the 
breaking of businesses. 
 
I am also, Mr. Speaker, a farmer, and I know the problems of 
agriculture. The Throne Speech says many farm families are 
back to depression era incomes. Without much needed income 
to the farm sector immediately, many farms will fall by the 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

wayside in the new year. The backbone of this province is first 
farming and second small business, and neither one is doing 
good right now. Farmers are going into receivership; businesses 
are moving to Alberta. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what would the urban population say if 
income was cut by 35 per cent as was in the agriculture 
income? There’s an old saying: give a farmer a dollar, and he’ll 
spend it in town. Well right now, Mr. Speaker, the farmer 
doesn’t have a dollar, and there isn’t much left of the town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a young man had a dream once, a dream to change 
the focus of Saskatchewan, to change the direction of 
government, to make the lives of all brighter, to restore faith 
and prosperity to all citizens. In order for this to be done, eight 
courageous men and women formed a party, the party called the 
Saskatchewan Party. Under the leadership of Elwin Hermanson, 
myself, and 15 other MLAs, we are now the opposition party, a 
party devoted to holding the government of today accountable 
for the decisions they make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the members opposite to get things 
straight. We are not called Sask-a-Tories. We are the 
Saskatchewan Party, a party, Mr. Speaker, that on September 
16, 1999, the voters of Saskatchewan gave us 60 per cent of the 
vote. They were tired of the worn-out NDP policies, tired of the 
old ideas, and tired of watching the province fall by the 
wayside. Hope is dwindling for many of the citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Members opposite keep referring to the 15 billion provincial 
debt left by the PCs (Progressive Conservative). They forget 6 
billion of that debt was accumulated by our NDP government to 
start with. It now sits at 18 billion. Mr. Speaker, you can’t keep 
referring back to the debt. The government has had eight years 
to do something. What have they done? 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, the highest taxes, worst job creation, 
health care beyond repair, education in turmoil, and many, 
many people leaving our province. Is this what you want your 
family to grow up and live in? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am an MLA from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, a large 
constituency in north-central Saskatchewan. My constituency 
wanted a voice that will carry the many, many concerns of the 
region. They wanted the party that had a vision of hope. They 
wanted the party that will provide a brighter future for their 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president government is consistently saying 
the federal government must help the farmers. That is true, but I 
also believe the provincial government has a job to do. They 
must come to the table and help also. 
 
The farmers of my constituency have little or no hope for this 
government to provide aid. The only good thing about AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program is the letters 
A and D, which stands for “accountant’s dream.” 
 
The government’s crop insurance needs to be addressed. 
Farmers in my area have had crops condemned because of deer 
manure in the grain. Yet the crop insurance program will not 
look at their claim or stand behind it. There are other programs 

in place but still do not address the agriculture problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time is of the essence. This government must 
address this problem now. Money has to get into the hands of 
the farmers before the new year. Farmers can’t afford all 
expenses, with the price of grains as low as it is, with fuel prices 
up, with fertilizer prices up, with education tax up, and grain 
prices down. The writing is on the wall, Mr. Speaker; farming 
can’t exist at this rate. 
 
The opposition party, in their election campaign, put taxes as 
the number one priority. All taxes have to be addressed. 
Saskatchewan, with the highest taxes, are losing out to our 
neighbouring provinces like Alberta. Most people don’t mind 
paying their fair share of taxes, but we enjoy all services, 
everyone of us. Everyone must contribute to the pay of taxes. It 
would be nice if there was no PST in Saskatchewan, but until 
the time comes, we all must share in the paying of taxes. We all 
want lowering of taxes. Lowering of taxes creates jobs and 
stimulate the economy. The government must move on this 
issue in the next budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another key issue in my constituency has to do 
with forestry and forestry management. Many small time 
loggers cannot compete with the large machinery operated 
organizations. Their jobs and forestry business are dwindling. 
Saw mills are being forced to shut down. Trucking contracts are 
lost, and trucking firms are moving to Alberta. High fuel costs 
are also adding to the growing problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many problems in Saskatchewan. 
Our job as opposition is to bring the concerns to the attention of 
a government. It is a government’s job, today, to try and solve 
them. People of my constituency, and all constituencies in 
Saskatchewan, are tired of waiting and waiting for results. The 
results of the 1999 election proved this. The Speech from the 
Throne was presented. There are some good ideas in the Speech 
from the Throne. But it is up to the government — the present 
government — to implement them and get the job done. Now 
that we have a coalition government, it will help to get things 
done if they put their mind to it. Voters need answers; voters 
need things to be done and done now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my conclusion I want to say 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood put their trust in me to bring forth their 
ideas and concerns. I will not let them down. I look forward to 
lively debate with my members opposite. I also want to wish 
each and every one in this Assembly today a very Merry 
Christmas and a happy and prosperous millennium year, 2000. 
Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a 
tremendous sense of awe that I rise to speak for the first time as 
the new member from the constituency of Carrot River Valley 
in the heart of the great Northeast. I am in awe of the historical 
significance of this Chamber and how that history and tradition 
translates into the expectations that there are of me personally 
and of each and every one of us here today. 
 
I am also in awe of the almost surreal quality of my personal 
presence here. I am one of these truly unique — some may say 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

weird — individuals who’ve always been involved, interested 
in politics and government. When I was nine years old, my dad 
brought our first television set home. My fascination with 
current events and politics began immediately. The very first 
major political event I remember watching on this second-hand, 
black-and-white television was the coverage of the 1968 Liberal 
leadership convention and the election of Pierre Elliott Trudeau 
as leader. 
 
I followed that coverage and everything related to it to the 
exclusion of everything else, to the degree where my dad 
became concerned because he thought it wasn’t normal for a 
nine-year-old to be that interested in politics and government. 
As a result of that interest, my goals were a little different than 
most nine-year-olds. My goals were to participate in the 
democratic process and to some day serve in an elected 
capacity. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I have had the 
opportunity to serve in many elected capacities over the years, 
both non-government and government, including three terms as 
the mayor of the town of Porcupine Plain. When I was first 
elected, the well-respected publisher of the Hudson Bay 
Post-Review, Al Mazur, now deceased, claimed that after much 
research he determined that at that time I was the youngest 
mayor elected in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — All of these distinctions and experiences 
contribute to the sense of awe that I feel today. Mr. Speaker, I 
feel that it is important to thank the people of Porcupine Plain 
for the overwhelming trust and confidence they have shown me 
over the years. When my current term as mayor expires in 
October of 2000, I will always remember how the people of 
Porcupine Plain, the councillors I have served with, and our 
town administrator, Barry Warsylewicz, have supported me and 
contributed to my personal growth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Carrot River Valley have 
placed their trust in me to serve as their representative in this 
Legislative Assembly. I wish to assure all of the citizens of 
Carrot River Valley that I understand and respect that trust. It is 
not enough to just say thank you for that trust. That trust must 
be returned each and every day by representing constituents in a 
fair, caring, and accountable fashion, and I intend to do just that 
to the best of my ability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Carrot River 
Valley have very high expectations of their elected officials, 
and I will work very hard to meet those expectations. One of the 
ways that I intend to meet those expectations is to be a very 
strong advocate for the constituency of Carrot River Valley. I 
will bring all of the advocacy skills that I learned in almost 20 
years of working with and for people with disabilities to bear in 
advocating on behalf of the constituency and all constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to recognize 
the previous MLA for Carrot River Valley, Mr. Andy Renaud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Renaud — Andy — and I, have both 

a personal and professional relationship that goes back many, 
many years. I for one am very glad that Andy had the 
opportunity to serve in this Chamber because as with me I think 
that Andy entered public service in order to be able to 
constructively contribute to improving the quality of life of his 
constituency. Andy served his constituents with dignity, 
dedication, and conviction. So on behalf of the constituents of 
Carrot River Valley, I would like to thank Mr. Renaud for his 
contribution and wish him and his wife, Sylvia, the very best in 
their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Carrot 
River Valley is one of the most beautiful parts of this province. 
Our lakes, rivers, and forests are all part of a natural 
environment that, even after having lived there all my life, can 
still take my breath away. This environment lends itself well to 
many of the growth industries in our province today, such as 
tourism, ecotourism, outfitting, snowmobiling, summer and 
winter recreation, and much, much more. The dynamic and 
progressive communities of Hudson Bay and Nipawin have 
been particularly successful at developing these industries. 
 
This environment though, as beautiful as it is, can be very 
demanding. This was particularly true for the early settlers in 
our area. Every single acre of farmland had to be cleared and 
for the most part by back-breaking manual labour. From this 
came two things: a people that have an undying love and very 
high respect for their environment; and a people who are strong, 
proud, independent, and fiercely protective of their 
accomplishments. These characteristics have provided us with 
the skills necessary to survive in even the most difficult of 
times. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even the tough and resilient people of Carrot 
River Valley are having difficulty surviving now because this 
government has neglected and undermined agriculture by 
tearing up GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), off-loading 
60 per cent of the costs of education on the property tax, and the 
numerous policy decisions made with no regard to their 
negative consequences on this province’s single largest 
industry, agriculture. 
 
The citizens of Carrot River Valley are having a difficult time 
surviving because of an oppressive tax regime that chases our 
young people out of the province, forces our professionals to 
pursue careers elsewhere, stifles and suffocates economic 
development, and penalizes our existing businesses to the point 
where they can no longer grow, or are forced to close their 
doors. 
 
The citizens of Carrot River Valley are having a difficult time 
surviving because their services are under attack, particularly 
their health care services. 
 
Eliminations, reductions, consolidations, amalgamations, and 
closures have left our communities in a state of shock and fear. 
One community alone, the town of Carrot River, has lost its 
rural service centre, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, Highways yard, 
Crop Insurance, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Resource Management) office, and now added . . . and now to 
add to that misery, Mr. Speaker, this government wants to close 
their hospital. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the people of Carrot River are 
survivors, and they will survive, with the help and 
understanding of a Saskatchewan Party government after the 
next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, we are all products of our 
environments and our experiences. As I indicated earlier, for 
almost 20 years now I have worked with and for people with 
disabilities, historically — and I believe even yet — the most 
disenfranchised group in our society. 
 
It is from this experience that I have learned the only way to be 
successful and to contribute in a productive way is that people 
must be provided with a level playing field. If people are 
provided with a level playing field and they are given the 
freedom to choose, and their dignity and independence is 
respected, anybody can accomplish anything. 
 
My colleagues and I, Mr. Speaker, respect and believe very 
strongly in the dignity and independence of the individual. We 
do not subscribe to the socialist ideology of control and 
dependence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been asked by the citizens of Carrot River 
Valley to relay their disappointment with this so-called 
NDP-Liberal coalition government we have here today. 
 
When I was a little boy growing up on the farm, I always used 
to hear farmers talk about haywire outfits and haywire fixes. I 
never understood what that meant, and I asked my dad. Well 
dad explained to me that because people often were too poor to 
buy new or proper repairs for broken-down equipment, they 
would use haywire, which was plentiful and inexpensive. But 
dad explained these were usually cheap, ugly, and unreliable 
repairs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the good citizens of Carrot River Valley 
would agree with me that this NDP-Liberal coalition is a 
haywire outfit that gave the people of this province a cheap, 
ugly, and unreliable fix. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on another note, I would just like to take a 
moment to congratulate Bill Schiller of Carrot River. Bill is, I 
think, one of the finest craftsmen in the entire country. Out of a 
small shop in Carrot River, Mr. Schiller and his wife handcraft 
knives that he has sold all over the world. Recently Mr. Schiller 
was featured in a North American-wide magazine, Knives 
Illustrated. Mr. Schiller takes a great deal of pride in his work, 
and I am very proud to have him as a constituent. 
 
On a sadder note, Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention a very 
dear friend who recently passed away. Mr. Ron Mlazgar of 
Nipawin was a man of tremendous strength and conviction from 
whom I was able to draw strength and confidence. Ron had 
desperately wanted to attend my swearing-in ceremony, but his 
cancer had progressed too far by then. When he passed away, 
the funeral was set for the same time and the same day as the 

Throne Speech. His family insisted that I should remain in 
Regina for the Throne Speech because that’s what he would 
have wanted. 
 
So I’d like to say thank you to Ron and his wife, Gai, for their 
friendship, support, and unconditional love. I wish to pay 
tribute to Ron in this, my maiden speech to the Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Ron. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the four most important 
people in my life for all their love and support in everything I 
do: my wife, Leona; my two daughters, Carla and Krystal; and 
my son, Tyrrell. While I have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, I 
will wish you and all members of this Assembly the very best 
for the holiday season. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion, but 
voting in favour of the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To begin my 
presentation, I want to first of all congratulate you on you being 
selected Speaker. And I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 
without question, there are certain times that rules all of a 
sudden become muddled, and there’s confusion on everybody’s 
mind, in rookie positions. But I want to assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that you have my utmost respect and admiration in 
your brand new job, and we wish you very well in the future, 
and we know that you will do well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I also want to congratulate all the new 
members. I think you’re going to find that this is a very trying 
time in your life. There’s certainly a lot of things that you have 
to balance, and one of them of course is family, and the other is 
spare time and certainly work for your constituents and work 
here. 
 
I also want to wish you all a very Merry Christmas and a Happy 
New Year. And to the new members, I want to encourage you 
to spend . . . make time for your family and spend time with 
your family because that’s very, very important. And it’s a 
lesson that I learned very, very early in this life as a result of 
being involved with very good fellow MLAs. 
 
I also want to acknowledge my constituents. This past election 
was also a very challenging time for me. We had to make sure 
we went into every community, and Athabasca is the largest 
constituency in the province. From my home, from my home 
driveway to this driveway of the Assembly, it’s exactly eight 
hours. And when you travel that distance you get to see the 
whole province, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker. And I wanted to 
point out that to have that many people from that far away 
participate in that sense of sending me back here to be their 
MLA is something that we’ll always treasure. So while I have 
some certain degree of sympathy with those folks that say they 
have to travel three to four hours to get here, I want to assure 
you many people from the North — the member from 
Cumberland as well as the member from Athabasca — have at 
least a seven and eight-hour drive respectively to get here. But 
the North has sent us and they have sent us here to work with 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

the NDP, and certainly in the coalition, to build a brand new 
day. 
 
I also want to thank my constituents. I think they are people that 
have for many years stood by me despite my many weaknesses 
and despite my many shortcomings. I believe that at times they 
have looked the other way at some of my shortcomings, and 
they have again endorsed me. And forever we’ll be thankful to 
the constituents that continue to believe in you even though at 
times your own belief in yourself is somewhat challenged by 
the stress, the time, and certainly the rigours of this job. 
 
I also want to acknowledge my family, especially my wife, 
Becky. She’s at home right now taking care of our three 
children. We have three lovely daughters and they all look like 
their mother, thank goodness for that. My three children, 
Michelle, Kellie, and Taylor — Michelle’s 15, Kelly is 12, and 
Taylor is going on to 10 — and all three of the girls, of course, 
are being raised by their mother since 1988 when I was first 
elected as mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse and on the road a 
considerable amount. Without the wife and the three daughters 
back home I simply would not be able to do the job, and the 
support that they have afforded me is something that I will 
forever be thankful for. So to my wife and to my children, I 
sincerely thank you for your support and ask for your continued 
patience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As well, Mr. Speaker, my number one 
supporter and my number one person that I always turn to in 
times of need and times of stress is my father, my father, Leo 
Joseph Belanger, who was a veteran in World War II. He also 
served as mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I have followed in his 
footsteps, Mr. Speaker, and he is the one that blazed a trail for 
me. And to point out to my father, Leo, who may be listening 
tonight, I just want to tell him that we made it here. We’re now 
the cabinet minister, and that there is nobody that can take that 
away from us. So, hats off to my father, Leo, and certainly to 
my stepmother who raised us as her own since we were at a 
young age when we lost our mother. 
 
Also, to my Aunt Rose and my Aunt Sheila and my Aunt 
Maggie, and my 50 other aunts that took a tremendous load on 
themselves to help raise a family when we were orphaned at a 
young age by the loss of our mother. Without their love and 
without their understanding and compassion, again, we would 
not be here today to be making this speech in the Assembly. 
And I think without question that these people did not know if I 
was going to be a logger, they did not know if I was going to be 
unemployed, Mr. Speaker. They had no idea I was going to be 
an MLA. So without them and their unconditional love, again, 
we want to thank them for their contribution to my life and 
certainly my family’s life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I come from a very 
exciting part of the province: northern Saskatchewan. It’s got 
pristine lakes. It’s got a tremendous amount of forestry 
opportunity, and it’s got a whole pile of tourism potential as 
well for all the province to enjoy. As I often do, Mr. Speaker, I 
fly throughout the North, and as you get up to 3,000 feet, 3,500 

feet, you can look both ways in the airplane when it’s a clear 
day. And as far as you can see — north, east, west, south — 
there’s just a beautiful piece of land called northern 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, you can travel for an hour, an 
hour and a half in this plane travelling at roughly 200 miles an 
hour, and still there’s beautiful land out there, and there’s just a 
tremendous asset for the province. 
 
And above all else, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan also significantly add to the value of the province 
of Saskatchewan, and I want to pay special tribute to the area I 
am from, to the people I represent, and also to the aboriginal 
people in the North that have for many years been very patient 
with the political process and certainly with their politicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 
non-aboriginal people in the northern part of Saskatchewan that 
have made the North their home they’re most certainly 
welcome. In northern Saskatchewan, we believe that there is no 
time for racism. There is no time for doubt. There is no time for 
self-pity. Mr. Speaker, it’s only time to build a brand new 
North, so the aboriginal and non-aboriginal people are working 
collectively and in strength to rebuild the North to a world that 
we both can share and enjoy from. 
 
As well, in the city here, I have often tried to make the city my 
home. Without the kind support of my fellow MLAs and, on 
occasion, MLAs from the opposite side, we often sit down and 
talk, and talk about the challenges of the life. But in particular 
there’s one place in the city here that I want to say hello to. And 
these staff members and the people at the West Harvest Inn, Mr. 
Speaker, have actually tried to make the West Harvest Inn my 
home. They’ve been very, very friendly folks. They’ve been 
very patient and they’ve also treated me really well as if I’m 
actually at home. So, I want to take my hat off to Tom, to 
Shane, Barb, Jennifer, Marion, Kathy, Kelly, and all the gang at 
the West Harvest Inn for doing a tremendous job of making me 
feel welcome here in the city of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, why did I join the NDP? 
Why did I believe that the NDP were the best team in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Well, I’m going to tell 
you . . . I’m going to take you on a history lesson, Mr. Speaker 
— a history lesson. We’re going to go back to 1991 when the 
NDP took over the province and they had to make some very, 
very tough choices, Mr. Speaker. Very tough choices because 
they were in deficit, they were in debt, and all the mood 
throughout the land, without question, was doom and gloom, 
and the future looked bleak. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I went into the archives to check, not the 
archives . . . but the past newspaper clippings and I went to ’91, 
’92, ’93, ’94, ’95, ’96, ’97, ’98 and I closed my eye and I said, 
this year — 1994 — this is my choice. That’s where my finger 
went, Mr. Speaker. So I pulled out some clippings. You say any 
year if you pick out clippings, and I want to maybe mention a 
few of these clippings, Mr. Speaker. P.A. Herald, April 10, 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

1995, and this is Myron Kowalsky, the MLA from Prince 
Albert, and I quote: 
 

The advantage of receiving a credit upgrade has several 
implications. It can help lower the cost of borrowing and 
fuels optimism in the province’s economy. 
 

That was one of the quotes, Mr. Speaker. And this, of course, is 
the MLA from Prince Albert’s weekly column. The second 
quote he makes: 
 

I find it personally satisfying that Saskatchewan is the first 
province in Canada to get a credit upgrade in five years 
(Mr. Speaker). It comes on the heels of Saskatchewan 
being the first province in Saskatchewan to achieve a 
balanced budget in several years. 
 

That’s one newspaper clipping, Mr. Speaker. That was in ’95. 
February 7, 1995, we talked about the balanced budget, the 
Throne Speech. That’s the headline here, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re talking about civil servants that went through the 
incredible pressures of losing many jobs and the tough choices 
we talk about and the Leader of the Opposition at that time: 
 

Bill Boyd, Leader of the Opposition Conservatives, 
criticized Romanow’s reluctance to consider layoffs of 
public servants. We should be looking for more 
efficiencies, Boyd said. No department should be exempt. 
What they’ve done in Alberta is streamline government. 

 
And now they’re talking about these same problems, Mr. 
Speaker. And that was from a newspaper article. And I’ll go to 
another newspaper article, Mr. Speaker. This is March 17, 
1993. It’s done by Randy Burton and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s debt is enough to make a billionaire weep. 
Under the most optimistic scenario, it is going to take 
decades to pay off the provincial debt. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the same article, they talk about credit 
ratings. And where is Saskatchewan as a result of the debt, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s near the bottom. Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, 
New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island — smaller provinces, 
Mr. Speaker — had better ratings than Saskatchewan did in 
1993. 
 
We got that debt, Mr. Speaker, from the Progressive 
Conservatives of the 1980s. And I will go to another quote, Mr. 
Speaker, 1993, May 15. And the quote here is: 
 

Saskatchewan’s rating was lowered because of the 
province’s continuing high debt load. 
 

And the other quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Tax increases and capital financing needs of the crown 
corporation sectors are two reasons — DBRS gave for the 
downgrade. 
 

And, of course DBRS, Mr. Speaker, is the Dominion Bond 
Rating Service. However, Mr. Speaker, a further quote goes: 
 

The company praise the government’s attempt to reduce 

the deficit (but added) it would be difficult for 
Saskatchewan to stay on track. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, was a direct reference to the debt left by 
the Tories of the 1980s. 
 
And a lot of people in the province, throughout the province, 
have always said we are tired of hearing the debt problem. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers — the taxpayers — are tired 
of paying that debt. We’ve said that time and time again. 
 
And I’ll go to another quote, Mr. Speaker. This goes from The 
StarPhoenix, May 27, 1993. Again, Mr. Speaker, again 
optimism is slowing growing and quote: 
 

Because of the strong, demonstrated commitment to deficit 
reduction outlined in March’s provincial budget, Premier 
Roy Romanow said he’s encouraged by the affirmation 
because it’s so . . . budget projections are accurate and 
realistic. Opposition leader, Rick Swenson, was less 
enthusiastic. I guess it’s good, in that at least people can 
see some results for all the taxes. 

 
And that was their best response from their leader at that time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, February 24, Mr. Speaker, 1994, The StarPhoenix, 
1994, the headline is “Credit rating agencies seek positive signs 
in Saskatchewan.” And the place I want to talk about Mr. 
Speaker, the particular quote here. And it goes: 
 

Eugene Williams, a financial analyst with the Canadian 
Bond Rating Service said any time a government deficit 
follows a downward trend it’s a positive signal. They’ve 
done a fairly remarkable job. The effort is there, and the 
conviction has held up, and the fruits are slowly coming to 
bear. But that being said, we still have to do our due 
diligence. 

 
He was speaking about the NDP’s effort, Mr. Speaker, the 
control of debt and the control of deficits. 
 
And another article, Mr. Speaker, 1994, March 8, again the 
headline reads “Saskatchewan gets good marks. Budgets have 
impressed bond-rating company.” And again the headline has 
further information lower down. It says: 
 

The Canadian Bond Rating Service reaffirmed the 
province’s credit rating at A but improves Saskatchewan 
main outlook to stable from negative. And A rated 
government bond is considered by CBRS (Canadian Bond 
Rating Service) to be of good quality. It’s the first senior 
government to be afforded a stable outlook rating. 

 
Said Eugene Williams again, a financial analyst with the 
Montreal based CBRS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s time and time again. Time and time again, 
Mr. Speaker, we have headlines from the early ’90s — ’93, ’94, 
’95, ’96 — about the tremendous job, the tremendous job that’s 
being done in terms of managing the debt and paying down that 
debt and handling that deficit problem created by the Tories in 
the 1980s. 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

And, Mr. Speaker, the news continues. This is today’s paper, I 
believe. This is The Globe and Mail, Monday, December 13, 
1999; that’s today. And the headline says “Who supplies 
Canada’s trading muscle?” That’s the question. And you would 
figure . . . let’s see, is it Ontario? Is it Quebec? Who is it? The 
quote: 
 

New Brunswick and Saskatchewan are the only other 
provinces whose reliance on exports exceeds the national 
average . . . 

 
What that says, Mr. Speaker, is we’re on the right track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And it goes about the diversification 
efforts, Mr. Speaker . . . the second quote goes: 
 

Six of the 10 provinces ran international surpluses. Ontario 
and Alberta kicked in the biggest chunks, followed by 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
And that’s today’s Globe and Mail. It’s a national paper, Mr. 
Speaker, talking about the diversification efforts of 
Saskatchewan. That diversification efforts, Mr. Speaker, was a 
direct result of us taming the deficit, reducing our debt, and 
investing those proceeds into our economic thinking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, not only has this 
government tamed the deficit, Mr. Speaker, that oftentimes we 
forget those people that made tough choices on our behalf, the 
people that aren’t here today. Some of the people that went on 
to other lives and other careers, some by choice, others by not. 
However, Mr. Speaker, those are the people that we should take 
our hats off, those people that have sat in this same Assembly 
and sat in many other rooms making tough choices, and now 
today we’re beginning to see some of those tough choices bear 
fruit for Saskatchewan and its future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we also have here the 
Mid-Year Financial Update for 1999 and as always we want to 
share this information with the opposition, and it says, “The 
sixth consecutive balanced budget on track.” That’s the 
headline, Mr. Speaker, six balanced budgets in a row. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re balancing the budgets, we’re paying down 
debt, and we’re improving Saskatchewan’s economy. Is there 
any more that we can do? Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes, there 
is more that we can do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So I want to give, Mr. Speaker, this to 
one of the pages to take over to the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party and show him this is good news. This is good news. 
Saskatchewan’s on track, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to 
blink; we’re not going to deviate for silly politics. We’re on the 
right track. Let’s keep on going. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, one of the points we 
want to make is that this party has a history of making some 
tough choices. We don’t go out there and sell fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have balanced budgets, not so much with my 
involvement — I’ve only been around for a short while — but 
the many people that have been here before me. We take our 
hats off to them. These are the people that are the true warriors 
of the fight against the deficit and the debt that the Tories left to 
us in the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I implore the Saskatchewan 
people to have a long memory as some of the people talk about. 
Have that long memory. Have a long memory because you’ve 
got a long ways to pay the debt, and we got to pay it. Nobody 
else but we got to pay it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, tough choices, balanced budget, the debt’s 
going down, and what else have they done? What else has the 
NDP done, Mr. Speaker? They have cut taxes, not as fast as 
some people would like, Mr. Speaker. They have cut the PST. 
They’ve cut corporate tax. They’ve cut income tax. They’ve cut 
all three sectors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what I mean: is there any more that they can do? 
And the answer is, yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a brand new day. A brand new day is 
dawning. It’s a brand new start, but I implore the people of 
Saskatchewan to not forget those people that have come before 
me and have come before other people in the Assembly in 
fighting that debt. And I can tell you now, making decisions 
affecting our lives is a very tough business to do. 
 
And those people now that may be sitting at home watching 
TV, tired, burnt-out, beaten up — those are the people that won 
the battle, Mr. Speaker, and again my hat goes off to them in 
recognition of their fine work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the overall debt went 
from $15 billion in 1991, left by those Tories, and now, Mr. 
Speaker, it went down to 11.4 billion, Mr. Speaker. Almost $4 
billion less, Mr. Speaker, $4 billion less. Now is that a tax 
break, or is that a tax break, Mr. Speaker? $4 billion less in nine 
years, that’s an incredible record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The overall debt’s going down. The overall interest on an 
annual basis, Mr. Speaker, went from $860 million each and 
every year that this government paid, goes down to $725 
million, $725 million. That’s a $135 million more that we got to 
spend on education, on health care, on highways, and the list 
goes on because the list is great, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s a bet going on within, within the coalition caucus. 
We are not sure whether our debt and interest will drop faster 
than the Saskatchewan Party. 
 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — With all due respect, the Deputy 
Premier’s a nice guy and he’s saying, well we’ll all support the 
Sask Party. They’ll probably drop but not as fast as our debt, 
because he’s an optimistic person. But being a political person 
that we all are, the rest of our caucus said no. The Saskatchewan 
Party are going to drop faster than our interest and our debt 
rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that 
there are challenges ahead for this government. Without 
question the election dictated that. We understand that, and we 
humbly take that message on the chin. However, we understand 
that the challenges ahead include the farm crisis. That’s number 
one, you know, and being from northern Saskatchewan, I look 
around me and I got a preacher behind me and a farmer next to 
me, so we got a lot of preaching about farming going on in this 
caucus. And I’m beginning to learn a lot about the agricultural 
crisis. 
 
But what I do know, Mr. Speaker, is I was very proud to take 
part in the day when the farm groups sat in this Assembly and 
they spoke about some of their challenges, about the unpaid 
bills and some of the pessimism in terms of the future of their 
children, their farms, and their livelihood. And much of that, 
much of that message, Mr. Speaker, is the same message that 
the northern people have been expounding on for many years. 
And the northern people have said, there Buckley, that’s where 
we can relate to some of the problems associated with the 
province, is that farmers will get our support. 
 
So the northern Aboriginal people all over northern 
Saskatchewan are saying, we back the farmers up 100 per cent. 
We want to see a fair system for them as we want a fair system 
for us. And I can tell you right now sitting here in that historic 
day, Mr. Speaker, I felt very proud to be part of the NDP 
government that helped make that happen, and give the farmers 
an opportunity to express to all of us, Liberals and NDP, and 
yes, even the Saskatchewan Party, the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party, give them the opportunity to hear first-hand of some of 
their struggles. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the agricultural sector, to the farmer, we 
feel your pain, we share your pain, and we also want to share 
your work and share the effort to rebuilding Saskatchewan as a 
whole. And that’s the message from the northern Saskatchewan 
people, the Aboriginal and the non-Aboriginal people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of the other challenges we have is 
educating for the new economy, and I believe the coalition 
government’s going to do that. And folks back home asked me, 
what’s your impression of the coalition government, Buckley? 
You think it’s going to work? And I said this coalition 
government’s going to be judged on its success, not what the 
Saskatchewan Party says or any other columnist says. It’s going 
to be judged on its success, Mr. Speaker. We have two quality 
cabinet ministers involved in this coalition government and it’s 
going to work, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The other part of the equation, Mr. 
Speaker, and something I know the Sask Party has a difficult 
time with, is we have to increase the aboriginal participation in 
the economy and into the fabric of Saskatchewan. 
 
Without question, Mr. Speaker, without question, what was the 
primary . . . what was the primary message, Mr. Speaker, of the 
provincial campaign of 1999? The primary message was the 
Indians are going to pay tax. That was their message. Or if it 
wasn’t Indians paying tax, it was the welfare rolls are climbing. 
If it wasn’t the welfare rolls are climbing, well our youth are out 
of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s unfair to the province; it’s unfair to the 
aboriginal people. All these issues are going to be discussed in a 
good, solid environment built on respect. We’re not going to 
cheapen the process using politics for our own political efforts. 
Mr. Speaker, That’s unfair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — You’re doing more damage, you’re 
doing more damage to the fabric of Saskatchewan when you try 
and divide the people. It does not work. You unite the people, 
bring them together. Bring them together on a table of respect 
and of admiration. You don’t say, well he’s getting away with a 
free ride, let’s get him. There is no free rides in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The First Nations people and the Metis people all pay taxes. 
And I’ll go so far today as to challenge the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party that I probably pay more taxes than he 
does. And that’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. It’s every 
Aboriginal person in the province does contribute to this 
province in an economic sense and a social sense and certainly 
in the cultural sense as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out as 
well, Mr. Speaker, you go back to the year that Quebec was 
having their vote. Quebec was having their vote, Mr. Speaker, 
on the future of this great country and there’s 80,000 northern 
Quebec Cree — 80,000 — of which 90 per cent of them voted 
to stay in Canada. Ninety per cent of them. And you do the 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. They won . . . the yes . . . the no side 
won by 50,000 not to separate from Canada — by 50,000. It 
was a close, close vote, the most historic vote in the whole 
country’s history. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, think about that. Who put them over the top? 
Who put them over the top? It was the 80,000 Northern Quebec 
Cree, the First Nations community that said “yes, we believe in 
Canada and, yes, we’ll back up Canada”. And that, I think, is 
the fundamental contribution that the Aboriginal people make 
to our province, make to our cultures, and makes to our country. 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, we got to do more and more in 
terms of trying to respect that whole process of sitting down and 
talking to each other as opposed to cheapening the whole 
environment with petty politics. 
 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the APTN (Aboriginal 
Peoples Television Network), the launch of the Aboriginal 
Peoples Television Network is going to do a tremendous 
amount to narrow that gap of misunderstanding. It’s going to 
happen. The renaissance as mentioned in the Throne Speech is 
going to happen. There’s going to be a reawakening, a rebirth of 
the Aboriginal people, and I think it’s best that we embrace that 
and build up on that and bring them on in so that we can all 
build this great province and this great country together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in sports as well . . . (inaudible) . . . what 
everybody and every kid’s dream is to make the NHL (National 
Hockey League). Well in the NHL, the contribution of the 
Aboriginal community includes Sandy McCarthy, Gin Odjick, 
Ted Nolan, Theo Fleury, Reg Leach. And then we have other 
folks that played junior hockey, Louis Gardner, Abe Apsis, 
August George. The names are not familiar, Mr. Speaker, to 
most people, but they are familiar to many young people who 
don’t look at that individual if he’s native or non-native or 
Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal. The guy can play the game — let 
him play. And that’s the message to the Saskatchewan Party 
when it comes to the arts, to politics, to business, the Aboriginal 
people can play the game — let them play. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of 
the efforts being taken by the Aboriginal people in our province 
and throughout our land, and I’m very proud of the New 
Democratic Party for reducing our debt, reducing our taxes, and 
enhancing our services. That’s going to continue. I’m very 
proud of the coalition government that’s going to be adding the 
coalition partners, that’s going to be adding to the whole 
process. They all have value. We even have some of the ideas 
— some of the ideas coming from the Saskatchewan Party. 
Well this is all about amalgamation of good ideas towards a 
common vision. 
 
And what lessons have we learned, Mr. Speaker? What lessons 
have we learned? These are the ten lessons that we’ve learned, 
Mr. Speaker. Number one, we encourage, or I encourage, every 
Aboriginal person in the Province of Saskatchewan to exercise 
their right to vote. I implore you all to rise up and exercise your 
political power so that other people cannot make a difference in 
your lives, but you can make a contribution to theirs. 
 
First Nations, Metis, non-status, Bill C-31, and off-reserve 
people — they can all have a direct impact on the Saskatchewan 
political direction. And I urge every Aboriginal people to get 
out there and exercise your right to vote because it’s worth a lot 
in this world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a 
proven track record; it has a history; it has a vision. The 
Saskatchewan Party has got to admit that. Now the older ones 
will not. The more seasoned veterans will say no, no, no, no. 
 
But to the new members, I share with you, as I once sat in 
opposition, there is going to become a time, sooner than later, 

that you will be told, don’t ever say that in public. Or the other 
part is, don’t agree; your role is to disagree. Or the other phrase 
is, our plan, which is no plan, is better than their plan. 
 
Mark my words, the backbenchers, the young players in the 
Saskatchewan Party, you will see the direction we’re going is 
the direction of common sense. It’s being inclusive of all 
people, and it’s got a vision attached to it. And sooner or later 
you’re going to admit, deep in your mind, that this is the plan 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the third lesson is the 
amazing thing about politics — and that’s what I find really 
amazing — is that these guys put us in debt and now these guys 
are telling us how to spend our money. The last advice on 
money matters cost Saskatchewan for the next 30 years, but 
thanks, but no thanks, for your advice. 
 
Number four. In the past nine years, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eight, eight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Eight years, nine years, this 
government through the taxpayers, have paid over, or close to, 
$7 billion in interest payments. Seven billion, Mr. Speaker — 
$7 billion in interest payment alone. Now you think about the 
tax breaks that $7 billion could do. You think about the 
highways, the health care, the seniors’ support that 7 billion 
could afford this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, above all else, think what 7 billion could do 
to help the farmers out right now. That could re-energize the 
whole province — 7 billion; it’s 7 billion, Mr. Speaker. We 
could have a long-term agricultural safety net for the next 10 
years. But thanks to the debt, thanks to the interest, we have to 
work within our means, Mr. Speaker, and we’re doing all that 
we can. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, number five is Saskatchewan is the province 
that I chose to serve. And we often hear the Saskatchewan Party 
talk about Alberta, and Alberta has this, Alberta’s done this, 
Alberta’s cut their taxes. Well I think, Mr. Speaker, if you love 
Alberta so much, move to Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — But Saskatchewan people want us, the 
Saskatchewan people want us to rebuild this province. This 
province just west of Alberta, you guys . . . I meant east of 
Alberta, just a tad east of Alberta, just a tad west of Manitoba, 
that’s where Saskatchewan is, you guys. This is our province. 
This is our home. This is where you fix the problems. 
 
If you want to live in Alberta, live in Alberta but when you’re 
in Saskatchewan, you talk about Saskatchewan dreams, 
Saskatchewan ideals, and Saskatchewan plans — not Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And, Mr. Speaker, I say to you that 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1999 

we’re only here temporarily — all of us are only here 
temporarily. And I know that eventually that I will go home 
back to the North and live in Ile-a-la-Crosse. My challenge is to 
try and bring lasting, positive change to the North, for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and to mankind. That’s my role here. 
 
But I can assure you I know, I know this is not for life. I know 
that I’ll be going back home. And I’ll be going back to do what 
I have to do with my own folks to rebuild the North as best I 
can in that capacity. 
 
The seventh point is, Mr. Speaker, is being part of this NDP 
team and the coalition also reminds me of the message, the 
message of tolerance. And the message of tolerance that I have 
to all the people that may be listening is this: there’s no time in 
our lives, as I mentioned, for racism, doubt, self-pity, and all the 
other evils. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There’s only time, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
only time to encourage our children to challenge life in every 
arena life has to offer, be it in business, politics, the arts, and 
life in general. And I believe our job here is not to trivialize the 
political process by name-calling and pointing in direction of an 
Aboriginal group. I believe that the greatest challenge that we 
all have is to meet the challenge of allowing our children — 
native and non-native, Aboriginal, Chinese, the whole shebang 
— is to allow our children the freedom, the freedom and the 
peace to dream. That’s our number one goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the eighth lesson I’ve learned, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
party has always and will always admit its fault. Time and time 
again, Mr. Speaker, we have heard, yes there’s always room for 
improvement. This party does that. And I believe, in simple 
terms, admission of a fault is the greatest attribute of leadership; 
we made a mistake; we’ll try and fix it. That’s the general 
position, if it’s fixable. And, Mr. Speaker, I think without 
question, that’s a lesson that we’ve learned being part of the 
NDP team. 
 
Number nine. With your plan, with the Saskatchewan’s Party 
plan, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to use a former colleague’s 
phrase. You can cook it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — I request leave to make an introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Mr. 
Ken Rauch up in your gallery. Gentlemen, as I indicated in my 
speech, I’ve worked almost 20 years with people with 
disabilities. Ken is a community program consultant with 
community living division of Social Services, an agency with 
which I had an excellent working relationship, and particularly 
with Ken. I welcome him here tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to 
introduce also Ken Rauch who happens to be a constituent of 
mine, but frankly I was so captivated by the speech of my 
colleague that I was unable to get on to my feet. But I do 
welcome Ken to the Legislative Assembly as I know all will, 
and I’m sure he’s here to listen to the member from Athabasca. 
And I’ll sit down so that he can continue with what I think is 
one of the better speeches, Mr. Speaker. But I’d like the 
members to join with me in welcoming Ken Rauch. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Higgins, seconded by Mr. 
Addley, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m saying 
again, Mr. Speaker, with your plan, the Saskatchewan Party 
plan, and I’m going to quote one of my former colleagues: 
 

You can cook it. You can bake it. You can microwave it. 
You can shake ‘n bake it. You can fillet it. You can fry it, 
but it will never, never, never add up (Mr. Speaker). It 
never will. 

 
And I want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that without 
question, we have the best record, and certainly in my view, Mr. 
Speaker, not because he appointed me in charge of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), I 
believe we have the best leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Our Premier’s been through the ringer 
on a number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, but I want to make one 
very minor point is that he has put everything on the line in the 
recent crisis facing the agricultural community. He has put 
everything on the line for this province of Saskatchewan — not 
Alberta, not his personal aspiration — but for Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to point out that on behalf of the Aboriginal people 
of Saskatchewan, especially the Aboriginal people of the North, 
we want to thank you for appointing us and having confidence 
in this whole process of appointing myself as Minister of 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management). We will do a good job. And I also want to point 
out, Mr. Speaker, he did not appoint me because I was 
Aboriginal. He appointed me because I was Aboriginal. 
 



December 13, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

And I believe we have the best leader, the best plan, the best 
vision. And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that they are not the 
government-in-waiting. We are the government that is not 
waiting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, therefore, it is very 
important that I stand up today and talk about this pamphlet, A 
Brand New Day, the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Today marks the beginning of a new voyage with new eyes, 
new vision, and a fundamentally new government. It talks about 
families; it talks about young people; it talks about rural 
families; it talks about health care; it talks about an open, 
accountable government; it talks about self-reliance for 
Aboriginal people; and it even mentions Camsell Portage, Mr. 
Speaker, the smallest community, the furthest north community. 
About 30 people live there and they are inclusive of Camsell 
Portage and the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also talk about other priorities — about police officers to 
protect their communities; it talks about the forest, a review of 
the no-fault auto insurance. All these plans, Mr. Speaker, talk 
about admission, a weakness in certain areas, and vision of 
others. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I thank you for your time and your 
indulgence, and to also again take my hat off to my former 
colleague and the guy that was handling SERM for a number of 
years, Mr. Lorne Scott. Of course, Mr. Scott’s done a 
tremendous job. Amongst all his department staff he was very, 
very respected. There was a lot of admiration and a lot of the 
staff, when you mention Scott’s name, would certainly light up 
with excitement and certainly enthusiasm and they admired Mr. 
Scott. So on behalf of the staff of 1999 and myself as the SERM 
minister, I want to thank Mr. Scott for his contribution and 
certainly the many hours he spent trying to rebuild some of our 
attitudes towards SERM and hopefully in the future some of his 
work will bear fruit. 
 
So again in closing, Mr. Speaker, thank you so much for your 
time and I implore all folks, let’s be inclusive — north, east, 
west, south, non-Aboriginal, Aboriginal, rural, urban, because 
I’ll tell you, we have a million people and as CBC says, a 
million people, a million stories. We can rebuild, Mr. Speaker, 
if we have respect. Thank you so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 
much looking forward to making a speech in response to the 
Speech from the Throne, but due to the late hour, I’d move 
adjournment of the House . . . of debate, I’m sorry. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I announce the adjournment, I wish 
everyone a very pleasant evening. This House now stands 
adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:51 p.m. 
 



 

 


