





























































Hansard: March 29, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 325 
 March 29, 1999 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we 
rose for our supper break at 5 o’clock I was commenting on the 
various measures that there are in the budget such as the 1 per 
cent reduction in sales tax, the income tax decrease, the 
continued emphasis on debt reduction, the increased health care 
spending, education spending and highway spending. 
 
One thing that I did not mention which is extremely important, 
and I do want to emphasize it right now, and I hope that other 
members will do more justice to it than I’m able to in the brief 
time allotted to me this evening. But I am very pleased that this 
year we were also, as well as doing all these other fine things, 
we were able to bring about a 26 per cent increase in the 
funding going to poor families through the Child Benefit plan 
and various other measures. 
 
And I think this is extremely important because having grown 
up on social assistance myself, after my mother was widowed 
when my father was killed in a car accident, at age 5 I know 
that for people to escape the welfare trap they need two things 
in equal measure. They need a sense of dignity and self-worth, 
Mr. Speaker, and they also need a sense of duty, a sense of 
social obligation, not simple dependency. 
 
So we have to move beyond dependency towards dignity and 
duty and I believe that the increased funding for the Child 
Benefit plan will allow us to have those measures very firmly, 
very materially in place so that we can hopefully start to see a 
real solid end to the blight of ongoing dependency on welfare 
for people who could go out and get a job. And I say that 
because I recognize of course that the majority of people who 
are on the social assistance caseloads in this province right now 
are either children or are disabled people or people who for 
various reasons, including their child care duties, are not able to 
obtain a job outside the home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we broke at 5 o’clock I was just at the point 
of saying that in my opinion the Sask-a-Tory party opposite is 
trying to plant in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan not 
this collective sense of purpose of going forward and doing 
something with moral purpose for our children and 
grandchildren, but instead they’re trying to get people to slide 
into this individualistic mentality of oh, all those things are 
okay but what did you do for me today? And I think that’s a 
very, very dangerous place for people to get. 
 
And I do hope that people will be able to take a look at this 
budget and see within it not only measures that might 

individually help them or their own individual concerns or 
bailiwick, but they will also take a look at the whole budget in 
its entire perspective and understand that what we have tried to 
do, through a judicious balancing act I would suggest, is to 
satisfy the dreams, the aspirations, needs, and concerns of all of 
Saskatchewan citizens, not merely a very narrow group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many more things I want to say about the 
budget, but before I do, I do want to address one very important 
issue from my point of view. While I’m doing this I would ask 
that you listen very carefully, and I know you always do, you 
are always most attentive. It makes making a speech in this 
House a pure pleasure and joy, Mr. Speaker, knowing that at 
least one member is listening to my every word. 
 
But I want to address a statement that was made in this House 
last week by the member from Saltcoats. And I’m very mindful 
that there is a certain word I’m not suppose to use, so the word 
I’m going to use instead is misrepresentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the Hansard of March 22 in 
the evening, if I may, during the address in reply to the Throne 
Speech. The member for Saltcoats said this, and I quote: 
 

I was really interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. (That would be me.) The 
member for Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. Deputy Speaker did 
an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) report here 
in the summer. And her MLA report made the comment 
that farmers don’t pay taxes. That was right in her MLA 
report. The member for Saskatoon Southeast doesn’t have 
a clue what she’s talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will admit that there are some things I 
don’t have a clue about what I’m talking about. I cannot carry 
on a terribly well-informed debate and discussion about nuclear 
fission for instance, and I’m not terribly well versed in the 
paranormal. But I can tell you that I do not make statements like 
the member for Saltcoats is accusing me of. 
 
First of all, I didn’t have an MLA report put out last summer, so 
— whoops — there’s one slight factual error in what he was 
saying. 
 
Secondly, I believe — and I would ask him to correct me if I’m 
wrong — but I believe that what he was really referring to was 
not a summer report that I wrote but a January 1999 report. 
Now in January of 1999, I was still a columnist for the 
Saskatoon Free Press. For almost two years I wrote a weekly 
column for the Saskatoon Free Press. I very much enjoyed it. I 
thank the publishers, Bill Peterson and Paul Martin for the great 
risk they took in letting me make my relatively opinionated 
statements from week to week. And I very much regret the 
passing of the Saskatoon and the Regina Free Press. 
 
All of that is by the by though, Mr. Speaker. What I want to do 
is talk about the column that I wrote referring to farmers and 
taxation. Now the headline on that column from January 24, 
1999 . . . now how could I forget that? That was my birthdate 
for heaven’s sakes. 
 
On January 24, 1999, when I turned 29-plus-several years, the 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

 

headline was, “Preferential tax breaks deserved.” The body of 
the column, 600 words, and I won’t read it all into the record, 
but the column refers to two groups in Saskatchewan society 
whom I feel receive and deserve PST (provincial sales tax ) tax 
breaks. Those two groups, Mr. Speaker, are treaty Indians and 
— oops — farmers, that they receive tax breaks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I was saying, I was first of all trying to 
correct the belief that some people in Saskatchewan have — 
and it is very unfortunate that they have this belief — that 
Indians don’t pay any taxes. I know that there is at least one 
political party in this province that’s running around saying, 
elect us, elect us, and we’ll make sure that those Indians pay 
their taxes. 
 
It’s a nice, neat divisive form of getting people to find a 
scapegoat and distracting people’s attention from main and 
major issues. But it simply is not true. 
 
What I was stating in this column, Mr. Speaker, was some of 
the facts. First of all, we have very many Aboriginal people, 
First Nations people, in this province. It is unfortunate that not 
yet do all of them have full employment, but I am confident, 
with various measures that our government and the First 
Nations governments are putting in place, we will, hopefully in 
the short term not the long term, see full and fair and dignified 
employment for Aboriginal people. 
 
But we do have within this province three clear groups of First 
Nations people. We have treaty Indians, we have non-status 
Indians, and Metis. Mr. Speaker, in the column I’m making the 
point that over half the Aboriginal population, meaning the 
Metis people and non-status Indians, pay PST just like everyone 
else does. It is only treaty Indians who do not pay PST. And the 
amount of tax that is forgone by the treaty Indians not paying 
PST amounts to probably an estimate of 9 to $11 million 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, we more than make up that 9 to $11 
million supposed loss in not levying PST on treaty Indians by 
virtue of the fact that we do levy gasoline and tobacco taxes on 
reserves and we take in about $11 million in revenue there. 
 
I will just for the sake of the House and for the sake of clarity 
also say that this is currently being challenged in the courts and 
the whole situation is in flux right now. We’re waiting to see 
what the courts may say on this, but clearly there is taxation 
revenue that the provincial government does get from all First 
Nations people including treaty Indian people. 
 
But this supposed tax break is something that happened way 
back in 1937 and various governments — Liberal, 
Conservative, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), 
and New Democrat — have endorsed it since that time. When 
the PST exemption for Aboriginal people — for treaty Indians 
— was first brought in, at the same time there were exemptions 
for farmers. So that . . . because there was a recognition that 
both groups are important, and we need these kinds of 
stimulation for the two groups for different reasons. With 
respect, Mr. Speaker, to what I said — not in my MLA report, 
but in my column for the Saskatoon Free Press — with respect 
to farmers and taxation. This is what I said: 
 

Farmers don’t pay PST on farm machinery and repairs. 
That’s a $62.9 million exemption. There’s another $102 

million because fertilizer, pesticides and seed are PST 
exempt.  
 

And any of you who are going to plant a city garden this spring 
will know also that as well as farmers being PST exempt for 
fertilizer and seeds, so too are gardeners. 
 
I go on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Farm fuel tax exemption adds another $120 million as tax 
incentives to encourage farming. 
 
In total the seven per cent . . . (It was 7 per cent at the time; 
I’m very pleased that we’ve now dropped it down to 6 per 
cent.) 
 

In total the sales tax brings in about 730 million. 
 

If Treaty Indians paid PST, it would likely bring in only an 
extra $9 million. That’s because most Indians don’t make a 
lot of money. Consequently they don’t spend a lot of 
money on things that are taxable. 
 
So there you have it (I go on to say, quoting again from my 
column) — two large groups in Saskatchewan get a break 
on PST. There’s roughly the same number of people in 
each group. Treaty Indians benefit to the tune of $9 
million. Farmers have an exemption of almost $285 
million. Both groups are valuable to Saskatchewan. Indians 
were the original owners of the land, farmers till it today.  

 
So I hope, Mr. Speaker . . . I noted that the member from 
Saltcoats was listening very attentively. I hope that he will now 
understand I did not say, farmers don’t pay taxes. I did not put it 
up in an MLA report. I wrote the column for the Free Press, 
and I was merely talking about one, narrow, tax exemption that 
farmers get and comparing it to one, narrow, tax exemption that 
treaty Indians get. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, it is time in this 
province that we moved to reach out a hand in brotherly and 
sisterly love and stop trying to pit groups against each other. 
We should not be pitting farmers against Indians or anyone else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Ms. Lorje: — And any party that tries to get elected on the 
basis of hate politics, divisive politics and misinformation is not 
conducting themselves in a proper and a tolerant way, I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for the digression, but I did feel 
that it was important to read that into the record. I don’t mind 
being quoted, but I really don’t like being misquoted. It kind of 
offends me. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to what the Sask-a-Tory 
party is saying about our budget, and they quite clearly have 
listened to what the chamber of commerce has put out as its 
wish list and how they are trying to lobby and influence 
government, and you know this is a democracy and they have 
full rights to do that. But what the Saskatchewan Party is saying 
is that people don’t want a sales-tax cut; they want an 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

 

income-tax cut. Now this is a big surprise because quite frankly 
this is . . . we’re almost to the month of April. April 30, 
everybody has to have their income tax forms filled out in this 
country. So clearly income tax is the thing that is uppermost in 
many people’s minds. 
 
I do though want to point out that when we were debating what 
kind of a tax cut we would bring in, in this budget, we had some 
fairly spirited discussions within our caucus as to whether or 
not with the available revenue room that we had, whether we 
should put it into a PST cut or an income tax cut or a 
combination of the two. What we finally decided, as you can 
see, Mr. Speaker, from this budget, is we decided to do a 
combination of both. 
 
There’s a couple of reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. First of all 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now all hon. members know what the 
Chair is going to say. And so we’ll save everyone the time and 
the burden of listening to the remark of the Chair urging all 
members to save their remarks to put them on the record. And 
we’ll return to the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said . . . Now I 
realize that the member from Kindersley is betraying a slight bit 
of envy. Whenever I start to talk about the discussions that we 
have in caucus, that’s when he starts chirping, and it’s fairly 
apparent he would like to be part of a cohesive caucus that 
forms government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Quite frankly, if he carries on the way he is, he 
isn’t even going to be part of this Legislative Assembly . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hear that one hon. member is 
suggesting that chains to his desk might help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the confidentiality of our caucus room, as we 
debated what kind of a tax cut we would implement this year, 
we did decide that we would do both. Now I know that it might 
have been nice if we brought in a 2 cent or 3 cent PST reduction 
but quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what we are after is sustainable 
tax cuts and we want people to recognize that we are going in 
the right direction with respect to taxation. We’re very mindful 
of the province to the west. We know that Alberta has no sales 
tax, but we also know that Alberta has a health care premium. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan with 
this 1 cent sales tax reduction will see an overall savings of 
approximately $102 million. That is $102 for each man, 
woman, and child in this province. On top of that, there is an 
income tax reduction and I think the savings are projected to be 
in the neighbourhood of around $200 for each family of four 
earning $50,000. So, Mr. Speaker, we brought in approximately 
$300 of tax savings for the people of Saskatchewan. What’s 
more, Mr. Speaker, we brought those savings in almost 
immediately and they are sustainable. The PST came into effect 
midnight on Friday. The income tax will come along when the 
federal government rejigs its tables. 
 

In addition, because we were listening to what the chamber of 
commerce said about wanting a 10 per cent income tax 
decrease, in addition what we are doing, which I think is 
extremely important and will have far reaching effects, we are 
moving to redesign the tax system so we can in effect de-link it. 
Now when I say de-link it, I am not referring to the member 
from Regina Elphinstone. I am referring instead to the fact that 
we do not want to have to move our income tax system lockstep 
with the federal government. 
 
There is another government in Canada that also is moving to 
de-linking their tax system and that of course is our esteemed 
neighbour to the immediate west, the province of Alberta. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta got a lot of press when 
they announced that they were going to bring in their flat tax 
system. But what people didn’t stop and focus on when the 
Alberta treasurer, Stockwell Day, announced this . . . I think 
quite frankly what he was really doing was shooting the first 
salvo off the bow in terms of his leadership campaign for the 
United Alternative, or as some people would say, the untied 
alternative. What was not pointed out so clearly was that 
Alberta taxpayers this year will be receiving a tax benefit of — 
how much? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Zero. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — No, not zero, but certainly nowhere near the 
approximately $300 that you will get in Saskatchewan. Instead, 
they’ll be getting a tax break of $50 — $50. And their $50 and 
their much-wanted flat tax system — oh great and 
revolutionary, leading the way in all of Canada and all that sort 
of stuff. Guess what? That may or may not come in in the year 
2003. And only if revenues justify it. So he’s given himself an 
awful lot of whittle room. 
 
I would suggest that the members opposite might want to listen 
and change their, their platform, their way up, their political 
Viagra statement. And they might want to imitate the kinds of 
things that are being said in Alberta because they can promise 
all sorts of things but they don’t really have to deliver them for 
three or four or five years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this weekend after the budget was brought 
down, I decided that I would go out in my constituency and do 
a little door knocking, so I spent Saturday afternoon and part of 
Saturday evening and Sunday afternoon doing some door 
knocking in my riding. I was in the East College Park 
neighbourhood and the Lakeview neighbourhood. 
 
And I want to give you a few quotes about budget reaction, Mr. 
Speaker, that my constituents, all of whom are extremely polite 
and none of whom would consider siccing a dog on me, I want 
to let you know the kinds of reactions that they gave me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the funniest reactions I got was from a 
gentlemen who lives in Lakeview who is a retailer, he has a 
small business. Actually I think it’s a fairly large business, he 
employs probably 50-some people, but I think it’s still 
technically, since he’s not a multinational. I think it’s called a 
small business. He said to me, you know, Patti, he said, I 
thought this was a good news budget and a bad news budget. 
And I said what? And he said, yes, the good news was you 
dropped the PST by one percent. And the bad news was you 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

 

dropped the PST by one percent because now I’ve got to stay 
up till midnight rejigging my cash registers so I can pass the 
savings on to my customers. He was very pleased about the 
budget. 
 
Other comments that I received . . . one woman said to me, oh, 
good news at last. And then we got into a discussion about the 
very difficult time it has been in this province since 1992 when 
we decided to wrestle that deficit down to the ground and the 
great sacrifice that the people of Saskatchewan have had to 
make. And so she recognized that we have turned the corner. 
We are making significant changes. 
 
I want to give you two or three other comments — the positive 
comments. I will also mention the negative comments too 
because I think that’s only fair. 
 
I had a gentleman say to me, quote: 
 

You’re doing a good job. It’s nice to see a balanced budget 
and the debt coming down. 
 

Isn’t that wonderful, Mr. Speaker. That gentleman obviously 
had listened to the budget speech. He knew exactly what was 
happening. He wasn’t having his news distorted either by the 
Conrad Black media or the Sask-a-Tory party opposite. 
 
Another woman said to me, the budget is very positive. I 
especially appreciate the extra money for highways. And when I 
questioned her, she told me that her husband works as a sales 
representative, and he often travels the secondary highways. At 
that point he came home and we got into a discussion about the 
state of the highways in this province, and he was very pleased 
to hear that not only is there $235 million allocated in this 
year’s budget for highways, but we have also increased revenue 
sharing for municipalities to do some partnering with the 
provincial government for road bed improvement. 
 
The final comment I would like to share with you is a comment 
actually that I would direct specifically to the Minister of 
Finance. And this gentleman said to me, I liked the budget 
survey; it’s a good process to involve people. I asked him about 
that. I said, well did you fill it out and send it in? He said, oh 
no, no. I didn’t do that, but I really liked the chance to sit down 
and read it and read all the details, where the money goes, what 
it’s spent on and everything. And it’s so nice to have a 
government that gives that kind of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been saying for eight years that we are 
trying to conduct an open and accountable, transparent 
government. And it was very nice to get that kind of 
spontaneous feedback from a gentleman at the door about what 
he thought about our process. And I would encourage the 
Minister of Finance to carry on that process in years to come 
because I am sure that we will be forming the government come 
the next election. So we will have an opportunity to refine and 
expand that budgetary consultation process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I was door knocking in my riding 
on the weekend and I received numerous positive comments. I 
have to tell you, though, it wasn’t all positive. There were some 
negative comments. 
 

That’s probably not surprising. Saskatchewan is probably the 
most politically sophisticated province in all of Canada and 
probably the most politically aware and urbane area within the 
whole of North America. People are intensely politically aware 
and active. 
 
And so I did receive some comments. People who wanted, for 
instance, to have the chiropractic fees totally done away with. 
They don’t appreciate the co-payment for chiropractic. I can 
certainly understand that. If I had a stiff neck — and luckily this 
place doesn’t make me tense at all — the comments from the 
members opposite don’t bother me. But you know, if I had to be 
seeing a chiropractor on a regular basis I would probably be 
lobbying for that kind of change too. 
 
(1930) 
 
But the main thrust of the negative comments that I received on 
the weekend had to do with income tax. Now this is not really 
surprising; this is what I would say the curse of the Quick Tax 
program. It is now . . . Most people I think when they don’t go 
to an accountant tend to use a computerized program to 
calculate their taxes. And of course human beings being 
naturally curious, once they calculate their taxes they want to 
find out what they would be paying if they were paying taxes in 
other provinces. 
 
So I had people say things to me like, I want the flat tax gone, 
said one gentleman. Quote, he said, “I don’t mind paying for 
health care but the flat tax is a killer.” Another person said to 
me, I want the income taxes lowered more. Now this is not 
surprising and it’s something that’s a bit distressing that people 
are continuously concerned about the flat tax. Like them I 
would like to see us get rid of the flat tax too. 
 
Most importantly though, Mr. Speaker, I wish we had never in 
this province got ourselves in a state where we had to have a 
flat tax. If we didn’t have the debt, courtesy of the 
Sask-a-Tories opposite, we would have no flat tax. We would 
not have this deficit reduction tax that so many people dislike. 
 
I think that, while I agree with my constituents that it would be 
nice to have the flat tax gone, I think that what we have to do is 
be realistic and focus on what is sustainable, what is doable, 
what is deliverable. In my opinion, this budget is sustainable, 
doable, and deliverable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to some of the comments the 
members opposite have been making, talking about our high 
rates of taxation. And it is true, as some critics say, that we have 
one of the heaviest income tax burdens in the country. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, when you take a look, simply looking at the 
provincial income tax payable, Saskatchewan has the second 
highest personal income tax for a family of four with an income 
of $50,000 of all provinces in Canada, save for the province of 
Newfoundland. At this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m tempted to be a 
little cynical and say, thanks heavens for Newfoundland. 
 
But I think also though we should take a look at why we might 
have the second highest personal income tax in the country. 
And one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, is $725 million of interest 
on the public debt brought to us courtesy . . . $725 million 
dollars in interest on the public debt brought to us courtesy of 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

 

the profligate spending engendered by the members opposite 
during the 1980s. 
 
Last year we had to spend $747 million dollars on interest on 
the public debt. As a very wise gentleman said to me in caucus 
one day, that is a whole jumbo jet worth of interest on the debt, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that that was an extremely apt simile. 
 
Now as high as the interest on the debt is draining us, I would 
suggest, and reducing our flexibility to be able to either bring in 
the kinds of programs that many people would like to see or to 
reduce the taxes at the rate that many people would like to see, 
it is luckily coming down. The debt is coming down. It peaked 
at around 888 million in 1993. 
 
The reason it’s coming down is two-fold. First of all, no 
surprise, we live in a global economy. We’re affected by what 
happens in the rest of the world, and the interest rates have 
come down. So we’ve saved a certain amount there. 
 
Secondly though, Mr. Speaker, the interest on the public debt is 
coming down because we are paying off the debt. We have 
taken the debt from $15 billion down to 11.6 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think opposition parties tend to do what 
opposition parties are suppose to do which is oppose. So of 
course they’re going to look for the weak point in any budget. 
More power to them, and I will admit that yes we do have the 
second highest personal income taxes in the country, but let’s 
look at the whole picture, not just the income tax picture. 
 
In total when you calculate provincial income tax; tax credits 
and rebates; health care premiums, and of course Alberta has a 
health care premium of $816 a year for each family; retail sales 
tax, and of course our retail sales tax just came down so we now 
have the lowest retail sales tax of any jurisdiction that levies a 
retail sales tax; plus the gasoline tax — in total, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan now is the fourth lowest in terms of tax revenue 
generated from the people — the fourth lowest in the country 
behind Ontario, Alberta, and Manitoba. 
 
Now before we all rush out and get terribly envious about those 
three provinces I think there are some little facts of reality that 
we ought to take a look, a good hard look at. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, in Ontario — where the so-called common sense 
revolution brought the income taxes down dramatically — in 
Ontario within a year premier Mike Harris has created a 
situation where there are now 80,000 homeless people on the 
streets of Toronto, 80,000 people thrown out of their homes. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s almost the equivalent of 10 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s population living on the streets. That is a blight 
on the Canadian reputation. 
 
I shudder to think what tourists coming to this country must feel 
about us when they see all these homeless people stretched out 
on Bloor Street or Yonge Street with their sleeping bags and 
their shopping carts. It is a travesty of social justice, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t want that kind of record. I don’t want that kind 
of thing happening in this province. I quite cheerfully will pay 
my share of taxes in order to prevent that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta which has the second lowest total tax 
take in the country, they pay $816 per year in health care 

premiums for families. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, for those 
people who are not fortunate enough to have an employer 
picking up that tab, there are many people — I think it’s in the 
range of 25 to 30 per cent — who are in arrears on their health 
care premiums. So that if they go to a doctor or to a hospital, a 
quarter of a million people in Alberta are under the threat that 
they may get turned away, that they may not receive any health 
care coverage. Mr. Speaker, that’s not the kind of province that 
I want to see in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the third province is Manitoba. Manitoba, I think you can 
quite rightly compare the two provinces because we have 
basically similar kinds of economies and we’ve kept pretty 
lockstep, the two provinces. One year Manitoba’s taxes may be 
slightly lower than ours, the next year they may be slightly 
higher, but Manitoba and Saskatchewan generally are on a par. 
 
There is one significant difference though, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite should always be aware of. In the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have the population spread 
out over the whole of the province. It’s not like somebody’s 
taken a squirt of toothpaste along the US (United States) border 
and plunked down all the people. Instead we have . . . and 
successive governments, Liberals and Conservatives and New 
Democrat governments have attempted to keep . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members on both 
sides of the House need not shout across the floor. Order. And I 
will encourage all hon. members to extend to the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Southeast the courtesy of being able to enter into 
debate in an uninterrupted manner. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do apologize that I 
seem to be arousing the ire of the members opposite so 
frequently. And I also apologize that I have such a great 
cheering section on this side of the House — that so many 
members wish to engage in the debate. 
 
But what I wanted to say was that the difference between 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan is in Manitoba the population 
tends to be concentrated around the cities of Winnipeg and 
Brandon; whereas in Saskatchewan we have a great many of 
our citizens living in so-called rural circumstances. We have a 
large farm population and that, of necessity, requires a very 
major commitment to the rural infrastructure — to the roads, 
the highways, elevator systems, rail systems, and so forth. I’m 
very proud that we do that, Mr. Speaker, and it’s important that 
we maintain the rural population in this province, and we do 
that through raising government revenue and then having 
government programs. So I do hope that the members opposite 
will understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to — hopefully briefly if I don’t get either 
applauded or jeered and get sidetracked — I want to move very 
quickly into a few comments both looking at what we’ve done 
and looking towards the future. I was not able to participate in 
the Throne Speech debate because we have so many members 
on this side of the House, and there just wasn’t time for all who 
want to speak on the Throne Speech, so I want to address a few 
comments about what I view as the moral purpose that we have 
here in government as members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I want to start out, Mr. Speaker, by quoting from a book 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

 

called The Gifts of the Jews by a man named Thomas Cahill. 
Mr. Cahill wrote in his introduction to this book, he wrote: 
 

We normally think of history as one catastrophe after 
another, war followed by war, outrage by outrage — 
almost as if history were nothing more than all the 
narratives of human pain, assembled in sequence. And 
surely this is, often enough, an adequate description. But 
history is also the narratives of grace, the recountings of 
those blessed and inexplicable moments when someone did 
something for someone else, saved a life, bestowed a gift, 
gave something beyond what was required by 
circumstance. 

 
. . . But the great gift-givers, arriving in the moment of 
crisis, provided for transition, for transformation, and even 
for transfiguration, leaving us a world more varied and 
complex, more awesome and delightful, more beautiful 
and strong than the one they had found. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I find that very inspirational and I think it fairly 
aptly describes what all of us on all sides of the House, whether 
democratic socialists or free enterprisers or something in 
between or something totally different, what we would like to 
do as members of a government. We would like to give a gift to 
the people that we are serving. 
 
The gist of Mr. Cahill’s book is that life is not just about 
enduring what the gods hand out to us; there can also be 
progress, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Cahill’s quote applies to individuals, 
but it also can apply to governments. And just as Mr. Cahill, in 
recounting the history of Jewish people in his book, The Gifts of 
the Jews, talked about individuals and collectives, so too here in 
Saskatchewan we can talk about individuals like Tommy 
Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney. 
 
(1945) 
 
And we can also talk about the CCF and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen gifts of grace in this province. We 
have seen people who gave us something to help us cope with 
transition, to help us transform, and indeed on occasion to help 
us transfigure and rise above our daily living circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CCF and the NDP in this province gave us 
medicare; they gave us publicly-funded pensions. They gave us 
hospitalization services. They gave us labour standards and they 
gave us crown corporations. These are things that we can all be 
justly proud of. 
 
Mr. Blakeney, following on Tommy Douglas’s and Woodrow 
Lloyd’s good examples, came along and with his government 
— also a good group of men and women — further transformed 
the face of Saskatchewan. He brought us the dental plan, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, northern mining, the 
prescription drug plan. And then unfortunately we saw a halt in 
that process of transition and transformation. 
 
But then in 1991 the Romanow government was . . . Mr. 
Speaker, in 1991 the current New Democratic government was 
elected under the leadership of the member from Riversdale and 

we see again that continuing process of transformation and 
transfiguration. 
 
We’ve seen debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, and deficit 
elimination, both of which I am immensely proud of. We see 
pay equity being implemented through negotiations; we see a 
Child Benefit plan. Indeed this year, as I said earlier, 26 per 
cent increase for the funding for that Child Benefit plan, 
recognizing that it’s children who need the extra help and it is 
children that we have to put most of our focus and most of our 
energy on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen, under the current government, 
various things like The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. I 
would point out, just as an aside, that I was recently in Oakland, 
California meeting with Jerry Brown’s people. 
 
Members may know that Jerry Brown used to be the governor 
of California, made an unsuccessful attempt to become the 
president of the United States and — I guess either in a fit of 
pique or a fit of inspiration — decided that if he couldn’t be 
president of the United States, then he would be mayor of 
Oakland, California which is exactly what he has done. He’s in 
the process of re-inventing government there. 
 
And I noted when I was meeting and discussing with them that 
they have taken our notion of The Victims of Domestic 
Violence Act which basically turns the whole situation of 
spousal abuse on its head. And instead of compelling women 
and children to flee from their home in the middle of the night 
with a garbage bag containing the few possessions they can 
carry, instead puts the onus for change and for leaving on the 
perpetrator of the violence and asks the perpetrator to leave the 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Oakland, California, they are looking at 
different initiatives that will expand and enhance that basic 
thrust, and they have something they call tough love, operation 
tough love, where they do a sweep to pick up all the men who 
had orders to go for aggression management and so forth and 
who have not followed through on their court orders. And they 
pick them up and make sure that they do follow through on 
these orders. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, they have a very innovative program that 
I would like to see our government giving some consideration 
to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when police are sent out to deal with a domestic 
violence situation, the police do not arrive alone. The police go 
out with a counsellor, and the counsellor is able to begin the 
process of psychological change right away rather than waiting 
until people have had a time to cool off and get out of the hearts 
and flowers stage that often accompanies the cessation of 
violence and before they get into rationalizations and so forth. 
They start the counselling right away, so there can be some 
solid change. 
 
But I digress. Other things that this government has done that I 
think have started the transformation in this province are 
various initiatives to stop childhood sexual abuse. We are not 
viewing the young children, the young boys and girls who are 
compelled for various reasons to sell their bodies on the streets, 



March 19, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

 

we are no longer viewing them as perpetrators or as criminals, 
but rather we’re viewing them as individuals in very 
unfortunate circumstances in need of assistance and counselling 
and safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other things that we have done as members know 
who’ve read the budget document, we are spending the most 
money we’ve ever spent on health care. We have a revamped 
health care system and, I think, Mr. Speaker, we have proof that 
wellness actually works. And I want to, just to very quickly 
quote from the Rosthern Village Press, Wednesday, March 3, 
1999, which will give an indication of just exactly how well the 
health care system is working in Saskatchewan and also in 
small town Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand I may not use a members name so I 
will simply, in quoting from this newspaper article, say that a 
certain member opposite in the Saskatchewan Party is now as 
the headline says: 
 

On the mend, Rosthern MLA (B.H.) is recovering from an 
emergency appendix operation February 17, and while he’s 
still on the job, he’s had “some restraints” placed on him 
by doctors who fear the possibility of infection. 

 
Not sure where he was going to be infected. The newspaper 
article goes on to say: 
 

In an interview last week, the member from Rosthern said 
he first noted sharp pains in his abdomen February 15, but 
dismissed them as symptoms of a flu bug that was then 
going around: “I limped around till Wednesday night ( 
February 17), when my daughter took me to hospital and I 
was diagnosed as having gangrene on my appendix,” he 
explained. “I underwent emergency surgery and the 
doctors took it out about 2:00 o’clock on Thursday 
morning (February 18). I was in hospital about a week and 
got home February 23. 
 
“It was a rest, but one I could have done without,” he 
added. “I still have to take it easy, but other than that, I’m 
feeling pretty good.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have here sitting in this House this evening 
living proof, minus a gangrenous appendix, that health care 
does work in Saskatchewan and I do wish the member from 
Rosthern all the best and thank heavens he only has one 
appendix. Now, Mr. Speaker, if Thomas Cahill’s statement 
about gifts of grace is true, the opposite is also true. Some 
individuals and some groups historically have worked to 
reverse progress, to suppress human accomplishments, to 
replace charity with selfishness, compassion with greed, 
co-operation with rampant individualism. And I notice that the 
members opposite are starting to increase their volume again 
now and perhaps it is because they’re recognizing themselves in 
my statements. Perhaps the professional welder from 
Kindersley or the newest Sask-a-Tory from Humboldt 
recognizes themselves in the description I was just giving. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what have the Tories given us in 
Saskatchewan? How have they advanced the cause of our 
society and its people? Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to refer to 
what happened in this province in the ‘30s when during the 

height of the Depression we saw rampant racism and extremely 
ugly things, with people going around at night draped in white 
sheets and so forth. 
 
I’m not going to mention that but what I am going to talk about 
is some of the more, the more recent past for the members 
opposite. They gave us the longest list of public-spirited 
criminals in the history of the province. They gave us a health 
care system in retreat with the destruction of the children’s 
dental plan. And who will ever forget the sight, Mr. Speaker, of 
all those dental nurses crying as they came out of the hotel 
room knowing that the good work that they were doing and the 
jobs that . . . the contribution they were making to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the children of Saskatchewan, had been in one 
cavalier, callous moment, swept away as if it were nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite did more, though. They 
gave us Grant Schmidt, for heaven’s sakes. They gave us the 
big giveaway. You know, they gave away the mining draglines 
down in Estevan. They gave away all the highway equipment. 
They gave away Saskoil, potash corporation; you name it, they 
gave it away. They didn’t just give away things though; they 
gave us a few things. They gave us GigaText and they gave us 
Eric Berntson. And, Mr. Speaker, in just a year ago, they 
returned to us the dark of night as a clever political move. Mr. 
Speaker, they formed a new party in the dead of the night 
without benefit of going to the electorate, without benefit of 
consulting the people who had elected them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here you go, two contributions to history I’ve tried 
to outline: the contributions from people in the ’80s from the 
Tory Party, contributions in the ’90s from the New Democratic 
Party. You take your pick as to which one that you think more 
gives us a gift of grace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is one more step that we are taking as 
a government, a big one in terms of the lifespan of this 
particular term of government, but a very small step in terms of 
the panorama of history. But it is a step forward. It’s balanced. 
It’s balanced between expansion of necessary programs and tax 
adjustments, between looking forward to the future and past to 
the sins of the previous administration for which, as we know, 
we will be paying for some time to come. 
 
And one thing that I particularly like about this budget and this 
Finance minister is that the budget says and the minister says 
quite openly, we can’t do everything at once. You address what 
is most in need of attention. This year that means addressing 
health care. And at the same time, you prepare for what is next 
in line which will be next year, tax review and revision. 
 
I suppose that means that this budget really isn’t an election 
budget because it makes no claim to be all things to all people 
for all time. But quite frankly as Gerry Sperling said this 
morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio, 
every budget is an election budget. This budget builds on the 
work that we have been doing for the last eight years, and it 
takes us forward towards the new millennium. 
 
I like this budget. It is prudent, responsible, progressive, 
humane, creative, and balanced. I will be voting for it, Mr. 
Speaker. I will not be voting for the amendment that the 
members opposite have put, but I will be voting for the budget. 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1999 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I would like to, at this time, adjourn debate . . . 
move to adjourn, sorry. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 


