





























































Hansard: April 30, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 933 
 April 30, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 
present on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
demand that the federal government work with 
Saskatchewan to put in place a farm aid package that 
provides real relief to those who need it, and that the 
provincial government develop a long-term farm safety net 
program as it promised to do when it cancelled GRIP 
against the wishes of farmers. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the community of 
Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the petitions presented at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order and are 
hereby read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased today to introduce to you some very special students, 
many of whom are from my home town of Bruno, seated in the 
east gallery. And, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
Assembly I have 37 grade 8 students and I’m looking forward 
to talking with them a little bit later on today. 
 
Accompanying the students are Mr. Jake Jmaeff, teacher from 
Bruno; Mr. Scott Linton, teacher from Cudworth; and just 
behind the bar a teacher associate, Ms. Dawn Buckle. And 
accompanying them also are a number of chaperones — Mrs. 
Janet Hering — Janet is a member of the Wakaw School 
Division Board; Mrs. Connie Basset, Mrs. Brenda Tremel, and 
Mrs. Marie Tegenkamp. And also a chaperone from Cudworth, 
Jackie Williams. 
 
I would ask all the members of the Assembly to issue a warm 
welcome to these students, teachers, and chaperones from 
Bruno and Cudworth. And in a very hearty manner put your 
hands together and welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise and to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of, I think 10 students sitting 
in the west gallery along with two teachers. 
 
The students are part of an interchange of Canadian studies, 
which as the name would imply, Mr. Speaker, means that 

they’re having a look at politics and history and things going on 
in Canada. And part of what they’re doing is to examine the 
legislative process and the political process. 
 
And I think that’s to be encouraged and they’re to be 
commended for taking an interest in current affairs and in 
government and political affairs. And I hope that they find 
today’s proceedings to be interesting, and I hope somewhat 
enlightening. We’ll see. 
 
And with them today, Mr. Speaker, are teachers, Mrs. Heather 
Marshall from Mount Royal Collegiate in Saskatoon which 
happens to be in my riding. And I might add, it’s a very good 
school, I attended it myself, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. Bill 
Harrison, who is from Bedford Road Collegiate which is down 
the road on Rusholme Road in Saskatoon. 
 
And I will be meeting with the teachers and the students and 
answering their questions, and providing drinks, I think. And 
we’re going to have our picture taken. And I’d like all members 
to join with me in welcoming these students from around 
Saskatchewan, and their teachers, to the legislature here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the Assembly, a very important guest . . . a couple of 
important guests in your gallery. 
 
With us today is His Excellency José Letelier, the ambassador 
of Chile. And with Mr. Letelier is Eduardo Santos, who is the 
agriculture attaché in Washington DC (District of Columbia). 
His Excellency is visiting us for a few days here. 
 
Yesterday, I met with him; and he met with the Genex Swine 
Group. This morning, His Excellency met with the president of 
SaskTel; the Speaker, I believe; and I’ll be hosting a luncheon 
later on; and he has meetings with STEP (Saskatchewan Trade 
& Export Partnership) and SaskEnergy later this afternoon. 
 
As you know, Chile’s an important country to Canada, we’ve 
got a free trade agreement, and he is here exploring new ground 
and meeting some people and we want to have all members 
welcome His Excellency and Mr. Santos to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with our colleague across the floor, on behalf of the official 
opposition, and welcome the ambassador and friends from 
Chile. We look forward to developing business interests 
between both of our nations, and I hope that you find excellent 
opportunities while you’re in Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus, would like to welcome our guests here from 
Chile and hope that being here in Saskatchewan and Canada at 
this time of year — one of the most wondrous times of the year 
when new life is springing forth — that you enjoy your stay and 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

we’re certainly happy to have you here and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I want to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly some important guests in your 
gallery. Mr. Harry Gow is the national volunteer president of 
Transport 2000 Canada. Groups in Ottawa and Saskatchewan 
founded Transport 2000 simultaneously in 1976, and Mr. Gow 
was the first national president and was elected again last year. 
 
He resides in Chelsea, Quebec and teaches sociology at the 
University of Ottawa. The aims of Transport 2000 are consumer 
advocacy, balanced national transportation policy, and 
environmental protection. While interested in all forms of 
transportation, Transport 2000 has been particularly active in 
promoting rail travel. 
 
Mr. Gow is here to attend the annual meeting of Transport 2000 
Saskatchewan — the provincial affiliate of his organization. 
He’s also here to become better informed on transport issues 
here in Saskatchewan and will be meeting with officials with 
our Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Accompanying Mr. Gow is Michael Jackson, our chief of 
protocol who was the co-founder of Transport 2000 
Saskatchewan and served as the organization’s first executive 
director before joining our public service. Accompanying also 
Michael Jackson is his seven-year-old daughter Sarah Anne and 
we want all members to welcome our important guests here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Civil Rights 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the last few weeks, this Assembly has been treated to the 
spectacle of sanctimonious bleeding from the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) on obeying the law. 
 
It is ironic that 30 years ago this month, Mr. Speaker, in 
Memphis, Tennessee, African-American garbage collectors 
went on strike because even though they worked at the same job 
as their white counterparts, they were paid less. The city council 
of the day, the lawfully elected council passed a motion to force 
them back to work. The garbage workers refused and called on 
Dr. Martin Luther King to help support them. 
 
The law was unjust, the issue was fairness, and Dr. King led the 
struggle against it even though it eventually cost him his life. 
 
If these examples don’t hit home for the Premier, perhaps he 
would consider these. In the First World War Slavic Canadians 
were put in camps because the government thought they would 
be disloyal to Canada. Countless Canadians were deprived of 
their civil rights again in the Second World War when Japanese 
Canadians were interred as a result of government laws. 
 
If the Premier cannot abide men and women of good conscience 

objecting to unjust laws, then perhaps he should re-examine his 
own commitment to democracy and human rights. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Headlines in Saskatchewan Weeklies 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday it was good to hear a 
Tory report on some good constituency news — a rare but 
welcome one. That reminded me that we have been somewhat 
remiss this session in helping the opposition bring good news of 
the province to their constituents. 
 
So to catch up a bit, here are five recent good news headlines 
from weeklies around our province. From The Melfort Journal, 
March 30, “New company ready to start construction of 
agricultural service centre in Melfort.” In The Four-Town 
Journal, March 31, “Local entrepreneurs run top shop in 
Saskatchewan.” The Gravelbourg Tribune, March 29, reports 
that “Gravelbourg enterprise centre taking shape.” Also from 
the Tribune, April 6, “UGG fertilizer plant opens.” And to 
conclude, two for the price of one: from the Foam Lake Review, 
March 29, “Grand opening of Peppertree restaurant.” And the 
March 31 Kindersley Clarion tells us, “Subway to open 
restaurant in June.” 
 
Welcome announcements, large and small, from around the 
province, brought to you by the caucus that believes the sun 
rises in the east and sets in the west — and that pretty much 
everything else is on course as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Marsville ’99 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
weekend 14 grade 7 science students from Bruno school went 
to Holy Cross High School in Saskatoon to take part in 
Marsville ’99. Ten other classrooms from around the province 
also participated in that program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Marsville is a simulation activity where 
students build habitats to live in as if they were on Mars. Three 
schools get together to build a habitat made of clear plastic, 
sealed with duct tape, and inflated with a fan. Students have 
communicated with other schools by Internet throughout the 
year planning their projects. Students also had to make a model 
of a recreation and health system that would be needed on 
Mars, something that would be suitable for anyone from age 1 
to 100. 
 
While at Marsville, students had a video linkup with other sites 
in Canada and had a video conference with Edmonton where 
they showed each other their systems. Students also had an 
opportunity to ask questions of a former astronaut, Mike 
McKay. The Bruno science class spent a great deal of time 
designing mission patches for their school and two of those 
patches will be going up in space next month with Canadian 
astronaut, Julie Payette. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend my congratulations to the grade 7 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

science students from Bruno school and their teacher, Mr. Garry 
Sibley, for undertaking this successful and innovative project. 
Thank you. 
 

Prince Albert Domino’s Pizza Manager Honoured 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As a member of this legislature I’ve had the privilege 
of informing my colleagues on a number of times about the 
amazing and talented people that live in Prince Albert and I 
want to say it’s a honour to stand here again today and 
recognize the achievement of another one of my constituents. 
Rarely have I had the opportunity to inform the House that one 
of my constituents has been recognized as the best in the world 
in their chosen profession. I have that good fortune to do so 
today. 
 
Mr. Al Mohr, the manager of Prince Albert’s Domino’s Pizza 
restaurant has been selected Domino Pizza’s international 
manager of the year beating out, Mr. Speaker, competition from 
such places as the Netherlands and Australia. Al is the first 
Canadian to receive such an honour. 
 
Among other things Al was recognized for unique innovation, 
and customer service, and employee training and motivation. I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, the pizzer at Domino’s . . . the pizza 
at Domino’s — that was a bit of a tongue-twister — the pizza at 
Domino’s is as hot as our latest poll results and I look forward 
. . . And I want to say congratulations to Al for being the best in 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenaston School Receives Earth Award 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I was in 
the community of Kenaston to celebrate with the students at 
Kenaston School. The school received an Earth Award, Mr. 
Speaker. We all know that as our environment becomes more 
fragile we must make a greater effort to preserve it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only a few schools in Saskatchewan and indeed 
across Canada receive this award and the students at Kenaston 
School have taken up the challenge to help clean up our 
environment and should be commended for it. 
 
So congratulations to Linda Purves, who spearheaded the green 
machine; principal, Dan O’Handley and all the staff who 
supported the students; the community of Kenaston and 
surrounding area. And once again a special thanks to all the 
students at Kenaston School for taking up the challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Company Receives Power of Business Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
hope the members in the House don’t get tired of hearing all the 
good news that comes out of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency because I’m proud to announce more today. 
 
Earlier this week the Deputy Premier announced that a 

Weyburn company, Alcatel, received the Power of Business 
Award introduced by SaskPower to recognize important 
contributions made by local Saskatchewan suppliers. 
 
John Murray, the Alcatel plant manager in Weyburn; Wayne 
Conroy, the regional sales manager; and Brian Tinkler, 
vice-president and general manager of Alcatel Power Cables 
were on hand to accept their award. 
 
Alcatel employees 110 people at its plant in Weyburn, which 
has been operating since 1956, manufacturing a wide variety of 
cable for power transmission. Alcatel’s vice-president, Mr. 
Tinkler, said, “Our partnership with SaskPower has enabled 
Alcatel’s Weyburn plant to expand and diversify.” 

 
He also hinted that Alcatel in Weyburn has a good chance for 
further expansion, and that’s very good news. 
 
This type of partnership between SaskPower and Alcatel is a 
win-win-win situation, benefiting jobs, service, and the 
community. When you have high quality products and reliable 
service such as Alcatel provides you can see why Alcatel is 
deserving of the SaskPower Power of Business Award. 
Congratulations. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Last night the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley and I were pleased to attend the 1999 
Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards banquet at the 
Centre of the Arts. This event is one of several held around the 
province to honour women who are making significant 
contributions to their communities in several categories. 
 
In Regina the ceremony has a significant other purpose as well. 
Proceeds help support Y-sponsored services such as the Isabel 
Johnson Shelter, the children who witness violence program, 
Big Sisters, and several others — all very worthy causes. 
 
Last night women in nine separate categories were honoured. It 
is always worth noting that most categories had more than one 
nominee. All of them deserve equal recognition with the 
winners. 
 
The award winners were: Karen Harvey as Young Women of 
Distinction; Helen Marzolf as Arts and Culture; Jeanne 
Martinson in the Business, Labour and Professions category; 
Bonnie Morton in Community or Humanitarian Service; 
Marjorie Wilson for Contribution to Rural Community; Dr. 
Heather Hadjlstavropoulos for Health and Wellness; Francis 
Haidl for Science and Technology; Darlene Solie in Sports and 
Recreation; and Ruth Dafoe received the Lifetime Achievement 
Award. 
 
My congratulations to these recipients, to all the nominees, and 
to all the women of distinction throughout our great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

Armstrong Cheese Company Opening in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I’d 
like to join with the Minister of Agriculture and Food in 
welcoming a new agriculture investment to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Armstrong Cheese Company announced yesterday that it 
will be establishing a new cheese manufacturing operation in 
Saskatoon. Work has already started on the operation inside the 
Agri-Foods International processing plant. They will take up to 
30,000 square feet and produce around 40,000 kilograms of 
cheese per day. This means that 22 people will be directly 
employed in manufacturing and distribution positions. 
 
The Milk Control Board has assured Armstrong that they will 
be able to supply all the milk that is needed to make the cheese, 
and Saskatchewan milk producers will be able to maximize the 
return of their products by allowing their raw milk to be 
manufactured into a high-value item. 
 
Rob Dougans, general manager of Armstrong, says he’s 
delighted to make this investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to say we’re delighted to have him. 
 
The new operation is expected to be up and running by July. I’d 
like to congratulate everyone involved with this announcement 
and wish the Armstrong Cheese Company much success in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nursing Shortage in East Central Health District 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health or her designate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all week the minister has been bragging about the 
nurses they’ve been hiring in Saskatchewan. Of course the same 
NDP government that promised to hire 200 nurses last year and 
then wound up closing 64 beds in Regina because of a nursing 
shortage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is spreading. Today we learn 
that the East Central Health District is closing 18 beds in the 
Yorkton hospital. And what’s the reason? Not enough nurses, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to deal with this 
problem? When are you going to stop driving nurses out of 
Saskatchewan? And when will we see some of the nurses 
you’ve been bragging about hiring in the East Central Health 
District? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have heard very loudly and very clearly the concerns of the 
nurses being expressed across the province about workplace 
issues, and the position of our government is that every effort 
should be made to ensure that services are managed in a way 
that does not require excessive overtime. 
 
The East Central Health District is actively recruiting nurses 

and they are reviewing six applications presently from outside 
the province I understand, Mr. Speaker. From our point of view 
we want the district and the nurses, Mr. Speaker, to work 
co-operatively to address the concerns. And for our part what 
we’re doing as a result of the recent budget, Mr. Speaker, is 
funding the best ever offer that has been put on the table to 
resolve some of the nurse’s workplace concerns. 
 
And if we work co-operatively, Mr. Speaker, with the interests 
of patients in mind, I think that these parties, the administration 
and the nurses, who are people who can operate in good faith 
and have patient safety in mind, will start to address some of 
these concerns and we support them in that endeavour, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it doesn’t matter what kind of a spin you put on this, 
the bottom line is beds are closing because of a nursing 
shortage. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s no one else to blame but you. This nursing 
shortage and these bed closures are a direct result of your 
mismanagement in the health care system, and you haven’t 
learned anything. You haven’t heard a word nurses are telling 
you and now beds are closing and patient care is going to be 
jeopardized in the East Central Health District. Mr. Minister, 
you’re failing the people of Saskatchewan. And if you are 
listening, why are beds continuing to close in Saskatchewan 
hospitals in the East Central Health District? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the 
opposition in its ability to identify the problem. I think the 
opposition is very effective at identifying the problem. 
 
But unfortunately, what they’re not very good at is identifying 
the solution. And as was indicated in the Moosomin World 
Spectator, Mr. Speaker, of November 23, 1998, the Leader of 
the Conservative Party said this: 
 

“We’ve been able to identify some of the problems, but we 
haven’t been able to identify the solution,” Hermanson 
responded. 

 
So we hear the problem, Mr. Speaker. We don’t hear any 
solutions from over there, except for this, that in the platform of 
the Conservative Party, what is proposed? What is proposed is 
the freezing of health care spending. 
 
I’d like to ask the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, how that’s 
going to solve any of our problems. I don’t think that’s going to 
solve the problem. 
 
And I think for a change, even the Saskatoon StarPhoenix got it 
right on March 27 when they said, “Given the tax-gutting, 
expense-freezing alternative offered by the Saskatchewan Party, 
the campaign should prove interesting.” 
 
They have no solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Management of Crown Investments Corporation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
morning are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s now clear that you and your government 
learned nothing at all with regard to Channel Lake last year . . . 
learned nothing from it. You have done nothing to remove 
political interference from the Crown corporations. Your NDP 
family of Crown corporations are still riddled with 
mismanagement and political interference from you and your 
government, and Saskatchewan families pay the price every 
time they pay their utility bills. 
 
Mr. Minister, why have you done nothing to remove NDP 
political interference from the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
shows his ignorance about the operation of business in general, 
whether it’s private or public. But maybe that shouldn’t surprise 
us given the fact that he, along with Mr. Devine when they went 
to conventions, had a policy to privatize the Crowns. And in 
their new party platform, if you look at the page where it talks 
about privatization, they say clearly that they would privatize 
SaskTel and look at privatizing other Crown corporations. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, as it would relate to the 
management of the Crown corporations, obviously there is a 
role for the government in treasury benches in operating Crown 
corporations in the big picture. How else would you have it? 
But as it would relate to the day-to-day operations of the 
Crowns, if you’re saying Mr. Frank Proto, the new chair of 
SaskEnergy, or Milt Fair over at Power are political appointees, 
you’re actually doing those individuals a big disservice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, well 
that’s a very lovely answer. The problem is no one in the 
province believes you including . . . including . . . including 
your own SaskPower board members. I have a copy of a letter 
of resignation you recently received from Calgary lawyer, 
Gwen Randall, who used to be on the board of SaskPower, who 
when appointed to the board of SaskPower wrote the following 
letter to you: 
 

I accepted the appointment to the board of directors on the 
understanding that the corporations were seeking a more 
independent business-based board. 
 

That’s what you’ve always said, Mr. Minister. 
 

However in the past year I have found that I cannot fulfill 
my fiduciary responsibilities because of the governance 
structure of the corporation. Key decisions which have a 
profound affect upon the corporation’s business are made 
elsewhere. I cannot agree with the decisions that were in 
the best interests of the corporation. 
 

Mr. Minister, isn’t this a clear indication that the NDP’s 

political interference in the Crown corporations is alive and 
well over at SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, not at all. I don’t 
agree with that member on many things. I don’t agree with him 
on privatizing SaskTel, which is his intent. When you sweep 
away his cover, what it really is is the policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party, as it was with the Tory Party in the late 
1980s to privatize SaskEnergy, now to privatize SaskTel. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that the management 
of the Crowns, the management of the Crowns is a balance 
between what the Treasury Board or the treasury benches 
through CIC and that board giving direction to the Crowns, 
which is an appropriate and I think the only way to operate the 
Crowns at one level, leaving the day-to-day operation of the 
Crowns to the management and boards of directors. 
 
Now does everyone agree on that balance? Obviously not. But 
if you were to ask Mr. Proto or the other Chairs of the boards, 
they would understand that that balance, while not perfect, is in 
line with the recommendations from the review that was done 
in 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, this person, Gwen Randall, 
resigned because she couldn’t put up with your political 
interference. In her letter of resignation she said: 
 

Key decisions, which have a profound effect upon the 
corporation’s business activities and structure, are made 
elsewhere. 

 
Key decisions are made with you, and you know that. 
 
What does she mean by that? Does she mean your office or the 
Premier’s office? Mr. Minister, what exactly does she mean 
when she says that there is interference from elsewhere? What 
caused Gwen Randall’s resignation, when she said to you in a 
letter, “Key decisions . . . are made elsewhere”? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not in a position 
to get into the individual’s mind as to what the rationale was, 
but I’m sure she has good rationale for what she says in her 
letter. 
 
And I want to say that there is debate about what the balance is 
as to what role should be played by the executive of the Crown 
corporations and the board of directors of CIC. But what I can 
tell you is the management of the Crowns . . . And that balance, 
I believe, has never been better both with SaskPower today — 
and you may have liked it better when George Hill was there, 
your boy, earning over 400,000 a year with total political 
involvement from the then minister, whether it was Mr. 
Berntson or other people who were involved in the management 
of the Crowns. 
 
But I can tell you that the management of the Crowns today, 
creating some profit for return to the investors — that’s the 
family of Saskatchewan — with the lowest rates for most 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

corporations in terms of rates in Canada, it’s well balanced. 
 
And I think the member opposite should apologize to the men 
and women, who he continually slurs, who manage these 
corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another question 
for the minister responsible for political interference over at 
CIC. A few weeks ago, Mr. Minister, SaskFor MacMillan 
invited bids on its oriented strand board plant in Hudson Bay. 
The original tender was for an open shop project. 
 
Then all of a sudden you and CIC stepped in and said that 
there’s going to be a project agreement with the Building 
Trades Council and the Construction Labour Relations 
Association. Mr. Minister, in effect that means that it will be a 
closed shop. Just like your union only tendering policy here in 
Saskatchewan, the Crown Tendering Agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is CIC stepping in to insist on a union only 
policy after their original tender call called for an open shop 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite again, his lack of understanding about project 
management, whether it’s the private sector or public sector, or 
in this case, a joint venture, a joint venture of a large 
multinational corporation and SaskFor — this is a joint venture. 
 
And I know the article you’re quoting from where it says, Mr. 
McLachlan says, and I quote: “My understanding is, it’s going 
to translate into a hundred per cent increase in labour costs.” 

 
Now do you think that MacMillan Bloedel, an international, 
multinational corporation, would stand idly by and pay 100 per 
cent more when they’re a major partner. Give your head a 
shake. That’s not the way it works. 
 
But what I do want to say is that this will be a site agreement if 
the project goes ahead. That’s the same thing as Grant Devine 
did on the Shand project, on the Husky upgrader at 
Lloydminster. It’s what is happening in Alberta in all major 
projects because it works best for the investors. And for you to 
say that somehow this is a wrong-headed idea, puts you totally 
out of sync with what’s happening in the industry in Western 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, once again your political 
interference is costing the people of Saskatchewan millions of 
dollars of wasted taxpayers’ money. 
 
The construction association says that your policy will drive up 
the cost of this project by some 30 per cent. We understand the 
original open-shop bid was for about $10 million. That means 
you’re going to be wasting about $3 million of taxpayers’ 
money on your union-only tendering policy. 
 

The problem is this project was supposed to create jobs for local 
people, like farmers and other people in the area who need the 
extra income. Your union-only policy will prevent local people 
from the Hudson Bay area from getting the jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you just simply stick with the original 
open-shop tender project? Why are you going to call on a 
union-only tendering project that will cost taxpayers several 
millions of dollars and likely put at risk jobs for local people in 
this industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that when site agreements are used on major 
projects — again I say if the project goes ahead at Hudson Bay 
— are common and standard procedures within the industry, 
whether it is private or public or in this case joint venture. 
 
And I want to say that our friends in industry in Western 
Canada, some even go further than this. Denis Kornelson, the 
CEO (chief executive officer) of the New Alliance Pipeline, has 
chosen to build the Alliance Pipeline, the biggest project in the 
history of Canada, totally union. And they also are purchasing 
their pipe and are required to purchase their pipe from a 
union-only steel plant at IPSCO. Why do they do that? 
 
Why do they take time to pay extra to train Aboriginal people 
which they are doing? Why do they do that? Do you know why 
they do that? Because it’s the best in building a solid 
infrastructure in inclusion . . . including people, union, 
Aboriginal. And it may cost a little more but in building a 
society even the private sector is way out ahead of the old tired 
Tory of divide and rule for political purposes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 

Mr. McPherson: — This morning we talked with Yorkton 
local SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) president, Suzanne 
Stewart. She says the large amount of nurses who are unable to 
work in Yorkton is not a job action. She says this is simply a 
response to all of the overtime that they have been forced to 
work. 
 
A lot of nurses there are above the average age for nurses in the 
rest of the province. In her words, and I quote, “They’re tired 
and sick and no longer feel safe to provide safe patient care.” 
She adds, “There comes a time when the body says it just can’t 
take it any longer.” 
 
Mr. Premier, Suzanne is home right now with pneumonia. She 
is upset that management has insinuated that this is a job action 
when it is really just a response of years of overwork brought 
on by your health care reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what does he say to all the nurses 
in Yorkton and other communities throughout Saskatchewan 
who are sick and tired, brought on by continual overtime and 
your health care reform, and what action are you going to take 
today, Mr. Premier, to reopen those beds in Yorkton? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, in this 
province over the last several weeks and I think even a few 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

months, we’ve heard a lot about the concerns of nurses. And 
many of those concerns are legitimate, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
heard the concerns of management. 
 
But what I would say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 
this. Let’s try to get the parties together, focusing not on the 
concerns only of nurses or the concerns only of management, 
but on the concerns of the patients and the public of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The nurses of Saskatchewan are good people; they are people 
that want to proceed in good faith, and I believe so are the 
people that operate our health districts. And what we need, Mr. 
Speaker, is not rancorous debate and to raise the level of heat on 
this issue; we need to get people together to focus on patient 
care, and let’s all work together to try to resolve these 
workplace issues for the benefit of the patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I would imagine if there’s 
nurses watching this television broadcast today, they’re 
laughing all over the province at that response. 
 
Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the Premier. You can’t 
say you weren’t told that workplace stress has taken a high toll 
on Saskatchewan nurses. You can’t say you didn’t know that 
Yorkton was facing a shortage of nurses. 
 
According to a freedom of information request obtained by our 
caucus last January, the East Central Health District reported 
that for general duty registered nurses, several casual positions 
remain vacant. For the position of long-term registered nurses, 
several casual positions remain vacant. For the position of home 
care registered nurses, several casual positions remain vacant. 
That means no relief, Mr. Premier. 
 
What are you going to do, Mr. Premier, to change that? And 
how are you going to reopen those closed beds in Yorkton 
because of your shortage of nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member will be 
aware that there is a nursing shortage, not just in Saskatchewan, 
but all across the country. And we’ve got to do everything we 
can do to try to resolve the nursing shortage, there is no 
question about that. And we have to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, 
that the nurses work hard and they work under stress and they 
work with people who are acutely ill when they’re working in 
the hospital sector, which is mainly the sector that the member 
is raising. 
 
And I just say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that my 
sense of the situation, I think the sense of my colleagues and 
perhaps even some members of the opposition, is that the public 
has heard the debate, they’ve heard the discussion, we have 
heard the concerns of the nurses. We can’t solve them like that 
overnight, but we can work toward a solution and that’s what 
we need to do. And we need to do it co-operatively, in good 
faith, and let’s try to get everybody moving forward together to 
resolve these concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to that response; it 
is ridiculous. He’s letting on that they can’t come up with a 
response overnight, the problem didn’t come on board 
overnight. And we’ve been raising this for four or five years of 
the nursing crisis, and the Premier is standing up and saying he 
just found out about it only a few months ago — looked like 
Bambi caught in the headlights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another supplementary to the Premier. The 
Premier said addressing workplace concerns is a priority for his 
NDP government. However in Yorkton, nurses are getting a 
different story. You heard them yesterday, Mr. Premier, during 
your visit to Yorkton; you heard them but you weren’t listening 
because Yorkton still had to close 18 beds due to nursing 
shortages. 
 
You are showing other priorities besides nursing concerns. 
According to another freedom of information request obtained 
by our caucus from the East Central Health District, the 
president/CEO of the East Central Health District gets not only 
a salary of $115,000 a year plus benefits, but he also gets a 
district vehicle at his disposal. 
 
Mr. Premier, for the price of a district CEO and the car that he’s 
driving you could have had . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask the hon. member 
to now . . . order . . . I’ll ask the hon. member now to go directly 
to his question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Premier, it’s a case of priorities: 
hundred and fifteen thousand bucks a year on cars or nurses — 
you tell us what it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I just would say to the House 
and to the hon. member that it is time — it is time. It is time to 
get off of the politics. It’s time to get off of the political 
platform and to try to bring everybody together to try to fashion 
out solutions that are fair to the nurses and fair to the rest of the 
people of the province and to focus on patient care. Let’s try to 
work together, Mr. Speaker, move things along to resolve some 
of the very legitimate concerns that nurses have in the 
workplace 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I dare say you 
haven’t done a thing to try and resolve some of these issues. 
And you’ve heard about it for years. You’ve been listening . . . 
or you should have been listening to nurses tell you about being 
overworked and burnt out, and you attempted nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP would rather spend money on hacks and 
flacks than nurses. The NDP figure that if they spend money on 
spin doctors instead of real doctors and real nurses maybe they 
can spin their way out of this nursing crisis. Well it isn’t 
working. Too few nurses means bed closures no matter how 
you spin it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP like to remind everyone about the $15 
billion debt left by those Tories. Well they should also remind 
people of the 600 nurses that their government, that NDP 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

government fired with their health care reform. 
 
Eighteen hospital beds closing is devastating in a community 
like Yorkton. The nurses there are tired and worn out — worn 
out because of no overtime and no relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, look back, and don’t you realize 
and won’t you now admit that you caused this nursing shortage 
when you, sir, fired 600 nurses in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
appealing to the member to get off of the politics and get on to 
the issues surrounding patient care, and to try to take some of 
the heat out of the situation and encourage the parties — who 
are both good parties — to work together to try to resolve some 
of these difficulties. 
 
The member clearly does not want to do that, Mr. Speaker, 
because the member believes that this is his opportunity to 
advance his political agenda and the political agenda of the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan on the backs of the nurses and 
the managers and the patients of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, get off that 
dime. It’s time to cool it, bring the parties together, and try to 
fashion co-operative solutions instead of divisive politics, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Rates 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is falling further and further behind when it 
comes to cutting taxes. Yesterday Manitoba cut its basic income 
tax rate to 47 per cent. The Ontario government announced a 
plan to cut its income tax rate by 20 per cent over the next four 
years, all the way down to 32 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan simply is falling further and further behind on 
these tax issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government always says they don’t believe the 
credibility of our plan. Well maybe they should have attended 
Mr. John Brennan, the former dean of the College of 
Commerce’s classes and learned something about economics. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister announce some long-term 
sustainable tax relief for the people of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, well, this is very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, coming from a party that never saw a tax it didn’t like. 
And I could get into their record, Mr. Speaker, but let me point 
out to the member: Manitoba’s basic income tax rate this year is 
48.5 per cent; Saskatchewan’s basic income tax rate this year is 
48 per cent. Lower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Manitoba’s sales tax rate is 7 per cent — 7 per cent and is 
applied to many more goods than Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan’s sales tax rate, Mr. Speaker, is 6 per cent. 
Manitoba has a payroll tax of 2.25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan does not have a payroll tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s taxes are lower than Manitoba’s 

taxes, but in one respect we do have . . . there is something 
that’s higher, Mr. Speaker, and you know what that is? That is 
our interest payments on the debt which in Manitoba are $480 
million a year but thanks to the members opposite in 
Saskatchewan this year they’ll be $724 million. That’s the 
difference between Manitoba and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
introduce a motion to appoint the Ombudsman as well as 
introduce some guests during my introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Reappointment of Provincial Ombudsman 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion that 
Barbara Tomkins be recommended by this Assembly for 
reappointment as the Ombudsman. And before I begin my 
remarks I would like to introduce to you and to all members of 
the legislature a number of people who I will ask to stand when 
I give their name. First is Barbara Tomkins; her husband . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: —We’ll save the clapping until everybody 
. . . if you could remain standing. Her husband, Kirk Rondeau; 
their children Meaghan, Andrew, and Anna. And then the 
Children’s Advocate is here as well, Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen. And then the other people who are here are 
members of the staff at the office. And I would like them all to 
stand as well. Let’s all give them a big welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, the 
Ombudsman is an officer of the legislature, and her 
appointment by order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
only occurs on the recommendation of the Legislative 
Assembly. The term of appointment set out in the Act for the 
Ombudsman is for five years with an ability to serve one 
additional five-year term. 
 
Barbara Tomkins was appointed to serve her initial five-year 
term as Ombudsman on July 17, 1994. And accordingly her 
current appointment expires on July 17, 1999. I rise today to 
seek the support of this Assembly in recommending the 
reappointment of Ms. Tomkins to this position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Ombudsman plays an important 
role in ensuring that government remains responsive to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. In my view both the government and 
the Saskatchewan public benefit from the additional scrutiny of 
the Office of the Ombudsmen. Citizens are provided with an 
independent arbiter for disputes with government agencies 
while government is provided with careful advice from an 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

independent source as to what the public interest may truly be 
in a given situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Tomkins has made many strides in reducing 
the backlog of complaints in the Office of the Ombudsman. At 
the same time while the number of complaints received by this 
office has risen over the years, office procedures have been 
streamlined to address these complaints more efficiently. 
 
Ms. Tomkins has implemented the introduction of an early 
intervention system for the resolution of complaints. This 
allows the office to address the immediate concerns of members 
of the public in an alternate way in addition to the more formal 
processes as set out in the Act. This intervention system 
includes the introduction of mediation as a mechanism to 
promote mutually acceptable resolution of public complaints 
regarding government services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to internal changes to improve 
efficiency, the Office of the Ombudsman has undertaken 
increased public education efforts to ensure that the public are 
aware of the functions and services this office supplies. The 
public profile of the office continues to be increased through the 
release of the Ombudsman’s annual reports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of this Assembly will 
agree that Barbara Tomkins has shown herself to be very 
capable as the Ombudsman. She has demonstrated her 
commitment to serving the public by consistently performing 
her duties in a professional and judicious manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the original appointment of Ms. Tomkins as 
Ombudsman was the result of consultation among all members 
of this Legislative Assembly. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am 
confident that all members will share my view that the 
reappointment of Barbara Tomkins as Provincial Ombudsman 
for a second five-year term will continue the importance and 
independence of the office. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making 
the following motion, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly hereby recommends that the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council reappoint Barbara 
Tomkins of the city of Estevan in the province of 
Saskatchewan as Ombudsman pursuant to section 3 of The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take 
a moment on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party official 
opposition to congratulate Barbara Tomkins on her 
reappointment. She has done a great deal of work for the people 
of the province in taking their queries and concerns about 
government departments and working diligently with her staff 
to ensure that all people in the province are treated fairly. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to commend the 
work of the child advocate, who is also in your gallery, on the 
work that she has done on behalf of children in the province. It 
is a tremendous work and a very worthwhile work, and I’ve 
worked with Ms. Parker-Loewen in the past, as well as with 

Barbara Tomkins, and I look forward to working with you in 
the future, as do all members of the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition and I’m sure all members of this House. 
 
And so once again, congratulations, Ms. Tomkins, on your 
reappointment. It’s well deserved. You’re a great worker for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I table the annual 
report for 1997-98 for the Saskatchewan Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair — I will ask the minister to introduce his officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, today 
I have with me to my right, Terry Scott, deputy minister; Hal 
Cushon, director of administrative branch . . . of policy and 
program, rather. Who else have we got? Ross Johnson, budget 
officer, administration services branch; Jack Zepp, director of 
administrative services; and Doug Matthies, the general 
manager of Sask Crop Insurance. 
 
(Subvote AG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome to your officials this morning, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the hot topic as you are well aware is the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. We’ve 
been saying it’s not working. I believe that’s what you’ve been 
saying — it’s not working. 
 
Could you maybe give me an overview of what you are doing 
as the Minister of Agriculture to either lobby the federal 
government for changes, or where are we? Are there any chance 
of any changes with this program for this year — which I doubt 
— but what about for next year, Mr. Minister? What are you 
doing to address that problem for next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Last week, Mr. Chairman, last week in 
Ottawa I asked that very question to the federal minister — if 
there is any possible . . . the possibility of any changes this year. 
His answer was no. 
 
But at the press conference after the World Trade Organization 
meetings he did indicate that there may be an opportunity to 
make some changes for next year. We have to explore that. I 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

hope that’s what he meant. 
 
Therefore we need all producers to fill out the forms, bite the 
bullet, take your time. There’s a five page form you can fill out. 
You don’t know exactly what you’re going to get . . . 
(inaudible) . . . after you fill that out. But you send it away and 
they’ll reply. 
 
And unless we do that . . . If we do that, if all producers do that, 
it gives us the ability to examine the program, identify the 
problems, and then present it to the federal government. So 
that’s the route that we’re on now. 
 
And this program has been quite confusing. As yesterday, of 
course, some people like yourself had indicated that because we 
hadn’t signed the agreement, that somehow we’re holding it up. 
 
What I’d like to ask you is, after you found that not to be true, 
why did you go out and repeat it to the press again? And would 
you say that was a fact or a falsehood? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
believe, number one, you were caught off guard. I don’t think 
you even realized you hadn’t signed an agreement or that you 
had to sign an agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, why in Saskatchewan, being one of the leading 
agriculture provinces in this country, do we always have to be 
the last one to do anything? We wait on all the other provinces 
ahead of us. Just like negotiating the AIDA package to start 
with. We seem to be on the back end — everybody else was at 
the table except us. We’re going be stubborn, we’re going 
negotiate hard, as you kept saying, Mr. Minister, and look what 
we’ve got. A program that is absolutely useless to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I, yes, I did go out and say that we should have signed the 
program. Why haven’t we been lobbying them to get the forms 
out? If you knew that these forms, this agreement had to be 
signed, why weren’t you pushing Mr. Vanclief to get that out 
here, get it signed, so we can get some money in the hands of 
farmers? 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day when the Minister, I believe it was, 
of Municipal Government was answering some questions in 
agriculture, she made this comment, and she goes on to say, 
“. . . the federal government has indicated that if what we’ve 
been saying all along is true and that there will be (a minimum 
payout) . . .” here on the current criteria, then they are prepared 
and willing to consider some enhancements to the program. 
And I find that interesting, and I hope there’s some credibility 
to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Is Mr. Vanclief of the federal government realizing this 
program is not working in Saskatchewan? And are the willing 
to either top up NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
accounts or do something like that to cover for the shortfalls of 
the NISA . . . or the AIDA program this year? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I’m simply not going to allow 
this member to get away with the statements that he’s making, 

because you said we weren’t at the table. We’ve always been at 
the table, that’s not true, You said we were always last to do 
something, that’s not true at all. We’ve been there right from 
the beginning. I’m not sure why . . . and you still say that 
there’s a correlation — you still say after you know it’s not true 
— that there’s a correlation between signing the deal and 
getting the money. It’s not true. 
 
You still say that somehow, that they’re trying to say that the 
Government of Saskatchewan or the Government of Manitoba, 
because we’re all in the same boat as the ones that are being 
administered by the federal government, had somehow had 
something to do with handing it out, with holding things up. It’s 
not true. 
 
And I just don’t know . . . you always been fair . . . members 
have always been fairly credible in this Legislative Assembly. 
I’m not sure why now you’re taking this account. Stand up on 
your feet and admit that the signing of the agreement . . . You 
also say that I didn’t know I had to sign it — that’s not true. 
 
Stand up in this House, regain your credibility, Mr. Chair, and 
tell the people of this province that you were wrong when you 
said the signing of the agreement had something to do with the 
farmers of Saskatchewan getting their money. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, 
we’ve got our information from the AIDA people themselves, 
and their comment to us, and I have no reason to believe they 
don’t know what they’re talking about — I would think they do 
— said that until the agreement is signed, that a farmer from 
Saskatchewan that qualifies for aid will get 42 per cent of the 
amount he qualifies for. If the program had been signed, they 
would be receiving 70 per cent upfront; the balance of the 30 
per cent in September. 
 
So you say I’m . . . I guess what you’re saying is I’m lying. And 
I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, I’m going by the information from the 
AIDA people that we have received. And that information tells 
me that the farmers that do qualify are only going to get 42 per 
cent. So yes, Mr. Minister, it does affect the payout of what 
farmers in Saskatchewan will get. 
 
Now you can take up this problem with AIDA, but don’t point 
the finger at me. That was the information I received from 
them. Maybe you should check with those people. Maybe the 
problem doesn’t lie on this side. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess we could hassle about AIDA all today and 
next week, and it really doesn’t seem to be going to matter. 
 
Do you have a plan or an idea you’d like to put to Mr. Vanclief 
as to how we could change this program, throw it out; what we 
could do for next year with a different kind of a plan that may 
help the farmers of Saskatchewan and not be completely 
designed for Ontario and the eastern provinces? 
 
Because from what we see now, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you 
must agree with me that when we hear of average cheques 
coming out in Ontario of $25,000, some cheques in PEI (Prince 
Edward Island) of $38,000 — and again, Mr. Minister, I’m 
getting my information from the federal government, their 
people said this — we see the problem in Saskatchewan. I 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

honestly believe, and I believe you believe this too, 
Saskatchewan needs help the most of any province in this 
country. We’re hurting the worst — whether it’s our hog 
industry or whether it’s our farmers with cultivated land out 
here that are seeing low grain prices. 
 
So what do you see in the future? What will you be pushing for, 
Mr. Minister? Really, what hope do our farmers have in 
Saskatchewan of getting some help? And I’m afraid I have to 
agree with you on this, that probably the help we’re stuck with 
this summer is AIDA, and very few are going to qualify. 
 
What small sense of optimism can we give the farmers in 
Saskatchewan that something better may be in the works next 
year. And it certainly isn’t the AIDA program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member opposite is 
not going to get off that easy. I will answer the question on 
what are the options for next year and address the 25 and 
$38,000 in other provinces. 
 
But first, you’re right. A federal spokesperson said something 
that was wrong and you repeated it. And that’s understandable 
— in good faith you were repeating what he said. After I 
explained in this House yesterday to you that that’s not the case, 
you went outside and repeated it. 
 
Now either you’re saying that I’m not telling the truth . . . Well 
I guess you are. And that’s not true. The truth is there’s no 
correlation between the signing of that agreement and the 
people of Saskatchewan getting their money. And I take great 
offence to that. And I want you to stand up in your place and 
agree there’s no correlation. Just say you’re right, there’s no 
correlation. 
 
The fact that you repeated something that was wrong from a 
federal civil servant that I don’t know why that was said, and 
I’m not blaming, but I understand why you would do that. But 
what I don’t understand is how you can stand here and repeat it 
and keep on the intimation that it’s going to be some 
correlation. And I want that apology and that respect from you 
because I think I deserve it because I didn’t treat you the same 
way. And I take a great offence when this happens. 
 
When the . . . (inaudible) . . . options for next year . . . We went 
through a number of options, Mr. Chair, before this. We said 
that the three-year base, successive years of loss, wasn’t going 
to work. We’ve got to prove that now to the federal government 
by people sending in the forms. 
 
The other thing that we’ve got to do . . . that’s just one thing. 
There’s a number of others. If your land size increased, the 
payment’s got to correlate to the size of the land that you have, 
and that’s not included this year either. But there’s one other 
thing that we have to talk to the federal government about and 
that is, is this the best method, period? Or should we take the 
money and do something else with it, like a NISA top-up? 
 
Those are the questions that we have to answer, but before you 
answer those questions you have to do the analysis of where the 
money is going this year. And the only way to do that analysis, 
and I ask you again to help that the cause, the people of 
Saskatchewan, by saying: we know we don’t like the forms, we 

know it’s not great, but lookit, you’ve got to fill out the forms 
so we know what to tell the federal government. 
 
Because right now the federal government is sitting there, 302 
forms in as of April 23, last Friday, a week ago today, and 
they’re saying well why aren’t people applying? I’m saying 
look, people aren’t applying because it’s complicated, they 
don’t like it, they’re deceiving, the accountants are loaded at 
this time of tax year. But they have to apply in order so that we 
can tell you what to do. And the federal government just 
basically says, well we’ll see how many apply. So we have to 
have people apply. We need all of us encouraging them to 
apply. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I would suggest that hell will freeze over before you 
will get an apology out of me over information that I got from a 
federal department and have no . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Now I’m sure that the hon. 
member from Saltcoats realizes that the words that were used 
are unparliamentary and I would get him to withdraw. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I will 
withdraw those comments. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, we 
can agree to disagree. I think . . . I would hope the one thing we 
do agree on that this AIDA program is just not doing the job 
that we had hoped it would do, and that next year, for next year 
you will work very hard, you and your department, to make 
changes to this program. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to go in just a few other areas here today, 
and just a few short questions. But I’d like to touch on ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan). On the Ag 
Credit Corporation. I notice in the Estimates for 2000, you go 
down to where it says loan losses, and you have I think $4.1 
million budgeted last year in the last year’s estimates. This year 
you have nothing. Can you maybe explain to me, is there going 
to be no losses? Are we past that point right now? Or why was 
the budget set up that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairperson, I’m saddened by the 
fact that the member takes a stand when he repeats something 
that he knows is wrong and won’t have the decency to 
apologize. But I’m going to leave it there. 
 
The loan loss provision is a feature where every year we look 
. . . we have a fund in ACS for loan loss, and every year we 
look at that fund and compare that to what we project the loan 
loss is to be for that year. And then if we think that there needs 
to be more money in that account, then we budget from the 
department to put that money in there. 
 
This year there was enough money; we calculated there’d be 
enough money in that fund so that we didn’t have to budget any 
more money for it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
getting calls from a few farmers, and I’m not sure how many 
this is happening to, but I believe there’s a number of court 
cases going on right now to do with the collections of past ACS 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

loans. Can you maybe explain what’s happening there and 
maybe give me a number of how many of these court cases are 
going on this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials have 
just looked up the number and it appears as though we have 
about eight cases ongoing right now. 
 
Although the process is that we deal with this on a business-like 
basis, if people are in a position where they have very little 
asset base, well then there’s no point in, you know, proceeding. 
And this has worked very well over the last number of years. 
 
The department from time to time will initiate a process if they 
think there’s a log jam and just to get you know some action, 
some people at least just talking and trying to resolve. And so 
they may initiate a process, but that simply leads to discussions 
and solving or restructuring the debt somehow. 
 
So there’s about eight ongoing right now. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The one call I got 
this morning, Mr. Minister, was a farmer out there that has to go 
to court to do with his ACS loan. And the court date, I believe 
— and I may be corrected and I’ll get you the information later, 
Mr. Minister, pass it on to you because I just got it this morning 
— was to do with a farmer that has to go on May 10. 
 
And it’s actually happening right in the middle of seeding and 
was wondering . . . I don’t think he, you know . . . He knows 
he’s got to go to court and do his . . . do whatever happens to 
whatever, you know, comes out of the court case. 
 
(1115) 
 
But I think it was timing, was their problem right now. And I 
guess what he was asking me, if there was any way that they 
could have that delayed till after seeding. And I’ll pass the . . . 
And I don’t want to use the name, Mr. Minister, but I will pass 
that on to you after and see if there’s anything we can do about 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to touch on crop insurance this morning 
for a few minutes. Do you have any idea how many people are 
in crop insurance for this year? How many people have signed 
up for crop insurance for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, of course the contract numbers are 
the number of producers, but we won’t know . . . The important 
number to us is the number of acres that are involved and we 
won’t know that until that information’s sent in by producers 
this year. But right now we have about 34,000 contracts on 
grains and about 1,200 contracts for forage. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister . . . 
and I agree with you, the numbers of farmers taking out crop 
insurance really doesn’t tell the whole picture. But I’d just like 
to go . . . ‘in ’92 I believe there was — and you can correct me 
if I’m wrong on this — but I believe there was 55,000 farmers 
signed up for crop insurance in ’92 and last year, if my numbers 
are anywheres close here, it was approximately 38,000. 
 
Now I know, as I said, that doesn’t tell the whole story and I 

agree with you there. But I believe in 1992, 33.8 million acres 
were insured under crop insurance and in 1998 that number was 
down to 21.5. Maybe, Mr. Minister, do you have any idea why 
this decline is happening in crop insurance? 
 
Because as you know, I’m not a big fan of the way crop 
insurance is set up right now. I don’t feel it’s doing the job it 
needs to do out there. And is this maybe not an indication that 
many farmers out there feel the same way about it, when we 
don’t just see the number of farmers dropping that are taking 
crop insurance, but the number of acres that are covered under 
crop insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Okay, this is from the annual report, so 
if you want to check the figures later, you can. In 1991-92, we 
had 51,466. Now you’ll remember that there was an enticement 
for farmers to get into — because of the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program — and so the number of 51. 
 
If you look at the total number of crop insurance and NISA — 
NISA being the revenue side — you’ve got about 56,000 people 
in NISA. And now the crop insurance numbers are down, but 
you can’t compare them to 1991-92. If you go back prior to ’92, 
they’re running about the 45,000 number, and now we’re about 
35,000-plus number. 
 
But the acres, the insured acres are the important thing, and 
those acres are trending up. And we all know that the farm size 
is getting bigger, so you have fewer contracts but you have 
more . . . I mean more acres per contract. So if you look at crop 
insurance and NISA and the acres under crop insurance, there’s 
fairly good participation in both. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
from information that I’ve had sent to me — and this is from a 
farmer that has done a lot of homework — he says that between 
’91 and 1997 there was actually a surplus of $292 million in 
crop insurance. Is there any validity to that, and if there is, 
where did our $292 million go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, okay, just so that I’m clear here and 
I can be clear to you. Right now we have about close to $213 
million surplus in the . . . that’s the total number in the crop 
insurance fund. And if you recall, we like to keep a surplus, a 
little surplus, for sure because a couple of bad years will take 
that down very quickly to a negative figure. 
 
If you recall, two years ago we put in 120 million . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . $123 million into the re-insurance fund to bring 
it up to zero. Basically what we did is wiped out our crop 
insurance debt using that crop . . . the money from the safety net 
package. The federal government, as you recall, put in some 
money and brought theirs down to about 90 million. They still 
have a debt and a portion of debt on their side but that’s very 
important to pay that debt off, get it down to zero. Now we’ve 
had a couple of decent years as far as crop insurance — hail and 
drought and stuff like that — concerned so we have built up a 
surplus. And that’s what right now is $213 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One last question 
for myself before the member for Kelvington-Wadena would 
like to ask a couple of questions, Mr. Minister. I noticed in the 
estimates for ’99-2000 under crop insurance program, crop 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

premiums: they were down about $4 million there. Could you 
explain what that drop is all about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes that’s an estimate. Like previous 
years, you estimate how many premium dollars you’ll need 
from government as your share. And the estimate last year was 
high and so we’ve brought that estimate down as we know 
better the participation rates from the new programs. And so 
that doesn’t show a decrease in . . . It shows a decrease on the 
line item but what it means is that we estimated high last year 
and some more real estimate this year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister and officials, I have a couple of questions. One of 
them is on . . . I’m sure you’ve had a lot of calls from farmers 
asking why, when the rural underground gas project was 
deleted or taken out. There’s about 15 per cent of the people 
don’t have natural gas and it’s making it very unfair for those 
farmers who are trying to dry their grain using propane. It 
makes it a lot more expensive. 
 
And I’m just wondering how you, the Department of 
Agriculture, has been working with or negotiating or bargaining 
with SaskEnergy to see if this isn’t an issue that can be brought 
back into the forefront? Because it really is being 
discriminatory against the number of the farmers that don’t 
have this option any more. 
 
You’ll probably say they do but they have to pay for it. We 
know that at the beginning it was $2,600 and now the minimum 
that I’ve heard lately is about 9,000. And I know it’s not a lot of 
people but it’s enough people that it’s again picking favourites. 
It’s again some people are winners and losers in this market, 
and farming is a tough enough business right now. And if you 
have it stacked so that your neighbour across the road can get 
natural gas and you don’t have it, it is very unfair. So I’m just 
wondering what Department of Agriculture has been doing on 
their behalf? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well of course I understand maybe why 
you asked the question. You will know that we don’t have a line 
item in our budget for any RUD (rural underground 
distribution) program. So I’ll tell you what I do is continually 
talk to — not continually but from time to time — talk to the 
minister and the departments about what we can do to help 
economic development in terms of the Crowns and what their 
role should be in an economic development. And that’s one of 
them. 
 
And of course the other things we do is when there’s a lot of 
tough grain in years, we inform SaskEnergy about where the 
areas are and try . . . I know they’ve put temporary hookups in 
different areas to help, you know, an elevator or something to 
help people dry grain. 
 
So this is an ongoing process and it’s one that I invite you too 
as well, to lobby along with me with the Crowns to continue . . . 
for them to continue to view . . . or determine what their role is 
in economic development. And if that means, you know, 
another underground distribution program, I guess that would 
be good for it to finish off the areas. 
 
But right now they have an underground distribution program 

as you know. It is more expensive than it used to be. But the 
problem in — and I know you can stand there and say this isn’t 
fair, and I agree — but the problem comes when we took over 
government there was a myriad of these things that were being 
done. And all good intentions. But what it did was drove the 
debt of the province completely through the roof. And now we 
have to come back and say, what’s rational? 
 
We know it’s not totally fair, but what’s the rational thing to 
do? And that’s what I do when I talk to SaskEnergy. I say look 
it, you know, I think what I want you to do, SaskEnergy, is you 
know maybe review what your role is in economic 
development. 
 
So those are the kind of things I invite you to lobby with me. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. And of course we 
all, probably all MLAs in this room have been lobbying with 
you to see if they can’t look at this issue. 
 
We all know that as well, the North was given natural gas this 
year, or there was intentions to bring it up there, and that is 
going to be giving benefits for a number of people. I don’t 
know if the number of people is any more or less than the 
number of farmers who are still waiting with bated breath to be 
looked at as being an economically viable part of this society as 
well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a question for . . . the hog barns that are set 
up right across this province. After winter there’s usually a very 
large pile of carcasses, and I’ve heard people call it, the dead 
pig man is coming around to pick up these hogs. Can you give 
me an idea of what is happening with all these carcasses around 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well when we have applications for a 
new hog barn, for example, they have to have a number of 
things: manure management being one of them; you know, site 
selection also being included. And they have to put in the plan 
what they plan to do with the deads. And most of the new barns 
now have a cooling room that they keep them in, and Saskatoon 
Processing, I think it’s called, come around. All you got to do is 
phone them and they’ll . . . they run a truck through a route and 
they’ll pick up the carcasses. 
 
There are some areas, of course, where the barns are a little 
older and they don’t have a cooling facility to keep the deads in, 
and the timing of the truck being there is critical. And so with 
producers who have a concern with that, all they’ve got to do is 
phone the Saskatoon Processing and they will send a truck out 
to pick it up. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Probably, Mr. Minister, there are . . . over 
winter and with snow problems, maybe this is the issue that 
they’re dealing with. I know of a number of examples where 
there is a large number of animals that are still outside. 
 
But if that’s your answer, I just have one other issue that I 
wanted to bring up with you, and that is farmers’ markets. I 
know that you’ve been lobbied to look at farmers’ markets and 
recognize their potential in diversifying the agricultural 
economy. 
 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

And I know that Alberta is moving a long ways towards helping 
individual farmers sell their products and make a living . . . it’s 
just cash products that will actually put food on the table. There 
hasn’t been any initiatives by this government to recognize that 
farmers’ markets can be a viable part of the economy. And I’m 
wondering what your plans are in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I want to talk briefly, Mr. Chair, about 
the deaths . . . the animals. The Agricultural Operations Act has 
provisions to . . . for complaints if there’s dead animals that are 
rotting and carcasses that are rotting. And so we . . . and as 
government we encourage you or anybody to make us aware if 
there’s a pile of dead animals somewhere because that’s, that 
has to be handled. 
 
And The Agricultural Operations Act talks about good farming 
practices or standard . . . acceptable farm practice. And that’s 
deemed to be non-acceptable farm practice if you have a bunch 
of animals rotting, because of disease and other things. 
 
So if you know of any, please give us a call and we’ll check that 
out. 
 
We certainly encourage the farmers’ markets. I know there’s a 
number, there’s a number of farmers’ markets around the 
province, and it is a great, little, local business that we have. 
 
We haven’t dedicated any funding to any farmers’ markets. I 
think the best thing what I see as happening is that the local 
areas are developing their farmers’ market association and 
planning days in town where the . . . you know, usually a 
Saturday. I think that’s a very important aspect of our rural, 
local economy and I just encourage them to continue. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
officials, following up on the hogs a bit if I might. Does your 
department, Minister, have any numbers set on the number of 
hogs that were actually destroyed or died over the winter when 
the pig market took a dip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We don’t have . . . we didn’t have any 
complaints from people about hogs being killed or left out. And 
I just want to make a point. If an animal dies over the winter, it 
really shouldn’t make any difference because the Saskatoon 
processing truck travels all year round so there shouldn’t be a 
build up. I mean there might be a build up for while when it’s 
frozen, but then it’s incumbent upon a producer to call the truck 
before it gets too warm before you have a problem. 
 
The numbers on . . . we don’t have any numbers or reports out 
of the ordinary when the hog prices went down of any more 
deaths. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, I was just trying to wonder how 
many pigs were actually destroyed as a result of the downturn 
in the hog market over the winter, if your department has any 
actual numbers on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We have no way of gathering that 
number. But it is our impression because we know the industry, 
we know the producers — we have Pork Central who deals with 
them all the time — we know that there was some media 
reports, but we believe and know that they were greatly 

exaggerated in terms of producers. 
 
I mean the prices went down. Most producers market their 
animals and some became very inventive in terms of how they 
did that. But you know, we have no way of gathering a number. 
 
But we are close enough in contact through Pork Central with 
the producers that we would have known if somebody was 
going to be just shooting animals or destroying animals because 
they felt that they wouldn’t make any money marketing them. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, I guess if you think that the media 
number were greatly exaggerated, you must have some idea 
then as to what the numbers actually were. So can you give us 
that number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The only report we heard was the one 
that you’re probably familiar with through the media, but we 
had no reports of anybody killing hogs. 
 
And just think of it logically. If you’re a producer, the hogs are 
even three-quarters the way to slaughter weight, what would be 
the point of killing them? I know that people were frustrated, 
but I mean if you sold them, even if you’re losing money, you 
were gaining some money to pay off some of the bills that 
you’ve incurred. 
 
So most producers think that way. They just don’t go out there 
and say, oh, the price is down, I want to shoot my hogs. 
 
And the other thing I might add that through this whole piece, 
Mr. Chair, our hog . . . the industry never quit building. The hog 
numbers continued to rise. Even when the prices were at their 
lowest part, the producers who were in the industry are in for 
the long haul. They know the prices swing up and down. And 
they’re not the type of people who would just say, oh, hog 
prices have fallen to the bottom, I’m going to go shoot all my 
hogs. I mean we didn’t have any reports of that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Minister, as you maybe have forgotten, 
I am a cattleman, and at one time I was a hog producer. So I 
know all about the ups and downs. And the one interesting 
thing about the hog industry as opposed to the cattle industry is 
that many farmers can get in and out of the hog industry very 
quickly, where in the cattle industry you don’t do that because 
of the investment. 
 
So we know all about that and I’m sure that most farmers, 
certainly the smaller-type farmers that are on the land, try to 
maintain their hog supplies through ups and downs as you have 
said. But there are many over the years that have not done that. 
 
Minister, can you tell us how much money that your 
government has invested in the hog industry to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’ll get you a best figure we can from 
Agriculture. But you realize that the Opportunities Corporation 
which is under Economic Development have made, I think, four 
investments. The number’s very, very small, though; I’ll get 
you that in a minute. 
 
But I want to make a point here about getting in and out of the 
industry. At one time hog producers could get in and out very 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

quickly and it was done basically in facilities that they already 
had in the farm and it was done on an individual basis in a 
smaller way. 
 
Those days have pretty much passed. You don’t jump in and 
out of the hog industry any more either. I know it’s been a few 
years since you’ve been in the industry and you maybe don’t 
understand it, but if you’re building a 600 sow unit or 1,200 
sow unit for — well 1,200 sows run about $13 million — you 
don’t sort of just jump in and out. You’re in there for the long 
haul. That’s why these producers are not destroying their 
animals; they know they’re in for the long haul and they’re not 
going to change that. 
 
I’ll just take a second now and see if we can get that number for 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. With the investments in the hog 
industry, you might want to ask the Minister of Economic 
Development when those estimates are up, because SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) does have I think 
it’s four. They had five, I think one was paid out. I think they 
have four loans now, and percentage-wise they would be . . . I 
would guess in the area of 5 per cent of the total project. I know 
one of them was about a million dollars in a $13 million, so 
that’s a fairly small investment. 
 
But as far as Agriculture is concerned, the only thing that we 
have . . . the only vehicle that we have to put money directly 
into the hog industry was ACS. And, as you know, they quit 
lending . . . We’re winding down ACS and there hasn’t been 
any investment for about four years now, since 1996, I guess. 
 
Before that there was of course some investments in some of 
the loans program. They would be basically for smaller 
operations. We could . . . we haven’t got that number identified 
because you’d have to go through the loans because some of the 
loans were for more than just the hog operations; there were 
improvement loans for the farm and consolidated. 
 
So we have very . . . we have some money in, but it’s old 
money. Since the wrapping up of the hog industry in the last 
basically two years, the Department of Agriculture hasn’t lent 
any money directly to the hog industry since 1996. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Minister. I do recall back in the 
early ’70s when hog barns, fairly substantial-sized hog barns, 
were being closed, moved off, burnt down — whatever you 
have. So there were huge hog barns back then, and the guys got 
out of the pigs because the market fell through and they 
couldn’t keep up with it. And this will happen in today’s pig 
industry as well, Mr. Minister, with some of these hog barns, as 
is happening with your potato industry in Outlook where the 
creditors are saying, hey, you’re not keeping up. They have no 
choice; they want their money. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that you have to leave here shortly, and I 
will want to come back to this. But there is one issue I want to 
address with you quickly today before we leave because it’s of 
utmost importance. And that is to do with the bureaucracy and 
fees within your department. And I’ve talked to you a couple 
times about this; I’ve sent you a couple letters. And to your 
credit, you’ve actually I think tried to address the problem and 

have made a couple changes, which I’m happy to see. But it 
seems like we solve one problem on one hand, and then the next 
. . . out of that resolve another problem springs out of your 
department. 
 
It’s to do with an issue with a small piece of wasteland that’s sat 
idle for decades. And a young farmer, after taking over, has 
come forward and said I’d like to take this piece of Crown land 
and utilize it. 
 
So initially your department told him that they wanted $200 a 
year preparation fee for the lease — it’s 44 acres of wasteland 
— plus other fees plus some rent for this piece of land. I came 
to the department, came to you with the problem, and we 
seemed to have it fixed. 
 
However, as I said, another problem has sprung up now within 
your department. And we’ve got the lease extended from one to 
five with the fees coming down but now your department seems 
to want to get into how this particular operator operates his 
land. And they’re asking for such things as: a set time to have a 
fence put around this piece of land; they’re telling him that by a 
set time he has to have so many head of cattle on that piece of 
land, even though the farmer knows himself that that piece of 
land cannot sustain that type of numbers. 
 
Why does the department continually want to get into these 
types of things? Your Premier keeps telling us in the House, 
Minister, that we’re cutting back on the red tape, we want to cut 
out the red tape. And here’s a classic example of where 
someone in your department wants to get involved in the cattle 
industry and try and tie the hands of this young farmer who’s 
trying to make use of a 44 acre piece of wasteland. 
 
Minister, can you look into this if I send you over the land title 
and the name of the farmer and see if you can’t get this thing 
straightened out once and for all? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I just want to make a final comment on 
the hog industry, Mr. Chair. I’ve got a lot of faith in the people 
who are producing hogs, as opposed to the member opposite, 
because I don’t believe that there’s going to be another 1970-71 
incidence. I don’t believe those incidents are going to be 
happening. And I think the hog industry is vibrant, viable, and 
long term in this province. And I’ve got great respect for the 
producers. 
 
The issue you bring up, we of course tender parcels of land. 
And whenever somebody takes up a piece of land, they have to 
use it. They can’t just say, okay I’ve got the lease on this land 
now I don’t have to use it, because there may be other people 
who would want to use it. 
 
So what we’ll go into . . . send me the details of that case. If 
there’s discrepancies for example in the number of the carrying 
capacity, we can always discuss that. But we have people . . . in 
fact we have probably the best rangeland technologists in the 
world right here, as proven by the international conference we 
held last year. Our department has people who are superior in 
terms of assessing what the carrying capacities are. And those 
can be discussed and can be altered. 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

So I just say I’m not familiar with that case. But the point I 
want to make is, if somebody gets a lease, they have to use the 
land. That’s our policy. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Land Information 
Services Facilitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Land Information Services 
Facilitation Act. The purpose of this Bill is to remove any 
statutory impediments to the creation of a Crown corporation 
under The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 thereby facilitating 
the timely development of the new land project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Crown corporation will partner 
Saskatchewan Justice land titles with the SaskGeomatic 
division of Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in 
order to provide integration of land titles information and the 
Saskatchewan Geographic Information System. 
 
This will lead to a faster, simpler, and more effective land 
title/GIS (Geographic Information System) and registration 
services to the people and industries of Saskatchewan while 
facilitating economic growth in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to allow for the creation of the proposed 
new-found corporation, this Bill provides for amendments to 
The Land Titles Act and The Land Surveys Act. These 
amendments do three main things. 
 
Number one, transfer employees from Saskatchewan Justice 
and SaskGeomatics division of Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation to the proposed new corporation. 
 
Number two, authorize the payment of revenue from land titles 
and SaskGeomatics to the new corporation. 
 
And number three, confirm that the pension and other rights of 
the transferred employees will not be diminished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act also addresses the transitional 
requirements necessary to ensure that all rights and liabilities of 
the Government of Saskatchewan are transferred to and 
continued under the new Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is intended that this new corporation will be in 
place by the fall of 1999, thereby securing the necessary 
corporate governance and funding structure to ensure the timely 
completion of this important project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to facilitate the 
Modernization of Land Information Services in Saskatchewan 
and to amend The Land Titles Act and The Land Surveys Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26  The Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my 
right is Wayne McElree, who is the executive director, 
programs branch; and to my left is Mr. Doug Muir, director of 
the apprenticeship and trade certification unit. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the development of this particular piece of 
legislation you consulted, I’m sure, with a number of different 
groups. Did you consult with any student groups before 
bringing forward this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The public meetings were open to the 
public and certainly to students. And in the industry-led and the 
department-led consultations, there was attendance by students 
at a number of the meetings. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, was there any invitation 
though extended to student organizations at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
perhaps from the university level or community colleges to do a 
organizational representation to you on this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The invitations were actually done 
through SIAST to the students, many of whom are their 
apprentices. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you very much. What this 
Act is doing is proposing to establish a new commission with an 
industry majority board as an agent of the Crown to manage the 
renewal of the apprenticeship program. 
 
What was the reason behind establishing the Saskatchewan 
Apprenticeship Certification Commission as a corporation 
rather than as a branch of Post-Secondary Education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me just respond briefly by first of 
all saying there were several things that sparked this change, if 
you will. First of all, the demographics of Saskatchewan, the 
changing technology in the workplace, and also the federal 
government withdrawal of funding. 
 
The rationale, largely for the establishment of a structure like 
this though, was so that we would be more responsive to 
industry as it pertains to training and apprenticeship. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Why do you 
need a corporation to do that though? Couldn’t you do that, or 
are you not doing that through the Department of Education? 
 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In the public consultations it became 
clear to us — and by the way, this has gone back as far as 1996 
— in the public consultations it became clear to us that we 
needed a structure that was more responsive. And certainly in 
designing the apprenticeship and in the training that we have, 
there’s been consultation with industry. And when I say 
industry, I mean the employer and the employees. But they 
were not a decision maker. 
 
This new structure will allow industry, to a large degree, to be 
the decision makers around how training in apprenticeship will 
actually function. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It pleases me 
to hear that the corporation is going to be able to respond to the 
changing needs of industry and of students within the 
apprenticeship program. But it saddens me to hear that the 
Department of Education cannot be more responsive, that 
you’re obviously saying that it’s hidebound and bureaucratic 
and can’t respond to the changing needs in education. 
 
And I think if that is the case, then the Department of Education 
needs to take a very serious look at itself and what it’s doing. If 
we have to go outside of the Department of Education to 
provide educational opportunities for students in this province, 
then obviously we have a failing in the Department of 
Education. 
 
I think perhaps you and your . . . the other Minister of 
Education need to sit down and take a serious look at what’s 
going on in your departments, and why you are unable to 
respond to the needs of students and of businesses in this 
province in providing apprenticeship and other people to work 
in those industries. 
 
So hopefully your new corporation will be able to do that, and it 
simply won’t be a rebuild of the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, it talks in the Bill about the ability to situate the 
head office for this corporation at any place in Saskatchewan 
that the minister may approve. Do you have any sites in mind? 
And what is going to be the deciding factor on where the 
location of that corporation will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’s been no decision or discussion 
on that yet. The head office will be located in Regina. 
 
But just on your earlier point as well, I think I need to respond 
to that. First of all I would disagree with what you have said in 
that the departments haven’t, haven’t done a good job. I think 
they’ve done a very good job as it pertains to training and 
education. 
 
(1200) 
 
We have always room for improvement. And under the 
structure that is being proposed, it has been our view through 
the public consultations obviously that we will have a more 
responsive, more responsive training structure in place. Much 
of the training will actually take place on the job site as it did 
before, and many of the programs will not fundamentally 
change in the regional colleges or at SIAST. 
 

But what we believe we need to do is to be more responsive as, 
as I described earlier. This is largely driven by technological 
changes, by the fact that the federal government withdrew 
funding, and purely the demographics of Saskatchewan. We 
have a large land base and land mass, and we need more points 
of delivery, I guess, for training. And under this structure we 
believe that will happen. But I will certainly defend the 
department in that I think they’ve done a very good job to this 
point in time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It was 
your words that said the department couldn’t respond as quickly 
as the new corporation would be able to. So that’s why I’m 
saying, if there’s a fault there that the department can’t respond 
properly, then it’s up to you to investigate it and find out why 
that is. It was your words that said they weren’t responsive 
enough, not mine. 
 
Mr. Minister, under the corporation, will the employees of the 
corporation be tied to the same collective bargaining 
agreements as those affected under the Department of 
Education and under the school divisions? Or will they be under 
separate collective bargaining agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They’ll remain under SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union). 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will they 
bargain separately or will they bargain . . . will their bargaining 
take place same as SIAST or the school divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They’ll remain part of the overall 
government bargaining process. They will not bargain 
separately. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When it 
comes to the appointment of the board of directors for the 
corporation, how will those directors be appointed and what 
will their qualifications have to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, it’s an industry-majority 
board. The names will all be approved by order in council, but 
they will be approved based on recommendations from what we 
describe as five industry sectors. 
 
There’d be a minimum of one employee representative and one 
employer representative from each sector. And we would have 
one employee representative of the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, one employee 
representative of the Department of Education, one 
representative from SIAST, and one or more persons to act on 
behalf of underrepresented persons or groups. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. And what do 
you mean exactly by under-represented? In what sense are they 
under-represented and who determines whether or not they are 
under-represented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — . . . large percentage of the population, 
that’s right. As an example, possibly if there’s not full 
proportional representation of women or Aboriginal groups, 
that’s sort of what we have in mind. 
 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Would they be . . . would it be someone 
who was mentioned then in the Human Rights Commission 
legislation? Or does it designate an economic 
under-representation? I think you need to give a more broader 
definition than saying women and Aboriginals will be . . . those 
people we’ll consider for under-representation. 
 
You know, what about truck drivers? What about farmers? 
What about school teachers? You know, if they don’t represent 
a large portion of society — they’re certainly not the majority 
— so how do you determine who is under-represented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think I’ll just refer directly, because I 
think this is an accurate description. The under-represented 
group as described directly out of the proposed legislation 
means a group of individuals whose participation rate in the 
opinion of the minister in the apprenticeship program, is less 
than the group’s proportional representation of Saskatchewan’s 
population. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Mr. Minister, if you didn’t have a 
truck driver on this board, then you can make the determination 
that truck drivers are under-represented in the apprenticeship 
board and could appoint a truck driver to the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Occupations would already be 
represented through their trade boards, because they’re broken 
into the sectors. So the example that you use is not likely 
possible. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Well perhaps you could explain 
to me what the designated sectors are; I think you mentioned 
five sectors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The five sectors are agriculture, 
construction, mining, manufacturing, mechanical repair, and 
tourism service. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t see anything 
in there for transportation which would be the truck driver area. 
Obviously then, they become an under-represented sector of 
society. So would they be included in that area and appointed to 
the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, there are currently 44 trades 
that are represented in Saskatchewan. Truck drivers are not 
currently a designated apprenticeshipable trade. But under the 
legislation there would be provision for that to happen if they so 
desired; I mean if they chose to do that, to go that route, then 
obviously under the structure that we have in place then they 
could have representation through the advisory boards as well 
on the new commission board too. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — If they so desired, would then there be 
another category entered into here for you have agriculture, 
construction, mining, manufacturing, mechanical repair, and 
tourism? Would there then be another seat added to the board to 
represent truck drivers and transportation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I said there are 44 trades in . . . 
apprenticeshipable trades in Saskatchewan right now so as the 
example that you used if truck drivers so chose to become one 
of trades these are . . . an apprenticeshipable trade, that would 

make, logically would make 45. 
 
What we’ve done is, as I’ve described, we broke them down 
into five sectors. There would have to be some discussion about 
what sector they would fall under. And through that, through 
that structure, as one of the . . . falling under one of those 
sectors, I’m not sure exactly sure which one they’d come under, 
but they would then have access to have representation on the 
commission by virtue of the fact that they would fall under one 
of the sectors. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, well then 
wouldn’t not all female and Aboriginal employees also fall 
under one of those sectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, really what you’re describing is 
really one . . . the example that you’re using is based on 
occupation and the other is citizenship, and that’s largely what 
we’re looking for, for the one seat just to ensure that we have 
representation, as I said, from under-represented groups. 
 
There well may be others. The examples that I’ve used are 
simply Aboriginal people and women. If there are other, if there 
are other citizen groups that aren’t represented that just don’t 
come to mind right now, they could well fall under that 
category also. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you. Mr. Minister, when you 
talk about citizenship groups, I’m not exactly sure either what 
you mean. If a member of the Lions Club was then to approach 
you that they wanted to come in the apprenticeship program, 
would they qualify as a citizenship group that is 
under-represented because there are no Lions represented on 
your board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think largely we’d be using the 
designated groups as defined under the human rights. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, I asked 
you that question right upfront — the first thing — was it a 
designated group under the Human Rights. And then you went 
off on some other tangent. We could have eliminated all of this 
if you’d have answered yes in the first place. 
 
Well, finally, Mr. Minister, thank you for trying to circumvent 
the questions but finally coming back to where we started from 
10 minutes ago. That’s all the questions I have. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 65 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
take the opportunity to first of all thank the member for the 
always thoughtful questions. I appreciate that. But as well I do 
want to thank the two officials that were with me, Doug Muir, 
and Wayne McElree, who have done hours and hours of work 
on this, and many hours of driving across the province in 
consultation with the public and industry. 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

And this is a Bill I believe that will be well-received across the 
entire province by a lot of people. So I want to take the 
opportunity to thank both of them very much here. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 
answering our questions. And I’m sure the truck drivers were 
very interested in this. Thank you. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Mineral Taxation 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right I have Dan McFadyen, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of resource policy and economics 
division. And to my left is Maurice Hall, the director of 
industrial minerals branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. It’s my 
understanding that the purpose for this Bill is to change the way 
that the Potash Corporation taxes are collected and payable to 
the government; that it’s being consolidated into one payment 
per individual corporation rather than a payment by the 
individual mines. 
 
Will this have any effect on the overall revenue taxation from 
those mines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, just I think if I 
could, I’d just briefly go through what the changes in this Act 
are intended to do. 
 
Firstly, it will increase the operating efficiency, because as you 
have said, the companies will no longer have to consider the tax 
effects when allocating their resources between mines because 
they are consolidated by company, and you’re right on that. 
 
Secondly, and I think as importantly, is simplifying the 
reporting requirements. It was time-consuming for the 
department, time-consuming for industry, the process that we 
had, and we wanted to eliminate some of what we felt to be 
unnecessary work, frankly. 
 
And the second or the third component was that with respect to 
increased investment from incentive effect, the companies being 
able to write off the costs of large investments at one mine 
against income from other mines. 
 
So I think personally it’s a simplification. It allows the 
companies I think to make better business decisions. And from 
a departmental perspective it will and should decrease some of 
the workload that we had in the past. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve also 
talked about how it would encourage investment and expansion 
in the potash industry. How much investment do you expect to 
flow into Saskatchewan because of these changes to the 

structure, the taxation structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we’re expecting as a 
result of these changes, about half a billion dollars, $500 
million, over the next five years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Would you say, Mr. Minister, though 
that that is related to this Bill or that this Bill is irrelevant to that 
increased investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill is just part 
of the whole package that we put together over a course of two 
years in discussions that we had and negotiations that we had 
with the potash industry in Saskatchewan. This is just one 
component of the whole package that was put together so I 
guess it’s part of what will attract that investment. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 
my officials for the work that they did in putting this legislation 
together, but as well the overall package and the work that was 
done in terms of putting together a royalty taxation and 
legislative structure that will ultimately make our potash 
industry more competitive in the global marketplace it operates 
in. And I want the member opposite for his questions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in and 
answering our questions today, and we do indeed all look 
forward to a prosperous potash industry. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Corporation Capital 
Tax Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today, 
sitting beside me is Mr. Bill Jones, who’s the deputy minister of 
Finance; and immediately behind me is Mr. Len Rog, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister of the revenue division; and behind 
Mr. Jones is Mr. Kelly Laurans, who’s the manager of corporate 
taxes and incentives in the revenue division of the Department 
of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good morning 
— good afternoon, I guess technically — Minister, and 
officials. 
 
Minister, I believe Bills 32, 33, 34, and 40 are a result of the 
changes announced in your budget. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that is correct. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I think 
we’ve had the budget debate; we will not re-engage it. 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the member for his question; and I 
thank the member for his co-operation as usual in the 
co-operative spirit that the member and I operate in, in moving 
these pieces of legislation through the House. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — Is the minister using the same officials? Seeing 
the nod in the affirmative, we’ll proceed straight into Bill No. 
33 of 1999, An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Minister, I 
again understand that this is an adjustment because of the 
change in the provincial sales tax. 
 
However, I have a question that maybe is interconnected with 
Health. There has been some discussion across the country and 
across the province of a relationship between the cost of 
tobacco and the likelihood of young people in particular to 
engage in smoking. And I don’t really want to get into the 
debate about the appropriateness of those arguments. 
 
But my question is simply this: has your department as the 
agency that actually determines the level of taxation on tobacco, 
has there been discussions with Health department or across the 
country in terms of perhaps moving the price of tobacco up and 
the implication with smuggling and all of those issues? Could 
you update us, Minister, on those issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the answer is yes. I’m not sure that we 
have any formal studies as such but certainly I am in 
communication regularly with the Minister of Health. And 
officials of Finance will certainly be familiar with what the 
Health officials think about the importance of the certain level 
of taxation on tobacco products, because the member is correct 
that taxation certainly has an impact on the number of young 
people that will start smoking. 
 
On the other part of the question, I think the implication of the 
member’s question is also correct; that is, that we could 
increase the level of taxation on tobacco more than it is right 
now. But there is a balance between having the tax high enough 
to discourage smoking but not so high as to encourage 
smuggling. 
 
And the advice I have from the revenue officials at the 
Department of Finance is, generally speaking, that we have 
achieved a balance which seems to indicate that our tax is 
reasonably high in comparison to some jurisdictions to combat 
the taking up of smoking by young people and, at the same 
time, not so high that we have a large smuggling problem. 
 
So in a way we seem to be in a situation where we have the 
appropriate balance now and these are the factors that we 

certainly do try to take into consideration. 
 
(1230) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education and Health 
Tax Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26  The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Mineral Taxation 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Corporation Capital 
Tax Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I neglected in the 
Committee of the Whole to thank the opposition member for his 
co-operation in passing this Bill and the others that I have 
today, and I do thank him for that. 
 
With that, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education and Health 
Tax Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair: — Before we begin, I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is Mr. 
Bill Jones, who’s the deputy minister of Finance; to his left is 
Mr. Terry Paton, who’s the Provincial Comptroller; directly 
behind me is Mr. Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister 
of the revenue division of the Department of Finance; to his 
right is Mr. Jim Marshall, who is the executive director of 
economic and fiscal policy in the Department of Finance. 
 
Behind Mr. Jones, is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs in the 
Department of Finance; and to his left behind Mr. Paton, is Mr. 
Bill Van Sickle, who is the executive director of the 
administration division of the Department of Finance. And we 
also have some other officials seated at the back in case we 
need to rely upon their expertise and I won’t introduce them 
right now unless we require their help. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again 
welcome, Minister, and officials this afternoon. First of all, 
Minister, I’d like to express my appreciation. In the interim 
supply discussion I’d asked for some information and I would 
like to acknowledge and thank the department for providing that 
in a timely basis. So thank you, particularly Mr. Jones, for 
providing that. 
 
Minister, there’s a couple of areas that I would like to touch on. 
And again, although you and I may very much enjoy and 
appreciate the opportunity to get back into the budget debate, I 
intend to ask the questions and ask information that is very 
much in the public interest. 
 
An area that seems to be a new and potentially expanding area 

of commerce, not only in Saskatchewan but across the country, 
is the whole issue of Internet commerce. Recently I’ve seen 
articles with the Cuenet I believe where the encryption 
technology, etc. is available to make secure transactions 
possible. 
 
And certainly while all of those things seem to be happening at 
an accelerating rate, it would strike me that this has some great 
potential issues for Finance in terms of the collection of 
provincial and national sales tax. 
 
Could the Minister please update the Assembly on where the 
department is in regard to the issues surrounding Internet 
commerce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It’s a very good question. And I must 
say that we and the other governments in the country, federal 
and provincial, are more in the process of identifying the 
problem and trying to assess the range of it and study what 
solution might be possible than actually being in a position to 
offer a solution at the present time. 
 
But I would say that the subject matter of the question is 
certainly pertinent and one that obviously causes some concern 
to governments across the country, both the federal government 
in terms of the GST (goods and services tax) and provincial 
governments that have a provincial sales tax. 
 
So this is something that’s being looked at. There’s a national 
committee set up under the auspices of the federal government 
to examine the problem and to try to find ways that 
co-operatively governments could work together to try to 
monitor the situation and deal with it. 
 
Beyond that, I don’t have very much detail for the member 
today, other than saying we think it’s a problem we have to look 
at. We think we have to examine solutions. And in the long 
term either there will be solutions that are workable and 
practical or else governments will have to examine their 
revenue generating capacity and the way that they raise revenue 
and perhaps at some point examine whether sales taxes are an 
effective way to do that. 
 
In that regard I think the fact that Saskatchewan at least has a 
narrower range of PST (provincial sales tax) than most 
jurisdictions with a provincial sales tax and also a lower PST 
than we’ve had in the immediate past does something to 
ameliorate the problem. 
 
But the problem nevertheless exists and what we need to do 
right now is to remain in the very much research mode and 
looking at it mode and try to determine what the nature of the 
problem is, how big it may become, and in due course to take 
appropriate measures to deal with the problem. 
 
And as I say, I can’t give you specifics of those measures today 
because that’s very much under review by all governments in 
the country. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think that you would 
probably acknowledge that timeliness is probably increasingly 
important. As with most things related to the Internet and the 
whole computer industry, it seems to move forward always at 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1999 

an accelerated rate so that this whole issue is probably one 
that’s going to build significantly in very short order. So that I 
think the minister probably is very aware of the timeliness 
factor as well. 
 
Minister, another area I’d like to touch on is the issue of 
forecasting. And I recognize that, you know, a crystal ball is 
always a bit cloudy in the best circumstances. And I believe that 
you’ve included some of your assumptions in forecasting in 
terms of the price of oil and the interest rates and the Canadian 
dollar and a lot of those issues. 
 
(1245) 
 
Minister, for example I believe you, if I read it right, is that 
you’re looking at a sales, retail sales increase of some 2.2 per 
cent. And in the retail sector that I participate in and in other 
areas in the community, it seems that there doesn’t translate, 
anecdotally at least that those retail sales are starting off with 
the likelihood of attaining that. In fact, in the recent 
Saskatchewan Trends Monitor, I notice that for the first month 
of this calendar year at least — and I recognize that that’s not 
identical to our fiscal year — but the sales are actually down 6.3 
per cent. 
 
Have you done any adjustments in your forecasting to reconcile 
what seems to be a very soft market, particularly in some 
sectors, with your projection of a 2 per cent increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — My understanding is that the retail sales 
have certainly been up and down. I think the member referred to 
the first year of the calendar year as opposed to the fiscal year. 
 
No, we have not adjusted our projection because I’m advised by 
officials in the Department of Finance that: (a) it’s too early to 
really tell and it’s too early to assess the impact of the recent 
sales tax cut; and (b) they do believe that notwithstanding what 
happened in January, that things have changed somewhat since 
then. 
 
The advice I have from my officials is that they feel that the 2.2 
per cent increase projected for the 1999-2000 fiscal year is still 
a reasonable projection. And I would say to the members, the 
member probably knows, generally speaking the projections 
from the Department of Finance tend to be fairly prudent and 
cautious and we have been meeting them mainly year after year. 
 
So this is the advice I have and we won’t be changing the 
projection now. Of course, if it proves that sales are higher or 
lower than the 2.2 per cent increase, then we’ll be doing some 
kind of adjustment later in the year. But the long and the short 
of it is it’s too early to tell what is actually happening in this 
fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In terms of your 
department’s forecasters, they would look at things like 
long-term interest rates, oil prices, commodity prices, some of 
the key indicators. And it seems in information that I’ve read 
that there is somewhat I would describe as guarded optimism 
that the economic downturn, particularly in the Pacific Rim, has 
maybe at least seen it’s worst days and that there is some hope 
that commodity prices may see some gradual improvements. 
 

Minister, has this information been included in your estimates 
for the factors in this year and how does your forecasting work 
in terms of being able to run that forward in a four or five year 
projection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we have factored the projected 
changes in I think in a very cautious way. I could refer the 
member to page 25 of the budget address booklet, actually 24 
and 25, which have several projections. 
 
But in particular on page 25 you will see that we’re projecting 
for example for 1999, world price of oil at 13.96 average 
throughout the year. And presently I think oil today is 
somewhere around $18. So it’s up, it could go back down. Who 
knows. But in any event I think it’s a fairly cautious projection. 
Lower than what we had last year. Some of the industry people 
I have spoken to indicate that they think that we’ll do better 
than we’ve projected. 
 
But on potash there’s a slight increase in price, about 1 per cent 
I think, that’s projected this year over last year. 
 
Wheat, a slight increase in terms of Canadian dollars per tonne. 
And those as the member will see, there’s a five-year projection 
there and these are the assumptions that we go on in terms of 
those major commodity prices. But also there are various 
assumptions made with respect to national and international 
economic conditions that are set out on page 24. And of course 
as the member has referred to other factors on page 27. 
 
And as I indicated, the Department of Finance tends to be fairly 
cautious in its projections, and it also tries . . . well, it doesn’t 
try to; it does compare its projections with those of the various 
private sector forecasters. It tries to make sure that it’s in the 
range of what everybody else is saying. 
 
And I’m pleased to say that it’s been quite successful in 
projecting out. Sometimes, you know, one thing might be 
somewhat higher but something else is lower, and so on. But 
they tend to be fairly accurate when you get right down to it. 
 
So these are the projections. Yes, we’ve tried to take some 
amelioration upward into account. And yes, we’ve set out a 
five-year plan, which also is part of our objective of setting out 
a four-year plan to keep the budget balanced. We have to 
explain how we’re going to do that, and all of these factors go 
into that projection. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, as well 
on the expenditure side . . . and my colleagues will have 
undoubtedly been asking some of these questions in the various 
departments. But for example, in forest fire fighting and things 
of that nature, it’s impossible to foresee exactly what kind of a 
fire year we’re going to have in any given year because so much 
is climatic in terms of its impact. And I recognize that SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
basically comes up with an average and budgets at that level. 
But, if the forest fire season is particularly onerous, then you 
have to do special appropriations in order to cover the 
difference. 
 
Minister, you know, there are those kinds of areas in forest fire 
— I use that by way of example. Last year there was extra 



April 30, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

overruns and expenditures in I believe eight of the departmental 
areas. The surplus is pretty razor-thin in terms of the budget 
numbers. 
 
What contingency plans do you have in place to meet 
unexpected shortfalls, given the fact that Liquor and Gaming 
has been drawn down pretty substantially in this budget and 
there’s been a significant extra dividend declared from the 
Crowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well the member’s point I think is 
well taken, that we have to manage expenditures very carefully. 
And in answer to the question about forest fire expenses, there 
really is no way to estimate what those will be with any kind of 
certainly in the sense that nobody knows how much rain we’re 
going to have and how many forest fires we’ll have. 
 
So the way they do that is simply to go by the long-term 
averages. And so we allocate a certain amount to fight forest 
fires based upon what would happen in an average year. And 
the member is correct, that if it turns out there’s more forest 
fires, then it will be more expensive; if there’s fewer then, you 
know, we might be under budget. 
 
And the answer to the question, generally speaking, is that 
while we may be over budget in some area, usually that will be 
coupled with being under budget in another area or having 
increased revenue where we don’t expect it. 
 
Because the whole process of course for budgeting is estimates. 
That’s why it’s called estimates. And we do our best to estimate 
what the revenues will be in each category, what the 
expenditures will be in each category. And undoubtedly some 
of them will be higher than we estimate for expense, but at the 
same time some of them will be lower. But more importantly, I 
think, some of the revenue projections we have will be lower 
than what we actually get. 
 
And what we need to do is use the reserves that we are 
projected to have this year, which is I think approximately $85 
million, reserves in the liquor and gaming fund, to make sure 
that we . . . That’s at the end of this fiscal year; presently the 
reserves are much higher than that. 
 
But my point is that there are reserves we have available to us, 
but overall we have to manage public expenditures to make sure 
that when we are hit with something unexpected, that we can 
withstand that hit. 
 
If I can make this observation, if you think back to 1995 when 
we also had record forest fires, the province — even though we 
had just come off the deficit budgeting and just balanced the 
budget— the province was hit that year with record forest fires 
at that time and I think spent upwards of 50 or $60 million more 
than budgeted, if not more. But we managed our way through 
that. 
 
And in 1998 we were hit with forest fires, the low farm prices, 
the low oil prices, and then $140 million expense on the farm 
income and disaster program that we hadn’t anticipated. So in 
the last year we actually managed a few hundred million dollars 
of unanticipated expenditure and we did that by drawing down 
on our reserves, 

My point is the member is correct. There are certain things that 
could happen that we have to manage our way through. My 
answer is yes, that’s right. We have to be careful. We will 
manage our way through because that is our job and we have a 
responsibility to do that. And if we’re hit with something that’s 
very unfortunate, we’ll do our best to manage through it as we 
have in the past. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being the hour of adjournment this 
House will stand adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 
o’clock. The Chair wishes all hon. members some relaxation in 
your constituencies and with your families this weekend. I look 
forward to seeing Monday afternoon at 1:30 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


