





























































Hansard: April 12, 1999


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 497 
 April 12, 1999 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the disenfranchised 
widows of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended whereby benefits and 
pensions are reinstated to disenfranchised widows and 
whereby all revoked pensions are reimbursed to them 
retroactively with interest to April 17, 1985. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from my hometown of 
Alida, from Manor, from Carlyle, from Saskatoon, and Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present has signatures from 
individuals from the communities of Pleasantdale and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the review of parental rights. The 
prayer reads as follow: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today demanding review of parental rights: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People who have signed this petition are from Melfort and 
Yellow Grass. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of people concerned about 
parental rights in our province. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a review process with respect to family 
intervention to ensure the rights of responsible families are 
not being violated. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a petition 
forward from the good people of Lemberg and Neudorf. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a greater portion of fuel tax 
revenues toward road maintenance and construction so that 
Saskatchewan residents may have a safe, reliable, and 
effective highway system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
this afternoon from citizens concerned about the unsafe and 
confusing entrance to the city of North Battleford And 
specifically, we hope that something can be done before the 
Premier’s visit to North Battleford on Thursday so that he will 
be able to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now the hon. member will recognize of 
course that presentation of petitions is not for debatable time 
and I’m sure he’ll want to get on directly to the petition and to 
proceed to that. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners this 
afternoon come from Leoville, Meota, Regina, Mayfair, Cando, 
Denholm, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions regarding 
the horrible state of Saskatchewan highways. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Prince Albert, Saskatoon areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the state 
of our highways. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so Saskatchewan residents may have a safe 
highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from all 
over our province. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of this province to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call on federal and provincial 
governments to dedicate a significantly greater portion of 
the fuel tax revenues toward road maintenance and 
construction so that Saskatchewan residents may have a 
safe highway system that meets their needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks out 
in Pleasantdale, Naicam, Melfort, and Quill Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy, Mr. 
Speaker, this morning to present on behalf of the people of the 
RM (rural municipality) of Fox Valley No. 171 the following 
cry in the prayer for relief to the government: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads, to enter into 
negotiations with SARM and SUMA for a longer-term 
plan of rural road restitution reflecting future needs, and to 
provide safety for all drivers as the new trucking 
regulations change safety factors on these roads. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These folks, Mr. Speaker, pretty much all come from the 
Richmound and Fox Valley communities which surround that 
RM. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Clerk:  According to order the general petitions presented at 
the last sitting have been reviewed and found to be in order and 
are therefore received. In addition the petitions for private Bills 
have been reviewed pursuant to rule 12(7). They are found to be 
in order and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society Limited and 
the Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Limited 
praying for an Act respecting the Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan; 
 
Of the Saskatchewan Foundation for the Arts praying for 
an Act respecting the Saskatchewan Foundation for the 
Arts; 
 
Of the Saskatchewan Medical Association praying for an 
Act respecting the Saskatchewan Medical Association; and 
 
Of the Group Medical Services praying for an Act 
respecting Group Medical Services. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following questions: 
 

First to the Minister of Finance: what are the total costs of 
production and placement for this year’s post-budget 
advertising campaign? 
 

And second question if I may, Mr. Speaker; I also give notice 
that I shall on day 23 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the total costs of 
production and placement of the anti-nurses advertising 
campaign currently being run by the Government of 
Saskatchewan? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the total costs to date 
associated with the airlift of patients out of the province for 
medical care including transportation, care, and the costs 
associated with the transportation, accommodation, and 
meals for one family member? 
 

And secondly, that I will on that date: 
 

In each of the individual cases requiring the removal of 
patients from this province, did officials of Sask Health 
contact the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses to ask if 
nursing care would be provided for those patients before 
they were airlifted out of the province? 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice and the cabinet: does your 
government support with regards to the nurses’ strike that 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

fundamental to our society is the rule of law. There is no 
liberty for anyone without the supremacy of law. Coupled 
to the foregoing is an unwritten statement as follows: 
“There is no absolute right without a parallel obligation or 
duty.” In this case that duty and obligation is upon the 
union and the individual nurses to obey the law. 
 
Does your government support Sir Edmund Burke’s 
statement about a century ago set out the solution for the 
situation we find ourselves immersed in this day. “A 
democracy and orderly society cannot long last unless 
there is a high level of discipline practised by all who bask 
under its protective banner. However, the less discipline 
that is supplied from within the individual, the more that 
will have to be imposed from without.” 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and through 
you to my colleagues in the House I’d like to introduce two 
very special people. They’re special to me for a number of 
reasons. First of all, they’re constituents, and they’re relatives. 
And thirdly and most importantly, they’re here today 
job-shadowing, so they’re with our caucus to see the way the 
government should really run. So watch and you’ll know in a 
few months what’ll really be happening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you, to members of the Assembly 
six constituents from Indian Head, that we have with us in the 
west gallery today and I would ask them to stand as I introduce 
them. 
 
We have Maureen Anderson, Gloria Karpa, Val Gorin, Karen 
Ernshaw, Claudette Bugiera, and Ruth Hollis, and I would ask 
all members to join in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and members of the legislature here today two 
residents of Shaunavon. The first is Jan Meek, Jan is the 
president of local 87 of acute care vision in Shaunavon hospital. 
And Rhonda Thompson is president of local 251 of the 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here today to make the legislature aware 
that while there’s a nursing shortage in Saskatchewan, we’re 
still laying off nurses in Shaunavon and they would like to say 
more about that later today. Thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I’d like to introduce through you to all 
members of the House a gentleman seated in the west gallery, 
Mr. Percy Hill from Moose Jaw. A long-time public servant 
with our Crown corporation, SaskTel, a farmer, and very much 
a community activist in our community and one of my great 
political mentors. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome 
Percy Hill to the legislature today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I received a number 
of statements over the weekend and I’m sure members on the 
other side did as well, but I’d like to make sure that all members 
are read the one from Ms. Katinowski, local 62: 
 

I am a member of SCUN (Saskatchewan criminal union of 
nurses) formally four days ago known as SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). This is a quick attempt at 
humour before a discussion of a very serious matter. We as 
nurses are frustrated first of all with the fact that we have 
predicted the short of nurses for years and no one listened. 
We have coped from hour to hour, day to day, month to 
month, keeping in sight the fact that we could bargain in 
1999 for better working conditions, for plans to retain and 
recruit nurses, and the opportunity to achieve at the very 
least adequate health care in this province. 

 
Roy Romanow has taken away rights not only from nurses 
by not allowing us to collectively bargain. They are also 
taking away the rights of Saskatchewan citizens by 
ignoring what the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have 
been saying for years — health care is in a crisis. 

 
We nurses defy the order to return to work because we feel 
the citizens of Saskatchewan are worth more than, at best, 
mediocre standards of care. We believe in the worth of our 
patients, clients, and ourselves even when our government 
obviously does not. 

 
We understand the people working in our places are very 
tired and feel overwhelmed and overworked. We feel 
empathy for these people. We have experienced these 
working conditions ourselves. 

 
The people of Saskatchewan — to all of you — without 
nurses there is no care in health care. From a person who 
was told . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before going on to the next member’s 
statement, the Chair was not certain whether the hon. member 
was quoting from a published item or from a piece of 
correspondence. I just want to remind members of the House 
that the proper names can be quoted if they’re from published 
items but not if they’re from private . . . from correspondence. 
 

Report from StatsCanada 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another brief statistical 
report from our friends at StatsCanada. Another batch of warm, 
encouraging numbers that says Saskatchewan is doing quite 
well, thank you. 
 
Of course on this side of the House we know that statistics 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

don’t lie. When the statistics are good news for Saskatchewan, 
members opposite think or believe with Mark Twain that there 
are three kinds of lies — lies, darn lies, and statistics. Mark 
Twain also believed that smoking 20 cigars a day was good for 
his health. 
 
But I digress. For the year from February 1998 to February 
1999, non-residential building permits in Saskatchewan 
increased by 51.2 per cent. Building permits in total increased 
by 8.3 per cent. 
 
I really don’t like this kind of competition, Mr. Speaker, but the 
Tories insist we do it. So how did our Tory neighbours do? 
 
Well Manitoba’s non-residential percentage was down by 38.3 
per cent and in total building permits were down 19.5 per cent. 
And the Promised Land, and the Promised Land? 
Non-residential permits down by a modest 48.4 per cent. Total 
decrease in Alberta — 27.7 per cent. 
 
Pass the cigars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Concerns in Rural Areas 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too am 
pleased to be able to make a member’s statement on behalf of 
some of the nurses in my constituency. 
 
One particular nurse that called me stated that she belongs to 
three SUN locals — 227, 13, and 107. This nurse has been 
forced to work in three different facilities — Cudworth, Wakaw 
and Saskatoon — with nearly no benefits because most of her 
hours are casual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she reiterates a number of concerns with rural area 
nursing and I would like to read a part of her letter: 
 

In the rural areas it is extremely hard to find a nurse to fill 
in for a sick call, never mind summer vacations. Our 
employers dish out overtime and double time on a regular 
basis. They won’t give pay equity. They’d rather keep 
paying overtime and double time. Meanwhile, our nurses 
and the rest of our health care workers are overworked, 
stressed to the max, and heading for burnout like those 
worn-out shoes. 
 
Do you want a nurse on her sixteenth hour to be the one 
responsible for decisions affecting your life? Education in 
certain facilities is also a joke. After nearly a year at my 
half-time position, I haven’t received professional assault 
response training which is supposed to be mandatory. Few 
others at the facility even have had this training. 
 
And speaking of legislation, this government pushed 
through the creation of several integrated facilities, health 
centres, province-wide. They did not even stop to create 
standards Acts for such facilities. The only standards Acts 
are The Hospital Standards Act and the nursing home Act. 
 
To make a long story short, are you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Moose Jaw Fifth in Canada’s Job Creation 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about a 
week ago StatsCanada identified the 10 cities in Canada with 
the best job creation record in the past two years, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, fifth in all of Canada, fifth in all of Canada, was 
the city of Moose Jaw, with a job creation record of 14.7 per 
cent. Fourteen point seven per cent, Mr. Speaker, which is three 
times — three times — the national average of 4.7 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, like the rest of Saskatchewan, Moose Jaw is 
demonstrating leadership in job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how has this happened? It’s happened through the 
presence of large retailers attracted to the Moose Jaw market. 
It’s happened through a blossoming tourism industry, through a 
thriving small business community, through a thriving spa 
manufacturing community in our city. And it’s happened, Mr. 
Speaker, in no small measure, through the strategic investments 
and partnerships between the city of Moose Jaw and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week SaskTel announced another of these 
partnerships and investments in the Moose Jaw area. Mr. 
Speaker, $5.9 million will be invested in network improvements 
in the SaskTel network to ensure that Moose Jaw and 
surrounding communities receive the most dependable, 
high-quality communication services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the result of these kinds of investments that 
Moose Jaw is fifth best in Canada in job creation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Layoffs 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while Saskatchewan endures yet another day of health crisis 
created by the Premier, and only the Premier, another chapter of 
that crisis is set to unfold this Thursday in Shaunavon. You see, 
even though the Premier finally admits he has a nursing 
shortage in Saskatchewan, the community of Shaunavon is 
about to lose four nurses and another 18 additional health care 
staff. The reason why, Mr. Speaker, is money. 
 
Both the CEO (chief executive officer) and the Chair of this 
district said they are laying the nurses off because they have a 
deficit. Despite appeals for more funding from nurses, the 
community, the district, and myself, this government is saying 
no, nurses are not a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it wasn’t good enough for the Premier to 
lay off 600 nurses, destroy the collective bargaining process, 
and turn them into criminals; he now wants to lay off more 
nurses. While other provinces are begging for them, paying 
them more, this government is treating them like dirt, laying 
them off, and in doing so, permanently undermining quality 
care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one local doctor put it, and I quote, “This is 
madness, not wellness.” I urge the Premier to stop the madness 
before it is too late. As I said, the layoff date is this Thursday, 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

April 15. And if no action is taken by the Premier, his inaction 
will say everything that needs to be said to the people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Holocaust Remembrance Service 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the privilege 
of speaking at the annual Yom Ha Shoah service, the Holocaust 
memorial service in Saskatoon. It was a day to remember all 
who were lost needlessly and senselessly during the tragedy of 
the Holocaust. It was a day for mourning, a day to reflect on our 
past. But it was also a day to look to the future, a day to 
reinvigorate and renew our efforts to ensure that an atrocity 
such as the Holocaust is never permitted to happen again. 
 
Although it is painful, we must continue to talk about the 
Holocaust. We must tell the stories of those who experienced its 
horrors so that we can teach young people about the danger of 
hatred and intolerance. That’s why Yom Ha Shoah is so 
important as are other educational events, events such as the 
March of the Living, which allows future leaders in the Jewish 
community to visit sites where the Holocaust occurred. 
 
I’m sure the March of the Living provides a very profound 
experience for these young people and that it teaches the 
lessons of tolerance, acceptance and peace in a way that nothing 
else possibly could. And those young people gave stunningly 
moving statements about the impact of that experience on their 
lives. 
 
I’m reminded on the famous quotation by George Santayana, 
“Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat 
it.” 
 
We must do everything we can to remember the past so that we 
are never again condemned to repeat it. I’d ask all members to 
join me to commemorate this very solemn occasion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elevator Closing in Tramping Lake 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, it was 
my privilege to visit a community in Saskatchewan that I had 
never been in before. It’s a long ways out of my constituency; 
the community is entitled Tramping Lake 
 
It’s a pretty little place on a spring Sunday afternoon. Families 
raking grass and kids and dogs playing on the sidewalk. But the 
only elevator left is going down soon. The elevator belongs to 
the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) friend, the Pool. The 
school, that still has K-12 this year, has only one more year to 
go and then due to NDP lack of funding, it will close. 
 
Hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, that this vibrant, caring, little 
community will soon be dead — dead thanks to this NDP 
government and its policy and its friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Nurses’ Strike 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, now what? 
For eight years, you have systemically destroyed the health care 
system in Saskatchewan. In the last five days you have created 
the biggest health care crisis this province has ever seen. You 
have completely destroyed any working relationship you had 
left with Saskatchewan nurses. And now nurses are saying they 
would rather quit than go back to work for your government. 
 
Mr. Premier, your health care system is on the verge of 
collapse. And what are you going to do now? Are you going to 
go back to the negotiating table and bargain or are you going to 
enforce your court injunction? 
 
What are you going to do, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We intend to 
return to the bargaining table as soon as the SUN members 
return to the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in the province of 
Saskatchewan where we have to look at the future of this 
province in terms of its fiscal capacity. Because really where we 
are today has come about as a result of some decisions that 
were made in the 1980s that came home to roost in the 1990s, 
i.e., a $15 billion debt and $2 million a day on interest on the 
public debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province does not have the fiscal capacity to 
have a 22 per cent wage increase. We have the capacity to have 
a 7 per cent wage increase but we cannot afford the difference, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
most two-faced government this province has ever seen. 
Yesterday the Health minister sent nurses a letter. And she said, 
it’s time to end the escalating course of bitterness and 
recriminations. She said, on behalf of our government I am 
offering to take that step. That was your commitment, Madam 
Minister, to end the recriminations. 
 
Then this morning, in today’s paper, we see a full page of ads 
vilifying the nurses and their position. You’re running radio ads 
saying exactly the same thing. What complete hypocrisy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Minister, your letter to nurses isn’t worth the paper it’s 
written on. Why did you write this phony letter when your real 
opinion appears in the newspaper and on the radio ads? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday the 
Premier of this province met with the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses’ representatives and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations) for 11 hours. In fact I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are some indications on the picket line that 
the Premier only met face to face for 15 minutes. I can assure 
the people of this province that the Premier met with the 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

representatives for more than 15 minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week this is what we offered. We offered a 
minimum of $20 million or 8.6 per cent of payroll for pay 
equity to begin in 2001 — 2001. We offered a $6 million 
recruitment and retention fund to be used by SUN and the 
government and SAHO to address issues of nursing recruitment 
and retention. And, Mr. Speaker, if we couldn’t agree on how 
we use it, it would go to binding arbitration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fiscal capacity of this province is such that we 
cannot afford a 22 per cent pay increase. What we can do is 
address nurses’ issues at the bargaining table once they return to 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we now hear SAHO and the NDP saying they’re willing to 
listen. What a joke. You didn’t listen in 1993 when you closed 
52 hospitals. You didn’t listen when you closed the Plains 
hospital. You didn’t listen when you rammed through your 
back-to-work legislation, and SAHO didn’t even listen to its 
own members when it decided to take the nurses to court. 
 
Some health districts are saying they do not support the court 
injunction, but they weren’t even consulted. The decision to go 
to court was rammed through by SAHO and the NDP without 
listening to anyone. And now you’re saying you’re going to 
listen. 
 
Mr. Premier, you haven’t listened to a single concern about the 
health care system in eight years. Why would anyone believe 
you, Mr. Premier, would you listen now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me just remind the member of 
some history. In the 1980s this province’s spending was out of 
control. And that’s why we’re where we’re at today. We had a 
$15 billion deficit. And I remind the member that that was a 
Conservative member elected in ’91 and 1995. That is who this 
party is, the party that got us to where we are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province was on the verge of bankruptcy. We 
came to office and there was a billion dollar deficit, Mr. 
Speaker. We had to act and we acted. 
 
And for that, Mr. Speaker, there is no apology because we had 
to get the fiscal position of this province in order. The apology 
is that in acting, in taking this province back from the brink of 
disaster and bankruptcy, we didn’t address the very real 
concerns of people in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
just seen is a example of eight years of irresponsibility because 
not a single member on that side of the House will accept any 
responsibility for their actions. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time for this insanity to end. It’s time to return 
to the bargaining table for real bargaining, not the kinds of 

political games that you were playing last Wednesday when you 
were pretending to meet with the president of SUN. 
 
Mr. Premier, nurses cannot bargain with a gun to their head. 
Will you admit that your political games over the past week 
have been a mistake? Withdraw the threats, withdraw the 
preconditions — go back to the bargaining table. Work out an 
agreement that addresses working conditions and treats nurses 
with respect. 
 
Mr. Premier, immediately after question period we’ll be moving 
an emergency motion calling for you to do exactly that. Will 
you support a return to the bargaining table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I find it incredible. I find it incredible 
that this is the member that was elected as a Tory in ’91 and a 
Tory in ’95. This is the member that racked up $15 billion on 
the debt — $2 million each and every day that leaves this 
province to go to Toronto and New York and Zurich, 2 million. 
That’s $730 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with $730 million we could give the nurses every 
cent that they’re demanding, but we’re not in that position. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the hon. 
members will recognize that the Chair is having some difficulty 
being able to hear the answer being put by the minister . . . 
Order. And I ask for co-operation by members on both sides of 
the House. 
 
While I’m on my feet, guests of the Assembly may not be 
aware of the long-standing tradition of parliamentary 
democracy, and rules of this Assembly as well, which do 
prohibit participation in proceedings of the House by guests of 
the House. And I will ask for co-operation of the guests of the 
House as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, $2 million each and every 
day on the public debt going out of here. Now that’s what 
people want. If people want us to go back to the ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker, obviously that’s what those people want. Well I’ll tell 
you something, Mr. Speaker. I have not spent eight years of my 
life returning this province to a decent fiscal position to turn it 
over to people like those that got us here in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transfer of Patients Outside of Province 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have never 
yet taken responsibility for their actions in the last eight years. 
And they’ve never even admitted that they’ve raised the taxes in 
this province by $1 billion in the last eight years. So start taking 
responsibility for your actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health. Madam 
Minister, nurses say you’re playing politics with the lives of 
patients and their families. Dozens of patients are being airlifted 
to other provinces and to Minot. Meanwhile, nurses are saying 
this isn’t even necessary because the nurses are on standby for 
essential services and they aren’t being called. 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

Madam Minister, why is that? Is it your intent just to make 
nurses look bad? And is your government using false tactics to 
get public support? Why are families being told their loved ones 
must be airlifted out of the province while nurses waiting to 
provide essential services are not being called? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I understand the process, the decision whether or not a 
patient needs to be transferred to a facility outside of this 
province is left to the individual physicians who are making 
these decisions, Mr. Speaker. What’s important to remember, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we do have essential services in some areas 
of care in this province. However, we do not have essential 
services on surgical wards and medical wards where we have 
people who are not critically ill, but people who are very ill, Mr. 
Speaker. And individual physicians, as I understand it, are 
making that decision to move these patients outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we are being told is that the 
nurses are not being called and they are there to provide 
services. The government opposite is talking about a process. 
They’ll use the process if it’s favourable for them, otherwise 
they decide the process isn’t necessary. 
 
Madam Minister, I spoke with many nurses over the weekend. 
And they tell me that nurses are ready and willing to provide 
essential services but they’re not being called. And you say this 
isn’t the case. I guess that means you think nurses are lying. Or 
do you think you can’t count on them when patients really need 
them? 
 
I’d like to ask the associate minister, the former SUN president, 
which one is it? Are the nurses lying? Or do you think you can’t 
count on nurses? Which one is it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to indicate to 
the people of this province is that a decision whether or not a 
patient is transferred out of this province is not made by any 
individual member sitting in the legislature. It is a decision 
made by a physician in a health district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the public that the people that 
are being transferred outside of Saskatchewan are . . . The 
reasons they’re being transferred is a decision made by an 
individual physician. It is not a decision that is being made by 
the Minister of Health who has no capacity — no capacity — 
Mr. Speaker, to make medical decisions. It is only the 
physicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recruitment and Retention of Nurses 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is the 
land of opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for other jurisdictions looking 
to recruit our nurses. Mr. Speaker, this weekend our newspapers 
were awash in ads asking for nurses to move from 
Saskatchewan to other parts of Canada and the United States. 
Who can blame them, Mr. Speaker? Especially after the 
offensive advertising campaign launched by the NDP 
government which seriously miscalculated the damage done by 
its back-to-work legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, would the Premier care to explain how his 
back-to-work legislation has helped nurse recruitment in this 
province? And does he expect the number of nurses to be lost to 
this province to other areas of the country is going to be 
hundreds, hundreds of thousands, millions — how many, Mr. 
Speaker? How many, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, what I want 
to report to the member is that the Government of 
Saskatchewan last Wednesday in a meeting with the president 
of SUN and the chief negotiator indicated that we were 
prepared to make a minimum commitment of 8.5 per cent of 
base payroll, or $20 million to nurses in order to engage in the 
whole notion of pay equity, Mr. Speaker. That is a significant 
commitment by the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we cannot do — what we cannot do — is 
afford 22 per cent in this fiscal year or the next. Mr. Speaker, 
what we can do is move towards a position that the nurses are 
advancing over a period of time. 
 
What we cannot do, Mr. Speaker, is to be held ransom for 22 
per cent in this fiscal year. We have an $8 million surplus, and 
we do not have the fiscal capacity to address the 22 per cent 
wage increase in this fiscal year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend at 
home people were asking me why doesn’t the government take 
the money that they’re wasting on their smear campaign against 
the nurses and actually give it to the nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Why aren’t they spending the money that 
they’re using to ship patients all over the world, so to speak, 
Mr. Speaker, why don’t they take that and give to the nurses, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Maybe the Minister of Health can ask us why she’s wasting and 
blowing taxpayer’s dollars in this province when we’ve got 
nurses out on strike who are asking for precious little and she 
won’t budge an inch, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Can the Minister of Health answer that question? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province want to know what is the situation for the government 
in terms of its fiscal capacity. What I can report to the citizens 
of this province is this, that we have an $8 million surplus, that 
we pay $730 million each year, this year, on interest on the 
public debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have three options: we can cave into the 
demands, the wage demands, of the nurses and we can increase 
your taxes; we can run a deficit, Mr. Speaker; or we can cut 
services. 
 
We do not think the people of this province want to increase 
their taxes, they don’t want their services cut anymore, and they 
don’t want us to go back to the ’80s when we racked up and 
racked up the debt. 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Nurses’ 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Premier. 
 
Nurses are committed to a cause, a principle, Mr. Speaker. They 
are not going back to work. They are defying what has been 
forced on them because they feel what they are doing is right 
for health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
They want a health care system that treats workers fairly and 
recognizes what they’re worth. 
 
Mr. Premier, you alone have the power to end this. There are 
only two clear steps for you to take. You can either slap the 
nurses with huge fines, throw them in jail, or you can repeal 
your back-to-work legislation. The choices are clear, Mr. 
Premier. What is it? Are you going to slap them with fines, put 
them in jail; or repeal the Bill and allow the bargaining process 
to go on without your political gain, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the option is clear. What 
we have to do is to return to the bargaining table as the nurses 
return to work, Mr. Speaker. And at the bargaining table we 
will make this commitment — we will make the commitment to 
deal with nursing practice issues by ensuring that nurses have 
access to a binding process that ensures that they are meeting 
the standard of care that they want for their patients through the 
policies of management. That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker, we will address the nurses’ 
issues of seniority. They do not like their seniority clause and 
we will deal with that. We will make sure that permanent jobs 
are converted to full-time jobs in order that young people that 
want full-time jobs and nurses that want full-time jobs will get 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we make a minimum commitment of 8.6 per cent 
of payroll, or $20 million, to begin pay equity. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a fund for $6 million to recruit and retain 
nurses. And that fund, Mr. Speaker, nurses will make sure that 
they have input into that fund and we will agree to how that 
fund will be spent to make sure nurses stay here and come here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
only way for the Premier to stop this province from exploding 
into an all-out labour war, and the only way to preserve the 
integrity of our health care system, is for the Premier to be a big 
man and admit he went too far. 
 
He must repeal Bill 23 because section 7 states any provision in 
a new collective bargain agreement concluded between SAHO 
between SUN is void if it deals with any monetary issues. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, according to the Bill, no bargaining in 
good faith can ever take place as long as this Bill is enforced 
and you know it. 

Therefore I once again ask the Premier, if you’re serious about 
letting cooler heads prevail, if you’re serious about ending this 
chaos you brought to the province, will you do what the Liberal 
caucus asked you to do last Friday, and repeal this Bill today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the province of 
Saskatchewan and the country of Canada are governed by laws. 
They are laws that each and every one of us are supposed to 
abide by, Mr. Speaker. We cannot be put in any position where 
people avoid the law, Mr. Speaker. The law of the lands is 
important to the stability of any country and any province, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is guilt everywhere. There is guilt in terms 
of the behaviour of these members in the 1980s because of the 
debt that they racked up. There is guilt because of the federal 
Liberals because they cut $200 million to the province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we did not respond to the individual concerns of 
people in the health sector in terms of their workplaces. We are 
all responsible. 
 
And what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is to go back to the 
bargaining table, go back to the workplace, and let’s get the best 
deal that nurses have ever had in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP government is trying to scare the general . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is 
trying to scare the general public into believing that nurses are 
putting the lives of patients at risk. The NDP is misleading the 
public. 
 
Nurses are saying that those nurses making themselves 
available for in-call are not being called in. ICU (intensive care 
unit) nurses are saying that they have never seen the ICU 
staffed so well, and as one nurse put it, they’re tripping over 
themselves. 
 
Nurses in Swift Current were in their uniforms out in front of 
the hospital waiting to go in to work. Nurses who have trained 
for years to provide health care would never put the life of a 
patient at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister admit the NDP is fearmongering, and will 
they stop this fearmongering now and quit escalating the 
problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that every one 
of us has received calls to our constituency offices or calls to 
our homes personally where people are saying to us that their 
surgery for cancer has been cancelled or is on the verge of being 
cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have people, we have people in this province 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

that are waiting for urgent surgeries in order to address their 
very urgent health needs, Mr. Speaker. Thos surgeries are not 
being performed in this province. The surgeries that are being 
performed are emergency medical procedures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that in order to resume bargaining, in order to get the 
best deal that nurses in this province have ever seen, nurses 
need to return to the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Negotiations with Service Employees’ International Union 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, I just 
received a call from Tisdale, from the hospital there, and they 
indicated to me that plans are being made to move patients from 
the Melfort hospital to Tisdale in the event of an SEIU (Service 
Employees’ International Union) strike. These plans were being 
made as late as this afternoon. Can you confirm that these plans 
are underway, and is an SEIU strike now imminent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
people will know, SEIU has returned to negotiations with the 
assistance of a conciliator, Mr. Speaker. I understand that SEIU 
was meeting this morning with the employer and the 
conciliator, and I understand that those discussions are still in 
progress. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, if 
these negotiations are going along so well, why are these 
contingency plans being made at this last eleventh hour? Is 
indeed there the possibility of these negotiations breaking off? 
Is indeed there going to be a compounded problem in this 
province of an SEIU strike on top of the mess you’ve made of 
the SUN negotiations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not ever going to 
be in the position that we were in on Wednesday evening, when 
we believed that the SUN negotiators were going to return and 
meet with the Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, they were . . . we left 
our meetings with SUN and the employer at 8 o’clock at night, 
and by 11:30 we were advised — even though they were to 
return the next morning at 8:30 — that they were calling a 
general strike, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, every health district has 
to ensure that they have contingency plans in order to ensure the 
public safety. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Health. Madam Minister, how can you expect the 
SEIU negotiations to go well after the record you’ve 
demonstrated with your willingness to negotiate in good faith 
with the nurses? Why won’t you take the stand of bargaining in 
good faith with all of the health care unions so this province 
gets out of the mess that your government and your Premier 
created? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the 
member, he may know that we do have a tentative agreement 
with SEIU, that negotiations are ongoing with . . . We do have a 
tentative agreement with CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) and we have ongoing discussions and negotiations 

with SEIU. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we can return to the bargaining 
table with the representatives of SUN and we believe that SUN 
can get the best collective agreement that they’ve ever had in 
their history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to rule 46, I 
seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion of urgent 
necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Third Party requests leave 
to introduce a Bill under rule . . . or introduce a motion under 
rule 46. I’ll ask him to very, very briefly describe why he 
believes that the business of the House should be set aside and 
then to concisely advise the House the motion he wishes to 
introduce. 
 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 46 
 

Back-to-Work Legislation for Striking Nurses 
 

Mr. Osika: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. By reading the intent 
of the motion I believe will advise and inform the members of 
its urgency and pressing necessity. Motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to 
immediately restore a co-operative, positive environment 
for labour/employer relations for Saskatchewan nurses, 
which is today being destroyed as a result of NDP 
back-to-work legislation and inflammatory behaviour that 
is now seriously jeopardizing our health system by 
immediately, immediately repealing this flawed legislation 
or at the very least removing section 7(4)(c) and section 
7(5) of the back-to-work legislation which prevent SUN 
and the employer from free collective bargaining on a 
monetary issue. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise under 
rule 46 to present a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Cannington requests to 
introduce a motion under rule 46. I’ll . . . Order, order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. The Chair asks for co-operation of 
members on both sides of the House. Order. 
 
The hon. member for Cannington requests leave to introduce a 
rule 46 motion and I’ll ask him to briefly advise the House why 
he believes the House should set aside the business and the 
nature of the motion he wishes to introduce. 
 

Resumption of Collective Bargaining 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, 
we’re entering the fifth day of a province-wide strike by the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. We believe that it is very 
important that bargaining again start to take place to resolve this 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

issue and that it take place without any preconditions put on it. 
 
I will read what the motion would say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations to 
immediately begin collective bargaining once again with 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and that these 
negotiations should come with no preconditions. 
 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Ward: — I table the answers to question no. 42. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 1, question 42, is 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Ward: — Open and accountable, table to question no. 43. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to item no. 2, question no. 43, is 
provided. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 1 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
honoured to be able to rise today in the Assembly to speak to 
the proposed amendment before us to The Child and Family 
Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without saying, our children are our most vital and 
precious resource. It’s got to be a parent’s worst nightmare if 
any harm or danger comes to their children. And it is our duty 
as a society to ensure that our children are safe and kept away 
from the dangers that are a harsh reality in this day and age. 
 
And it’s sad but true, Mr. Speaker, that there are people in this 
world who would want to harm our children. And these 
predators must be reprimanded, and our kids kept out of harm’s 
way. We in this House have the opportunity to help parents 
keep their children protected and to assist those children who do 
not have parenting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not every child is fortunate enough to grow up in a 
loving and functional environment. There are too many children 
in our province that are on the streets selling themselves, 
prostituting themselves, for a variety of reasons and this must 
come to a stop. It’s very sad and very disconcerting, Mr. 
Speaker, to drive down the streets and see young teenagers 

working the streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goals should be changed. Being a youth in our 
society is much too risky. The statistics reported of children 
living in poverty, suffering through child abuse, drug 
addictions, teen pregnancy, and violence literally numb the 
consciousness. The perils are so daunting. The solutions are so 
elusive that we as a nation appear unable to safeguard the 
well-being our most vulnerable generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most at-risk youths are those who live in 
poverty and are in immediate danger of physical, emotional, 
and educational neglect. But the risk is not limited to the poor. 
Children of every economic, social, and racial group are 
growing up in Saskatchewan with little confidence in our 
institutions, in family security, in quality education, and 
attainable health care. 
 
Youngsters must struggle to find adult models nowadays to 
guide their passage into the next generation of innovators and 
healers, teachers, leaders, parents, and neighbours. Many 
children have lost the opportunity to succeed and the impact is 
felt throughout our society. 
 
It’s crucial that we preserve the innocence of our children in 
these difficult times. Children confront life-threatening risks at 
an early age. And they hear about sexuality and AIDS (acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome), violence and drugs from very 
unreliable sources. Therefore it is imperative that we as parents 
and grandparents take the responsibility upon ourselves, where 
it primarily belongs, to inform our youth of the hazards they 
potentially face in the real world. 
 
In the amendments, Mr. Speaker, to The Child and Family 
Services Act, I have to say that I’m a little disappointed; 
because for a number of years I have brought forward the 
number of things, the important things, that need to be changed 
as far a legislation goes. We have absolutely no mention in the 
amendments of safe houses in this government’s Bill. The 
legislation does not lend support either to communities or police 
in their efforts. 
 
What I am happy about in these amendments, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the government has finally listened and put a provision in 
there, in the amendment, stating that a police officer can remove 
a child from a home without a warrant if they feel leaving the 
child will harm them further. It’s important to note that this is 
what has been said over the past three years by a number of 
people and finally the government is listening. 
 
But the Minister of Justice has mentioned that there would be 
intervention for young people at risk. The intervention the 
minister mentioned when presenting the legislation is not 
referring to on-the-street intervention by police; the minister’s 
reference to intervention means placing children in foster 
homes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, most of these children have been bounced 
from one foster home to another. They need to have immediate 
intervention on the street and provisions for ongoing specific 
healing treatment. 
 
(1430) 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

Most of the government’s Bill, as I mentioned, refers to 
children that are taken already out of abusive home situations. 
But there isn’t any mention, any direct mention of children 
being able to be assisted off the streets and into healing 
programs, healing treatments, and immediate help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken at length on this issue throughout 
the three years. And I would commend the government on at 
least putting a Bill forward and tabling this legislation because 
it means that there is an awareness that something must be 
done. 
 
There’s no doubt that the kind of intervention and the ongoing 
healing treatment for our young people would require a great 
deal of public money. However, it does not always have to be 
public money, Mr. Speaker, that would provide these services. I 
have had a number of private people and organizations speak to 
me about the possibility of that happening outside of taxpayers’ 
money. Whether or not that can come to fruition is another 
story. 
 
And one of the reasons I believe that the government of the day 
cannot and will not put forward the Bill that I presented is 
simply because of the overall cost. Our children certainly are 
worth it but at this time government has chosen not to do it. 
And so I would be pleased to be one of those referring this 
amendment in the present Bill to Committee of the Whole 
where I would be interested in speaking with the Minister of 
Justice further on it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is as the member for 
Humboldt just noted, encouraging that at least we are now 
taking this issue seriously; and of course as with everything it is 
the admission that there is a problem that is the start to any 
solution. I would say on behalf of my caucus that we know in 
the sex trade that there are always two sides. There are the 
buyers and the sellers. And if we wish to address this problem 
we have to look at both groups. 
 
Now the province of Alberta on the one side of us has basically 
gone to the issue of rehabilitation of young people who are on 
the streets selling sex and how they can be dealt with to take 
them off the street and begin a rehabilitation program. We 
certainly have no quarrel with that, and I think that in all 
fairness all members of this House should acknowledge that it 
is the member for Humboldt who first placed this matter on the 
public agenda in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
However there is the other side of the equation too which we 
ought not to ignore, and interestingly enough, our other sister 
province of Manitoba has chosen to address the issue of the 
buyers of sex. And they have done it by amending the vehicles 
Act to provide for seizure of vehicles and then upon conviction 
those vehicles are sold and the proceeds from the sale of those 
vehicles is used for rehabilitation programs for prostitutes. 
 
I think that is an interesting concept. It is one that is endorsed 
by the Liberal caucus and therefore my caucus will be placing 
an amendment to the vehicles Act on the order paper to 
accomplish that. And I think that . . . I see it not as an 
alternative to the suggestions of the government, or of the 
official opposition, but something that can work complimentary 
to it. 

So I think that again I congratulate the member for Humboldt 
for putting this issue on the public agenda. I congratulate the 
government for responding and bringing forth this legislation. 
And I would in turn ask other parties and other members of this 
House to seriously consider the proposal that the Liberal caucus 
will be placing before this Assembly, namely that we look at 
the purchasers of sex to see how they can be deterred. And I 
encourage all members to consider this as another weapon in 
the battle against the street sex trade as opposed to an 
alternative and opposition to what the government or the 
official opposition is attempting to do. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just conclude by saying 
that we are aware that one of the problems in dealing with 
prostitution as a criminal issue is that it has come to attract very 
small fines. And the criminal courts just don’t seem to be the 
appropriate venue for dealing with a serious social problem. 
And certainly to arrest prostitutes and maybe fine them $150 is 
simply had little impact on the sex trade. 
 
However we know in the case of child support and other areas 
that driving privileges can oftentimes drive home a message 
much quicker than a small fine can. And it is for that reason that 
Manitoba has opted for seizure of vehicles for those who are 
using their cars for the purpose of picking up young prostitutes. 
And I think that’s an interesting concept Manitoba has adopted, 
and the Liberal caucus is recommending that for this House and 
this province as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 14 — The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
fewer subjects have raised the ire of people in Saskatchewan in 
the last few years as much as reassessment, and I believe it’s 
caused many headaches for the government of the day, and for 
anyone, for that matter, that’s been elected. It’s caused 
problems all over the province. 
 
The government states the changes in this Bill will improve the 
reassessment process and make assessments and appeals more 
equitable and effective across the province. And this, Mr. 
Speaker, is something I think that has been drastically needed. 
Just the equitable and effectiveness of . . . (inaudible) . . . of the 
appeals is going to help. 
 
The government states changes reflect concerns appellants have 
raised in the past two years, and this is good to see. Any 
improvements are welcome since the reassessment of 1997 was 
a disaster. The government was ill-prepared and therefore got 
information out to assessors and municipalities extremely late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, neither municipalities nor taxpayers should have 
to go through what they went through in 1997. Many people 
who have chosen to appeal their assessments have found 
appeals to the Municipal Board frustrating and difficult. The 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

rules are difficult to understand for the average person. And 
quite often deadlines or other technicalities were missed and 
people lost their right to appeal. This is not right. 
 
With the appeal, people are facing a well-financed and 
well-lawyered barrage set up by SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency). It is very difficult to fight 
your case under these circumstances when you’re not a lawyer 
and cannot afford to hire one to deal with these matters. Will 
these changes make the process more fair? It does go some 
way, but I’m not sure it goes far enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mention should be made as well to property taxes in general. 
We now face the highest property taxes in Canada of any of the 
provinces. It only adds to the overall tax burden in 
Saskatchewan. This tax burden keeps people from coming to 
Saskatchewan and forces those who are here to leave. Taxes, 
Mr. Speaker, are killing us. 
 
This does not mention the overall problem with school taxes 
and how they keep climbing as the government’s commitment 
to education keeps falling. Property owners now pick up 60 per 
cent of the tab for education in this province, among the lower 
provincial government commitments in the country. This year’s 
increase to education will barely cover the cost of the teachers’ 
pay increase which the government negotiated with the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) last year. 
 
And what happens now, Mr. Speaker? This is about half of 
what the SSTA needs to deal with the new money they need for 
their new budget. So once again we’re going to see the mill 
rates increase in urban Saskatchewan and in rural Saskatchewan 
because of the downloading of the government and the shortfall 
in the money they’ve allotted for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a potentially good change is the comparability of 
properties within neighbouring municipalities. Currently the 
Act limits requirements for comparability of the municipality 
itself. However, municipalities are often part of the larger 
jurisdiction such as school divisions where a common mill rate 
is levied. Therefore more comparability is needed among 
properties in different municipalities. 
 
And I’m very glad to see this happen, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 
occasion in my own community of Saltcoats, and I believe other 
communities, where this comparability would have helped the 
situation there. 
 
Another requirement, Mr. Speaker, that is being introduced 
along with the above point is the requirement for equity among 
assessments within a school division. These two changes will 
not be in effect until the time of the next reassessment in 2001. 
The Act clarifies the method in which appellants serve notice of 
appeal of their assessment such as regular mail, registered mail, 
etc. The onus on meeting time limits remain on the appellant. 
 
The current Act is silent on how these notices are to be 
delivered. Regular mail, registered mail, or personal delivery 
will be acceptable. Perhaps a good question would be why 
electronic delivery is not being addressed at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes will disallow municipal council or 
school board members from sitting on local or district boards of 

revision to remove any perception of bias, and this is probably a 
good move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Changes will allow appellants with property and land in 
multiple jurisdictions to consolidate all appeals and bypass local 
board of revision process. And I also agree with that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Changes being made will allow appellants to take complex 
commercial and industrial appeals straight to the appeal board 
level since nearly all of them end up there anyway because of 
their complexity. This will be allowed only where there is local 
board of revision and municipality believe it . . . municipalities 
believe it to be prudent to do so. 
 
Another requirement of skipping the initial stage is having 
assessed property of a certain amount, that the amount be set by 
regulations. And I guess the problem I have once again with 
that, Mr. Speaker, is we’re putting decisions off to regulations 
can be brought in at a whim without any consultation from 
anyone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe the three municipal Bills are very 
similar here and we will have many more questions in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
say that there are certainly some reforms here being proposed 
but we know that the mess created in this province by 
reassessment has resulted in very unnecessary ill feelings and a 
feeling of oppression of our property taxpayers, and a certain 
amount of backlash against education and against school boards 
which I find highly unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we have a relatively high tax load in 
Canada, but of course that is especially true in the area of 
property tax. We have the highest property tax in the country 
and that is a direct reflection, as the member from Saltcoats has 
pointed out, to the government’s lack of commitment to 
education and therefore their lack of commitment to our 
province’s young people. 
 
They can take the credit for a drop in the sales tax, however, we 
are told that a direct result of this year’s budget will be to 
trigger a further increase in the mill rate. And it seems to me 
that the cynical part of that bit of economics is that the 
government gets to take the credit for a reduction in tax in one 
area, but by further bleeding the school boards and forcing it up 
in the mill rate the net effect is we, as taxpayers in the province, 
are net losers, but the government is off the hook because they 
can say that the school boards did it and not them. So they can 
say they gave us a tax break and it’s the fault of the school 
boards if in point of fact we end up, at the end of the day, with a 
tax increase not a tax decrease. 
 
That said, there has been a lack of confidence in the appeal 
process and I’m hopeful that these amendments will restore 
some confidence in the essential fairness of the system. But we 
know what is really needed to restore confidence in our 
property tax system is to get back to the tradition of this 
province, the tradition which the Premier has promised, namely 
that 60 per cent of the cost of education will be borne by the 
province and 40 per cent by property owners. If we can get back 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

to that then I think most people would pay their property taxes 
with the feeling that it is a fair system. 
 
(1445) 
 
Instead of course, as the member for Saltcoats just alluded, the 
provincial average is now 60 per cent of the costs of education 
are borne by property owners. That is an unfair imposition 
especially on people such as our farmers. 
 
And the other part of that scenario is that with rural 
municipalities 70 to 80 per cent of the taxes that rural 
municipality residents pay is for education purposes in many, 
many cases. When they see that up to 80 per cent of their taxes 
are going for school purposes, it unfortunately leads to a 
backlash against education. So I think that, say, if we want to 
make a declaration that education and young people are 
important to our future, the way to do it is to say the province 
will fund 60 per cent of education. 
 
The other area of property taxation though that has not been 
addressed here and I think has to be is recreation property. One 
of the expanding areas of economy for our province has been 
the increasing trend of younger retired people to build their 
retirement homes in the lake districts of our province. As we 
know there has been a long-standing Saskatchewan tradition to 
retire out to the coast or elsewhere. That means that our more 
affluent retirees take their money with them when they retire. 
 
So this new trend of young retirees building permanent homes 
in our beaches and lakes is a good one. It’s good socially and 
it’s good for our economy. And one of the areas this is 
happening is in the Jackfish and Murray Lake areas of my 
constituency. So we want to encourage this. 
 
Now I know the Minister of Municipal Affairs is forever telling 
us that taxes are not related to services, that it is an ad valorem 
system. Nonetheless under reassessment those people who have 
permanent residences at the lake find themselves paying taxes 
equivalent to what they would be paying in a city, and those 
people have little or no services. 
 
This is extremely discouraging, Mr. Speaker, when a property 
owner at the lake, who has to make his or her own arrangements 
for water, for sewage, for garbage pickup, and really a path for 
a road, and here they are paying taxes similar to what they 
would be paying in Saskatoon or Regina. This is very 
discouraging and this is not an incentive to encourage people to 
retire and build their retirement home at our lakes. So I would 
ask the government to take that very seriously and consider 
what could be done on that. 
 
I would also say that again, the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
says it’s not related to value and services, but it seems to me in 
a general sense all taxes have to be related to services. I mean 
why else do we pay taxes other than presumably to fund the 
public services we as a society have agreed we need. So to say 
that taxes aren’t related to services seems to me a non sequitur. 
And in that regard, at the lakes — and I believe this is a 
problem in Saltcoats — we have something called a view tax, 
where people are expected to pay additional taxes because there 
is a very nice view out the front window. 
 

Well our NDP government has given us many things over the 
years, Mr. Speaker, I concede. But I don’t think, I don’t think 
that even the Premier would take credit for the . . . the NDP for 
the Qu’Appelle Valley or for the lakes. The view has been 
provided by someone other than the Premier. 
 
So I say in all seriousness is it fair to charge people taxes for a 
view that has not been provided by the government? It has been 
provided by a higher authority even than the NDP. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am in agreement with the general 
thrust of this Bill, but there is much, much more that has to be 
done to restore confidence in the property tax system and in our 
reassessment and appeals system, and I urge the government to 
look very seriously at some of the issues surrounding this. 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 13 — The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is very similar to the urban municipal Bill. Just a couple of 
notes I’d like to make on it and then we will let this Bill pass 
. . . pass on. 
 
It brings forth the compatibility of assessment values, not only 
in single municipalities but in cases where there’s larger 
jurisdictions. It clarifies how appeal notices are to be delivered 
and to whom. It removes RM councillors from local and district 
boards of revision to combat perceptions of bias. And that’s 
probably a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Changes will force SAMA to re-file assessment field sheets and 
assessment explanations prior to appeal process and make it 
easier for appellants to proceed with their arguments. And I 
think anything we can do, Mr. Speaker, to make it easier for 
appellants — increasing the amount of availability of 
information that they need for their appeal and to make it easier 
for them to receive that information — will be welcomed by all 
out there. 
 
Changes clarify the use of recordings of board of revisions 
appeal hearings. Right now, Mr. Speaker, unless it is requested 
that hearings are recorded, the transcript recordings have no 
bearing before a Saskatchewan municipal board. This change 
states that if a recording is made it can be used at the board 
hearing. 
 
Appellants with properties or lands in multiple jurisdictions, 
once again as the other Bill, will be allowed to have their appeal 
heard in one hearing by skipping over numerous local boards’ 
revision. Complex commercial, and industrial cases can be 
taken straight to the appeal board or a local board of revision, 
and municipalities deem it to be prudent to do so. This is done 
because the local board does not have the expertise to deal with 
certain complex cases. And I agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

The Sask Municipal Board will have the discretion to allow 
appeals to proceed even when appellants have made procedural 
mistakes. This recognizes that not all appellants have access to 
first-class legal advice. If rules are substantially followed, this 
appeal . . . where the appeal would not be thrown out for 
technical reasons, and I think this is a very common sense 
change, Mr. Speaker, because most appellants are not of legal 
mind or are not lawyers. So it would make it very, very . . . 
much more simple for them to do. 
 
Like the urban municipal Act, this clarifies the use of tax tools 
by municipalities to deal with problems associated with 
applying school board mill rates, and it tries to deal with the 
problems where differing assessments through school division 
result in higher or lower rates than intended when 
municipalities apply the school portion to the overall mill rate. 
And this were to take effect for the current tax year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for North Battleford had touched on a 
very important issue that I feel and I would hope that the 
minister would also agree with, that we have to get, somewhere 
down the road, our tax base tied more to the services we receive 
than the property taxes themselves. I think we hear at rural 
conventions — and for that matter, SUMA, at urban 
conventions — that they continuously want the tax load taken 
off the property landowner and removed to some other avenue. 
And I believe one way of doing that would be to remove and 
. . . we pay taxes on the services we receive to a greater degree 
than we do now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s really all I have to say at this point, so I 
would be happy to have this go to committee and have our other 
questions answered there. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 12 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think these are many of the changes that we saw in the other 
two municipal Bills. And I understand and agree that obviously 
the North has many special problems and situations, but I 
believe these changes that were made in both the urban and 
rural and now in the northern municipal Act will help the 
people of northern Saskatchewan as they will help the people in 
the South. 
 
So I think we agree with these changes and if we have some 
questions we can ask them in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 10 — The 

Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Act, 1999. This is a very technical Bill. It can probably be dealt 
with better in the Committee of the Whole, but there’s a few 
things we do need to say about it. 
 
This rewrites the 1978 legislation, so it was probably, Mr. 
Speaker, time for an update. The minister stated that changes 
have been made in consultation with the industry. She didn’t 
say whether the industry approved of the changes or not. We 
hope they were and we will be questioning that fact very closely 
in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Bill puts in place a new legislative structure with new 
procedures for appeal and new boards — and that’s not 
surprising because the NDP just loves new boards to appoint 
people to — and new licensing procedures for those who 
operate boilers or pressure vessels. 
 
The new Act establishes the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Safety 
Board which will consist of up to 11 Saskatchewan residents 
appointed by cabinet. The qualifications for sitting on the board 
will be set out in regulations. Let’s hope they will put names 
forward from the industry and not more NDP hacks sitting on 
the board collecting per diems and expenses. 
 
Much of the technical data from the new Act had been removed 
from the Bill and then put into regulations. This, Mr. Speaker, is 
just the latest example of the government’s move away from 
legislative changes into regulatory changes. This of course takes 
away from accountability for any future changes the 
government may decide to make without being brought to the 
legislature. And we definitely disapprove of that method of 
government. 
 
This particular board will hear appeals of decisions made by the 
chief inspector. This appears to be a new right of appeal not 
contained in the old Act. The old power management board has 
been scrapped. We’ll need to determine in committee how these 
two boards will operate differently and how the new system 
will be more effective. 
 
The Bill also gives the chief inspector wide-ranging powers to 
cancel operating licences with little or no accountability to 
anyone. Boiler and pressure vessels will also be registered with 
the government with another prescribed fee attached. Why is 
both registration and licensing needed? One should be good 
enough. We’ll want an explanation of that from committee. 
 
Beyond the licence and registration requirements, an inspection 
certificate is still needed. Presumably another fee will be 
collected at the time of inspection. We’ll have to ask how much 
in total this cost will be. We want to keep tabs, Mr. Speaker, on 
the hidden fees and charges the government imposes. After all 
it’s only another form of tax. 
 
Penalties and fines have also been changed. For an individual a 
maximum of $2,000 to a fine of 5,000 plus a maximum $1,000 
for each day the offence continues. And for a corporation a 
maximum of 10,000 plus 2,000 for each day the offence 
continues. Second offences will see that the fees go still higher. 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

We’ll need some clarification of this last point. How can a 
director of a corporation be prosecuted with contravening this 
Act when the corporation itself is not? 
 
We do have several questions surrounding this Act. And we 
will be asking those questions in the Committee of the Whole 
where we would like to see this go. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 8 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think mainly this Bill changes reassessment from the three-year 
cycle to a four-year cycle. This will have effect of delaying the 
next round of assessment till the year 2001 and I believe that’s 
probably very important, Mr. Speaker. We support this move; 
and as many of the municipalities have been calling for this 
delay, I think to be much better prepared than we were last time 
around. 
 
This Bill also clarifies SAMA’s role as the body which 
implements assessment but does not set tax policy itself. I hope 
this means that the government will stop its practice of using 
SAMA as a political shield as we saw in 1997, and after, when 
the fallout from the reassessment was taking place. The Bill 
also gives government increased regulatory powers over SAMA 
in choosing the base date for which reassessment is based. This 
is a date in which all properties are valued to maintain 
consistency. The base date for the 1997 reassessment was ’94. 
The government will now set this date through regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill will supposedly improve SAMA’s 
accountability by requiring SAMA to put out projections of 
shifts in assessment from rule changes. The Bill also makes 
clear SAMA’s responsibility for assessment by deleting all 
references to appeals and tax shift since they do not set tax 
policy, simply carry it out. 
 
This Bill also makes it mandatory that SAMA consult all 
affected agencies such as municipalities and school boards 
before carrying out re-evaluations in preparation of assessment 
manuals. Once again, we can support this as long as the 
consultations that take place are meaningful and lead to good 
changes. The consultation process we’ve seen from the 
government up till now has been to talk to as many people and 
groups as they can, and then do what they felt they wanted to do 
in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAMA will no longer be able to suggest changes 
to appeal procedures. And this is seen as a conflict of interest in 
SAMA . . . must appear at appeals and defend its decisions. 
 
The Bill authorizes regulations to set deadlines for getting 
information out to municipalities. We would prefer to see this 
right in the legislation. If it’s anything like the last time, the 

government will no doubt keep changing the deadline as they 
continually miss it. 
 
We saw information get out to the municipalities much too late 
last time and this made the process much more difficult and 
painful, more painful than it had to be. Properties will have to 
be physically re-inspected every certain number of years, and 
that number to be set out in regulation. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have a problem with so much 
being left to regulation. We keep asking the question, why hide 
it in regulation? Why can we not put it in the Bill so people 
know what they’re dealing with? That would be real 
accountability. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again we will have questions, but at this 
time I would let this pass to committee. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say on behalf 
of my caucus that the decision to delay the next reassessment by 
one year is a sound one and indeed probably a necessary one 
given the circumstances. 
 
However, I do have this cautionary note that I think has to be 
sounded. We know that the main reason reassessment was such 
a painful process in this province a couple of years ago was 
because we had delayed it for so long. I believe it was 32 years 
that we had delayed reassessment. And the longer we delayed 
it, the more painful the process became. And the more difficult 
the problem looked, the more no one was prepared to touch it, 
and so consequently we went on for more than three decades 
without reassessment. 
 
The principle now of rolling reassessment on a regular basis so 
that reassessments never get badly out of date is an extremely 
important one and is one that we can’t lose sight of. If 
reassessment is done on a regular rolling basis, then presumably 
no one will find dramatic changes in their tax level as a result of 
reassessment. And that is crucial to restoring some stability in 
the system and restoring goodwill with those people who have 
to write the cheques. 
 
So while I say the delay for one year is appropriate, I sincerely 
hope that that isn’t the start of one year and then another year 
and then another year as happened after the last reassessment, 
until we ended up with 32 years between reassessment. 
 
I realize, I realize members opposite do not think there’s any 
urgency at getting to problems because they assume, they 
assume they will be sitting there for decades, and consequently 
they can deal with the serious problems of this province this 
year, next year, whenever. But, Mr. Speaker, I will just leave 
you with this parting thought. 
 
As I go around my constituency, I would encourage ministers 
opposite: if they have anything pressing they want to do to 
solidify and finalize their political careers, if they have any 
monuments they wish to leave the province of Saskatchewan as 
their lasting contribution to the growth and development of their 
province, I suggest they do it sooner rather than later. Thank 
you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 17 — The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill allows greater flexibility for municipalities regarding where 
they have to advertise election notices. This expands types of 
publications but does not allow the use of strictly advertising 
papers or supplements. 
 
I understand many local governments have been calling for this 
because of considerable expense that is involved in following 
the current legislation. Anything that cuts down on expenses for 
a municipality is welcomed by all. 
 
The Bill also deals with the problems around school 
amalgamation which we’ll probably see more and more of in 
future years. Under the changes, where two or more school 
boards are amalgamated, changes will waive requirement for 
school board elections in divisions which are restructuring and 
allow existing trustees to remain in office until a school division 
is officially disestablished. Existing school boards will remain 
in office until elections can be held. 
 
While any time you delay an election it is a concern, but we can 
see reasons why this is the case of there’s a need to have this in 
place. However, we see no reason to delay the provincial 
election in June, much different to what we’re talking about 
here. We are anxious to take over, Mr. Speaker, as the people of 
Saskatchewan are also anxious for us to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the same thing. We’ll have questions in 
committee and I feel that they can be answered at that time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 3 — The Intestate 
Succession Amendment Act, 1999/Loi de 1999 modifiant la 
Loi de 1996 sur les successions non testamentaires be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to speak to the proposed 
changes the government is making to The Intestate Succession 
Act. Mr. Speaker, it’s advisable for people to make out a will. 
Having a will provides considerable advantages in that the 
person drawing up the will can determine the exact financial or 
property distribution to their heirs or to a charity. 
 
However there are times when people do not make out a will 
and if no will has been made then the deceased’s property will 
devolve according to intestacy rules. The Intestate Succession 
Act, Mr. Speaker, sets out the rules for distributing the assets of 
an estate when a person dies without having a will. When this 

Act was first introduced in 1960, a preferential share went to 
the surviving spouse. When the Act was amended in 1978 to 
increase that preferential share, it did not clearly reflect the 
extent of entitlement to the preferential sharer. 
 
And essentially, Mr. Speaker, what this amendment will do is 
clarify that a preferential share is to be at least $10,000 to be 
given to the surviving spouse. And I am pleased to see that this 
government is addressing this issue in their proposed 
amendments, and I look forward to further discussion on this 
Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 4 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is certainly not one of the most exciting pieces of 
legislation that I’ve ever read in my career, however it does do 
some modest movements in order to promote investment in 
Saskatchewan and therefore we think it has some redeeming 
features. 
 
It really is something that would come as a surprise to 
absolutely no one that the NDP really don’t understand how to 
encourage investment in this province with their high tax 
policy. Entrepreneurs and businesses just simply aren’t willing 
to locate in this province. 
 
The attitude of this government seems that they don’t want to 
have anything new start here because they quite simply don’t 
understand business. Frankly, we get the distinct impression 
that they view anyone suspiciously who wants to start 
something in this province who don’t want government 
involvement as well. That’s exactly why we think investment in 
this province has to be encouraged and we certainly will do 
everything that we can to encourage it. 
 
We have to start with the taxation and regulatory system that 
makes businesses across this country, all across North America, 
ready, willing, and able to locate here free of the interference of 
this government. If we don’t do that, we’re going to continue to 
have the worst job record in this country and the only head 
offices that we have here are the family of Crown corporations. 
And we all know how everybody loves the Crowns. 
 
This Bill, the government states that the changes being 
undertaken in this Bill are similar to changes that are being 
undertaken in all provinces. They come from recommendations 
put forward by an industry committee looking at the rules 
governing company takeovers and shareholders’ right. 
 
The term bid has been amended to mean both the bid of the 
company attempting a takeover, or the company which is the 
target of the takeover offering to buy back its own securities 
from shareholders. 
 
(1515) 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

The takeover bid is commenced when an offer . . . by delivering 
the offer in a prescribed form to the shareholder of the target 
company. The minimum period for shareholders to respond to a 
bid has been raised from 21 to 35 days. 
 
This Act also gives shareholders the right to withdraw their 
shares after initial acceptance in case a better offer comes along. 
Shareholders may withdraw shares at any time until the offerer 
takes up the securities. After take-up, they can still withdraw if 
an offerer hasn’t paid them within three business days. The old 
Act referred to three calendar days so this extends the period 
slightly. 
 
After a time period for takeover bids is set out in this Act, the 
new regulatory clause gives the government the power to set a 
time frame at anything it pleases. This would have been quite 
helpful to the government when Talisman tried to take over 
Wascana Energy. The government could have set the time 
frame as long as they wanted to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other minor alternations in the 
regulations envisaged by this Bill, and while we have a few 
specific questions, we’ll be able to do that in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 5 — The 
Municipal Hail Insurance Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is another Bill that moves much of the legislative authority into 
regulations. While we recognize some of these changes are 
requested, we continue to have a real problem with the amount 
of things that the government continues to move out of 
legislation and into regulations. 
 
They like to avoid this legislature. And given their performance 
this session, I guess I can hardly blame them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister stated that the amendments in the Bill had been 
requested by Saskatchewan municipal hail association. So we 
recognize that the changes are probably warranted and will do 
nothing . . . we will do nothing to unduly hold them up. 
However, we will have some questions later on. 
 
Under the current Act, two-thirds of voting delegates at the 
annual meeting can appropriate up to $2 million from its 
reserves for the purpose of purchasing capital stock in a limited 
company. This amendment strikes out the $2 million figure and 
puts the amounts into regulations. And again, Mr. Speaker, even 
though it may have been asked for, we really have concerns 
with that. 
 
Currently when a claimant does not live within four miles of the 
crop for which the claim is being made, the notice of claim 

must contain the name of someone who does live within four 
miles. This clause has been scraped, and that is a good thing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the current legislation, claims must be filed by October 
15. This has been extended to October 31. And I also agree with 
that move. 
 
Currently basic indemnities cannot exceed $20 per acre. 
Subsequent indemnities cannot exceed $80 per acre. These 
amounts are struck out and moved to regulations. I do believe 
that these amounts, Mr. Speaker, had to be looked at, although 
I’m not sure that the regulations is the place to put them. Maybe 
they should have been right in the legislation itself. 
 
Regulatory authority is also being put in place defining any 
meaning in the Act, describing . . . (inaudible) . . . matter or 
thing required or authorized by this Act respecting any other 
matter or thing the cabinet considers necessary. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is pretty wide-ranging regulatory authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might say at this time because we’re speaking of 
a hail Act here, that probably being that grain prices the way 
they are, if the minister could probably legislate a hailstorm this 
summer, it’d probably . . . the minister would be doing a favour 
for every farmer out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time we will let this also pass to committee 
and we’ll have some questions to ask at that time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 18 — The 
Constitutional Questions Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 18, The 
Constitutional Questions Amendment Act, 1999 — another Bill 
of great import by this government. 
 
This is a very important Bill since it deals with constitutional 
issues, Mr. Speaker. This Bill provides for an amendment to 
ensure that the office of the Attorney General of Saskatchewan 
has due notice of all constitutionally based matters before the 
courts in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Bill also gives notice to the Attorney General pursuant to 
section 8(7) of the Act so a decision can be made whether it is 
appropriate for the Attorney General to appear on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is important to address the term “regulation” and “Act” and 
“law” in this Act. As a matter of fact, attorneys in 
Saskatchewan are ready to provide notice to the Attorney 
General’s office on all constitutional matters. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, basically strengthens the 
existing practices and ensures that the legally required notice is 
provided in a way that will ensure the constitutional interests of 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

Saskatchewan residents will remain protected. And any further 
questions on this particular issue, we’ll deal with them in the 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 20 — The 
Business Corporations Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I see 
we’re drawing to the end of a long list this afternoon of 
absolutely fascinating legislation that the government has 
proposed. Again, very routine in nature, very much a 
housekeeping legislation that will clean up some of the issues 
surrounding the business corporations and regulations 
surrounding the corporations. 
 
It seems as if this legislation will indeed improve a number of 
the issues facing corporations in their communications with 
their shareholders in the way members of boards of directors 
are appointed, and being necessary for them to accept that 
appointment, which we hope goes some distance in terms of 
making board members more responsible for the issues 
surrounding the corporation. 
 
Again from this side of the House it’s very good to see that the 
NDP is providing some encouragement to business in 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately it happens about as often as we 
see Halley’s comet coming into view. So we certainly will 
support anything that allows this to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a few questions about the specifics on the 
Bill and we can ask them in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
On my left is Larry Spannier, the associate deputy minister. 
Behind him is Jocelyn Souliere, executive director. Beside her 
and behind me is Lynn Oliver, the chief information officer. 
Behind Bryon here is Darryl Kristjanson, the assistant deputy 
minister, acting assistant deputy minister, and next to me on the 
right is Bryon Burnett, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and good 
afternoon department officials. Welcome. I would like to cover 

a few topics this afternoon. 
 
And where I would like to start is instead of the general area of 
the Department of Economic Development, is I understand that 
your department has been assigned the responsibility for the 
issues surrounding the Y2K (Year 2000) issue. 
 
Would the minister care to give us an overview of where your 
department is at in that regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, to the member opposite, we’re 
very pleased to give you an overview of that. 
 
As of June last year, 60 per cent of the departments and agency 
systems with direct impact on public services were Y2K 
compliant. 
 
The Crown utilities — SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy — 
reported to the Crown Corporations Committee in November 
that they’re nearing completion of Y2K preparedness plans. 
And you would know from the media that SaskPower was part 
of basically a dry run recently which worked and was effective. 
 
So what we’re doing is we’re doing it across government. But 
we’re also working in partnership with other governments. For 
example, the federal government has taken a major role in 
helping us work with the business community to ensure that 
they understand — particularly the small business community 
— the requirements here. And the federal government has a 
1-800 number which I gather is being utilized quite a bit by 
people wanting information. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, you 
indicated I think from the figures that you quoted, some figures 
as old as last June and November. Do you have information that 
is more current in terms of the Y2K compliance of the 
departments? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, to the member opposite. We’ve 
just completed the results of an IBM survey, which was what 
was released in June. So this will be an update, and that’s going 
to be released very shortly. But what I can say is that you’re 
going to see there’s been a lot of significant progress since 
June. 
 
I think of all the agencies that the average person worries about 
the most, it is SaskPower, because it obviously has the greatest 
impact on the whole province. And what’s key there is that 
SaskPower has been working on this quite literally for years, I 
believe starting in ’96. And I think what people should feel 
reassured about is that SaskPower’s dry run was effective. That 
is the dry run said that the system will work in 2001 on that day 
that it matters most. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Madam Minister, I appreciate your 
assurance but I would like to indicate to you some information 
that I heard over the weekend in my constituency. 
 
Apparently last week an electronic device situated at Tisdale 
failed, which set off a series of difficulties for SaskPower. The 
device I am led to believe is not Y2K compatible, is indeed only 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

scheduled for replacement later this fall. 
 
The people that were in a position to be able to deal with that 
device were located in Saskatoon. It took them a significant 
amount of time to try to locate anybody that knew anything 
about it. When they did, they couldn’t find someone that had a 
key for the lock in the gate to get to this device. 
 
When they did do the alternations or resetting of the device, it 
triggered a problem at the substation at Beatty. When they tried 
to address that, it triggered a problem in Prince Albert. And so 
on a warm spring day a whole section of this province went 
black because of a device that I understand isn’t Y2K 
compatible in Tisdale and potentially scheduled for replacement 
later this fall. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think it’s just an indication of how 
vulnerable in an unsuspecting way the system can be when 
things go wrong. And I wonder if those kinds of things are 
being looked at in a thorough way. And I don’t want to 
belabour it but I also want to make sure that you and your 
department are seriously looking into this issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. What I can 
say to the member opposite is this testing will be done in a more 
thorough way this summer; that is SaskPower will quite literally 
move the clocks forward and then there will be a complete trial 
run to test. And so that means if it’s done this summer, there are 
several months in which any of the problems can be ironed out. 
 
So I think what people in the province have to feel assured 
about is that SaskPower has been working on this quite literally 
for years. They are working not just within the province but 
with other agencies, and they are going through the process to 
begin testing the systems well before the event occurs to ensure 
that the bugs are ironed out and that by January 1, 2000 the 
system will be working. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I appreciate the fact that 
SaskPower is going to begin testing the system this summer, 
however, as the example I gave to you which happened last 
week indicates that it is required in order for the system to 
work, that there is going to be some physical equipment that 
needs to be replaced or upgraded to comply with the Y2K issue. 
And it would seem to me that that same issue is being faced by 
power corporations across the world, and if it’s left until as late 
as this summer, there might be some serious issues of supply of 
some pieces of equipment that show up to be the weak point in 
the link if you like. 
 
It seemed to me that from the reports I got of this incident, 
which didn’t create a great hardship because of the time of year, 
is that it indicated to me that the system is only as reliable and 
only as strong as its weakest link; and potentially when you do 
this testing in the summertime, it may indicate some unforeseen 
weak spots in the system that may be very difficult to replace 
because other power corporations, other agencies of that nature, 
are going to be scrambling to buy those same components. 
 
If the test of SaskPower that was conducted very recently . . . 
has that indicated and has it revealed some serious weaknesses 
in the system so that SaskPower is re-testing this summer? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well again to the member opposite, 
I don’t think that SaskPower has anything to apologize for here. 
I think they have been out in front of this. They have worked on 
this issue since ’96. They have begun the process of testing. 
They’ve had their consultations across the piece. And so that we 
have a few more months and a few more tests shouldn’t be 
surprising to the member opposite. But I think SaskPower’s 
record here has been exemplary. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I understand that you 
have within your department a subagency or an office that is 
dealing with the issue of the Y2K compliance. Do you have a 
coordinator that’s responsible, or give . . . would you outline 
what personnel you’ve dedicated in your department to the Y2K 
compliance issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, there’s a 
Y2 committee that has been across government collecting 
information and also providing information. That’s been in 
place for at least two years. Recently they’ve hired another 
person to help the coordination as we get into the final stretch, 
but the permanent committee has been in place for about two 
years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — This individual that you indicate that has 
just recently been hired, would that be the coordinator that has 
overall responsibility for the committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well again to the member opposite, 
the main person doing the work has been in place for a couple 
of years; as we get to the final stretch another person has been 
added to help in the final coordination. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the individual responsible for the 
project, or for the coordination of this project has been in place 
recently or for the past two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — For two years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister. 
 
Minister, while I agree with you that Power is one of the areas 
that are very critical in terms of the Y2K compliance because 
it’s going to have its major impact at the December 31-January 
1 period and that’s a very severe period weatherwise. 
 
There are other Crowns that also will be critically important. It 
strikes me as that probably one of the highest technical 
corporations is SaskTel. Can you update us on the status with 
SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again to the member opposite. I 
want to explain more precisely the role that Economic 
Development plays here. We’re just coordinating across 
government, providing information, and checking on the 
systems that exist. 
 
If you want details, absolute, you know, precise details as to 
what’s happening in the Crowns, you should ask CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). When they come in 
for their estimates, they can go through their details. Because 
we’re not responsible for looking at the details that are 
occurring in different parts of government, except to say this: 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

the Crowns are in excellent shape. They have been working on 
this file for several years, they have been doing test runs, and 
we’re very, very confident that the major utilities in the 
province will work very effectively in 2000. 
 
But if you want to go into the details of what they’ve done, I 
would just recommend that CIC is the best place when they 
come because they’ll have all the reports here. I just don’t have 
all of that information beyond the general information that they 
have been working on it, they are doing test runs, and we’re 
very confident that they’re in good shape. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, one of the issues that . . . I 
appreciate you saying that your department’s responsibility is to 
coordinate the efforts interdepartmentally and between the 
Crown corporations and the departments. Can you outline for 
me please what the status is in terms of relationship with other 
agencies outside of this province both nationally and 
internationally that have potential impact on our agencies? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, I mean this 
is I think one of the key things that the Crowns have done, not 
just work within the province but ensure the major hookups so 
the other agencies that they’re going to have to hookup with are 
in the same mode as the Crowns. 
 
But I would mention to the member opposite that the minister 
responsible for CIC has made it clear in written form to the 
opposition parties that if they want an update on where the 
Crowns are in terms of Y2K, the Crowns are quite willing to do 
this. So that information in detail is available to the opposition 
and to other interested parties and players in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. This is the estimates 
for your agency which is co-ordinating this effort and I’m 
trying to ascertain how prepared and how aware of the 
preparedness that is in place that your department is. Let’s 
move then more specifically to government agencies instead of 
the Crowns. 
 
Another area that would be critically affected by the potential 
Y2K compliance issue is the Department of Health. Can you 
update me, please, on the status of the Department of Health 
and the health board’s readiness for the Y2K compliance issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chair, just to make a point as to 
how this problem can get out of hand or can get misinterpreted, 
there is some information that I’ve just been handed about the 
power outage that you’re talking about at Tisdale, and I’ll just 
quote from the report: 
 

The outage was caused by the failure of a current 
transformer at Tisdale. A current transformer is a device 
which monitors the flow of current through a line. It should 
be noted this failure is not related in any way to the Y2K 
issue. 
 

So I just want to point that out to say that sometimes people can 
be overreacting too. If there’s a problem they say it’s a problem 
associated with Y2K. That one that you mentioned before was 
not associated with Y2K. 
 
The Department of Health of course is part of the government’s 

efforts to become Y2K compliant, and I think if you note that 
the report that was released in June said the Department of 
Health is making significant progress. We have had requests 
from the health boards because they of course have to become 
Y2 compliant for assistance. And in the recent budget we 
provided financial assistance to the tune of I believe $50 million 
to help them become Y2 compliant because they of course will 
have to do their own work. And that financial assistance I know 
is very welcomed by them so that they can ensure that their 
work proceeds quickly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In the coordinating role that you play, is it 
your job as well then to coordinate the actual implementation of 
this $50 million expenditure so that indeed that you know if the 
expenditure has resulted in compliance with the Y2K issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, it will not be the responsibility 
of my department. It will be the Department of Health, and it’s 
established a Y2K management forum to ensure that there is 
compliance and there is testing with the health districts 
involved. 
 
The health districts of course are not part of government in a 
formal sense. They’re not a line department and so my 
department will not have the jurisdiction. But the Department of 
Health has that issue under control because they have a forum 
which is doing this with the health boards. Now the health 
boards will have the funding and they will be doing their testing 
as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Minister, you know I know your 
government always pretends that the health district boards are 
some arm’s length organization when it’s convenient for you. 
Are you telling me that the district health boards then are on 
their own? Or are they coordinating through the Department of 
Health? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, they’re coordinating 
through the Department of Health. So the Department of Health 
has its own forum dedicated to dealing with the Y2K issue with 
specific expertise in health. And they’re dealing directly with 
the health boards which now have the financing in place, the 
$50 million from the province to ensure that they can become 
Y2 compliant. So that is even more effective because, as I say, 
it’s being very focused and it’s being focused through the 
Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, in the estimates the whole 
Y2K coordination that your department is undertaking, would I 
find that under information technology office? Or what part of 
the estimates would indicate how much is being expended on 
your coordination? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, it is part of the information 
technology office. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The number I see in that expense by type on 
page 35, as I read it, a million almost $200,000. How much is 
that as related to this specific Y2K project? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Approximately one-third of it. 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

Mr. Gantefoer: — So for something in the magnitude of 
$400,000, you can tell me virtually nothing about the Crown 
corporations, nothing about the Department of Health, nothing 
about what is happening inter-agency. And I wonder if you feel 
that we’ve gotten good value for the $400,000 we’ve expended. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. As you can imagine, none of the departments across 
government have expertise in this area. So we provide the 
expertise. We provide the information, the advice. We ask for 
the plans, and we ensure that the plans are effective plans, and 
we move them through the system. 
 
Considering the size of government, I think that’s a reasonable 
expenditure for a project of that magnitude that requires so 
much technical expertise in an area that we obviously have not 
encountered before. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. While we’re 
on the information technology office, can you indicate to me 
what other projects are . . . that are being undertaken for the 
other two-thirds of the expenditures outlined? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I think the best 
answer, rather than getting into a technical answer, is to say it 
this way. All the information technology that the government 
had was scattered in different agencies and departments. So 
what’s happened in the last cabinet shuffle was it was put under 
my department, under one agency. 
 
And there are three main goals that we have. One is to work 
with the federal government and people in the private sector to 
make this province as computer literate as possible. So if we 
had a goal there, everybody’s hooked up to the information 
highway right across the province. 
 
Hugely important, particularly to rural Saskatchewan. Because 
if you’re hooked up to the information highway, you can do 
business any place in this province. You don’t have to be in a 
major centre. If you’re properly hooked up, you can do business 
in Melfort just as easily as you can in Saskatoon or in some 
cases just as easily as you can in Toronto or Vancouver. 
 
The second goal is to use information technology to make it 
easier for business to access government services, and we have 
a number of pilot projects that we’ve done through the 
Department of Justice for example. So now you can do a lot of 
the registration that’s required for a business using electronic 
commerce. You don’t have to go in and fill out the forms and 
put these things in the mail and mail them back and forth. You 
can go to a terminal and do it right there. So that’s the second 
goal. 
 
The third goal is, as we move into information technology and 
use it more and more throughout government, we want to 
ensure the economic development benefits are here, that they go 
as much as possible to local companies or that we bring in, if 
we bring in an external company — like SAIC (Science 
Applications International Corporation) has been brought into 
the province — they work in partnership with our local 
companies so we grow information technology companies. 
Because one of the fastest growing R&D (research and 
development) sectors of this economy is information 

technology. 
 
So this is hugely important to the future economy of 
Saskatchewan and particularly to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. There’s a number of 
issues surrounding that. As I understand it then, your 
information technology office, would that provide coordination 
between programs that are initiated both inside of your 
government and government departments and the Crowns? Is 
there a coordination across the Crown corporation and the line 
departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Specifically to executive 
government. And as I say, let me take my example about a 
business in Saskatchewan. You can now in selected sites across 
the province — I believe it’s about six — go and register your 
business using information technology. 
 
That’s just the beginning of the process from our point of view. 
Our goal is to get to the point where many of the government 
services can be accessed through a computer; that you don’t 
have to come to a major centre, you don’t have to mail, you 
don’t have to fill out the forms. 
 
So we are expanding across government with all agencies, as 
we can afford to, to ensure that each and every year there are 
more government services that are accessed just in that easy 
way rather than having to use the old standard ways. 
 
And the other point is about access to computers and everything 
associated with information technology. Now the federal 
government has a lot of good programs there. So where they 
have the programs in place, we’re just plugging in to their 
programs but working across governments so that people, again 
particularly people in rural areas, are as computer literate as 
they can be because that is going to be a huge advantage to 
them as we head into the next century. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I maybe should ask some specifics 
and to see where I’m getting at. For example SaskTel is very 
much involved with the Internet, high speed Internet access in 
certain locations. When you’re talking about information 
technology and you’re implementing programs of accessibility 
to government through these programs — do you coordinate 
with SaskTel and their Internet and their technology programs 
— is what I was getting at when we talk about 
interdepartmental with Crown corporation agencies. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I’m glad the member opposite 
has raised this issue, something we should be very proud of in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan I believe is the only province in 
which rural communities are accessing the Internet without 
long-distance charges. Two hundred and sixty communities are 
being hooked up with the assistance of SaskTel but also with 
the community access program. 
 
So again there’s a specific number on that goal to hook up rural 
communities to the Internet and to do it in a way where they’re 
not paying long-distance charges so that they are in no sense at 
a competitive disadvantage. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So Minister, as a specific question, is your 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

office of information technology coordinating those activities? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In terms of this 
Internet, I think you said, computer literacy initiative that 
you’re talking about. It would seem to me that computer 
literacy is an educational type of activity. Does your 
information technology office provide the coordination and 
course outlines or any things of that nature for SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
the school system in terms of a vision of where we’re heading 
and some suggested course agendas in order to meet that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. No, obviously we don’t have anything to do with the 
curriculum in the schools because that is a separate issue and 
we believe the schools are doing a very good job at teaching 
computer skills. 
 
Where our department would be involved is initiatives like, 
recently through the community access program, one of the 
food banks in the province was hooked up to the Internet which 
means people who come into that food bank, who usually 
wouldn’t have access to training on the Internet and computer 
skills, actually had it on-site. Now that one was a federal 
initiative which we just hooked into. But it’s using the ways 
beyond the traditional education system to hook up people to 
the Internet. And people who are going to be hooked up through 
the regular education system, we leave that to the school 
system. 
 
And as I say, I have kids in the school system. I think they’re 
doing a very good job, but it’s people who are not being hooked 
up through the traditional system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I understand that the 
Department of Justice, for example, and Land Titles is moving 
towards more high-tech or technology-based title searches and 
things of that nature. 
 
Do you have a role in coordinating those types of activities out 
of this office? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, we would give them advice. 
Again, that’ll be done through the Department of Justice and 
through the budget of the Department of Justice. 
 
But obviously because we have experts in IT (information 
technology), they’ll come over and get our advice. And also 
we’ll give them advice about tendering so that we can do our 
very best to ensure that Saskatchewan companies have the 
competitive advantage in the sense of they have the knowledge 
of what’s coming and we try to form partnerships with other 
companies so that Saskatchewan businesses get the most 
benefit. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you indicated that you would 
encourage Saskatchewan businesses to participate in this 
technological advancement. Do you have specific programs to 
encourage things like software development, hardware 
innovation, and technical kinds of things? 
 

Can you outline for me, Minister, what programs you may have 
that would, in a practical way, encourage those issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, no, not directly. 
Again the Department of Economic and Co-operative 
Development does not directly provide that programming. 
Agencies like SaskTel would probably be more likely to move 
them in that direction. And there are some federal programs that 
come closer to doing what you’re talking about although I don’t 
even think they specifically do that. I think our goal here is to 
work with the agencies to make all of this happen but not to 
duplicate their efforts. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So there are no programs that specifically 
encourage businesses to develop software or to make hardware 
innovations and grow that kind of business in Saskatchewan 
that would encourage a high-tech industry in Saskatchewan — 
is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t directly 
provide any programs of that kind. We don’t provide grants. 
And I think in fact the public has told us, and the business 
community particularly has told us, they don’t want the 
government in the business of providing and give me a grant to 
do this and give me a grant to do that. That’s a lot of the ’80s 
that got us into a lot of the debt problems. 
 
But what we do, do, is we give them access to where the 
information is available. And on things like the land project 
through Justice, we will inform them about what’s coming and 
what kinds of things they need to do to gear up for the tenders 
that will be coming down the line. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, does your department and this 
office provide guidance with other departments in terms of 
where they would purchase hardware and software for their 
department needs, or are they all left on their own? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have standard tendering 
processes through Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation that we use in government so that, you know, this 
is a common part of open tendering, whereby you say here’s the 
requirements that we have and the companies come forward, 
put in their bids, and the bid that’s the most competitive bid is 
the one that’s chosen. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In this bidding process for technological 
equipment, is there any consideration at all weighted or given to 
the accessibility for IT support in the event that systems fail? 
And is anything given in terms of a weighting towards local — 
by that I mean Saskatchewan — companies in that regard 
considering that information technology systems inevitably will 
have difficulties and will fail and the issue of serviceability and 
having technicians available at relative short notice may be an 
important and critical issue. 
 
How do the criterias work in terms of considering technological 
support? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, well as the member 
opposite would know, the rules governing interprovincial trade 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

really prevents provinces from saying, look, I’m only going to 
hire a Saskatchewan company here or I’m only going to give 
this to a Saskatchewan company. So you can’t do that. And you 
shouldn’t be able to do that — I mean either Canada is one 
country or it isn’t. 
 
So you can’t just say we have a Saskatchewan preference 
policy. Quite frankly, I think it would be not smart for 
Saskatchewan to want us to have a Saskatchewan preference 
policy because Alberta would have an Alberta preference policy 
and Ontario would have an Ontario preference policy. And as a 
province of a million people — we’re a small province — we’d 
like to have access to those bigger markets. So you can’t do 
that. 
 
But you can . . . The only criteria in awarding these contracts 
isn’t just price — you know, it’s the cheapest so therefore we’re 
going to go with it. It’s service too. Quality service. And so if in 
fact there is a company that’s located here that can provide the 
service and the repair work and everything on a timely basis 
that obviously works in their favour. And so that . . . that is an 
important consideration in terms of awarding the contract. 
 
So it’s not just, you know, we go with the dirt cheapest. We go 
with the best value all around. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I would like to move 
to another area if I may. Minister, over the winter the Provincial 
Auditor made some reference and comments in a report 
indicating that he was concerned about the fact that provincial 
charities were not going to receive some of the funds out of the 
profits from the winding down of the immigrant investment 
fund. 
 
Would the minister care to indicate why the policy of the 
department changed so that this money which was originally set 
up to be . . . any profits were initially set up to be turned to 
provincial charities, that the government reneged on this 
province as outlined as an issue of concern by the Provincial 
Auditor? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is not an agency run through 
this department. This is run through the Crown Investments 
Corporation. So we get into that when the Crown Investments 
Corporation is here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister is your 
department responsible for the growth funds? Or is that also 
through the Crown Investments Corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — That is as well through the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. We will talk to those 
individuals at that time. 
 
Madam Minister, in terms of this past winter as well there have 
been a number of issues raised in terms of I don’t know if it was 
Christmas receptions or things of that nature and the cost of 
them, and articles quoted in a number of the provincial dailies. 
 
And I wonder if you could outline what the cost of the 
Christmas networking gatherings that you hosted in, I believe, 

Regina and Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I will say to the member opposite 
this is not in this year’s budget, so it’s not really technically a 
question to be answered here. But I have no problem in giving 
you the numbers because the numbers in the paper were wildly 
exaggerated as members opposite often do with numbers. The 
cost in Regina was $6,020; the cost in Saskatoon was $4,650 — 
47 — not $10,000 per reception and it was good value for the 
number of people invited and the number of people who 
attended. 
 
I think what’s important to understand here is that these are the 
only annual events in which — let’s take Saskatoon — we bring 
together people from the downtown business community, the 
Innovation Place business community, the university, the co-op 
sector, and the local economic development authority. And I’ll 
tell you, folks, I wouldn’t have hooked myself up with Murray 
Mandryk when he did that story because they said when they 
came to the Saskatoon reception, which was after the initial 
story, they said those guys don’t understand how you do 
business if they’re actually criticizing this. 
 
And I didn’t tell him that it wasn’t you folks as much as The 
Leader-Post and Murray Mandryk making up his own story. 
Because the key thing about doing business in the ’90s and 
beyond is networking, bringing all the players together. And I 
think the member opposite knows that that’s a difficult thing to 
do and if you have an annual event where they actually all come 
together and start looking at the next deal they’re going to 
make, it’s very important. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister, and while you may 
think it’s very good value to spend $10,000 on this networking 
concept, I think most business people would say just get a tax 
regime in this province that is favourable and a regulatory 
regime in this province that is favourable and that will do a lot 
more than hors d’oeuvres and networking. 
 
Madam Minister, how many people attended these two 
receptions? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I don’t have the actual . . . I don’t 
have the final numbers here. I mean in fact, as I said, we’re 
talking about next year’s budget, even that was not really 
technically required to be answered here. I don’t have the 
numbers but I can tell you this. We invited over a thousand, 
because what we invited was all the co-op boards, all the key 
players in the business community knowing that a lot of them 
would not be able to attend because of the time of the year. 
 
But I do have to ask the members opposite for some answers. 
Are you saying that some of the things that you have on the 
record you wouldn’t have any receptions for the business 
community, no networking? I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, sir, they 
were not impressed when they came to the Saskatoon one. They 
say those guys really don’t understand business. Are you 
sticking with what the member from Cannington said? He 
wouldn’t go on trade commissions? If you guys were ever 
government you’d use the telephone. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, Ambassador Chrétien would be very 
impressed with that. He’d say that’s right, Minister, you just 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

pick up that phone and you talk to me about the trade disputes, 
or you talk to me about the trade opportunities in Washington, 
and I’ll answer your call. And I’ll bring all those congressmen 
onto a conference call for you, Minister, because that’s how you 
do business in the 21st century. 
 
You know what folks? You said that when you use the 
telephone, yours has a crank, and you’re still on the typewriters 
and on the horses and buggies with some of those comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, your comments indicate to me, 
your comments, Minister, indicate exactly why Saskatchewan is 
dead last in job creation in this province. And when you talked 
about a horse, you know which end of the horse we represent on 
this government side — is you represent the end of the horse. 
 
Unfortunately, Minister, there has to be a positive way of 
creative job creation in this province. And it means very clearly 
to me, Madam Minister, that what we have to do is forget about 
the cocktail circuit and the networking and provide real 
meaningful tax relief so that jobs can indeed be created. 
 
Madam Minister, will you explain to me how this past year 
we’ve lost jobs where every single province in this country has 
created jobs? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again let’s put 
this into context. Between 1992 and 1997, Saskatchewan’s 
economy was the fastest growing in all of Canada — 1997 we 
created record numbers of jobs. 1998 the economy slowed 
down, and I mean why listen to me as to why it slowed down. 
The Canada West Foundation said it’s commodity prices, oil, 
and other agricultural commodity prices. 
 
Sask Trends Monitor said the only thing wrong with 
Saskatchewan is low commodity prices. Despite that, our 
economy is continuing to grow and it’s continuing to grow 
because our economy is more diversified. 
 
I mean, you ask what have we done for job creation in this 
province? We have been working since we’ve been government 
on the Synchrotron project, the largest single scientific 
investment in Canadian history. Saskatchewan will have one of 
six third generation Synchrotrons that exist in the whole planet. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, you get that through networking. You get that 
through constant working with the key players to put together 
the deal. And you don’t get that by saying, all we’re . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well sure, I’ll give Minister 
Goodale credit too. He does his networking as well. Sure, I 
have no problem sharing the credit. 
 
You don’t get that by saying all we have . . . I’ve seen your 
economic development plan. It’s about like this — a blank 
page. It’s we’ll cut taxes, we’ll bring in some regressive labour 
legislation, and we’ll do something on the regulatory side. 
 
I mean I think you folks are still looking on the map trying to 
find the information highway. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And it’s 

interesting to hear your comments that the reason that we have 
the Synchrotron project is cocktail parties. I think that a lot of 
people outside of this government have been working on that 
project. 
 
And we certainly stood in this House, and will stand in this 
House and congratulate all of them, including whatever 
networking your department did in getting that project into 
Saskatoon because it is an extremely worthwhile and important 
project. And you will never hear anything in the negative sense 
in terms of the importance of that project to Saskatchewan from 
the official opposition. 
 
The question is, is that you talk about 1991 to 1999 in terms of 
job creation. I recall that you were talking about something like 
30,000 jobs. We’re still some 6 or 8,000 jobs short of that over 
that decade. 
 
And at the same time, Alberta is projecting for next year 34,000 
jobs in a single year. How can you sit there and say that we’re 
the only people affected by a bad economy? As I last 
understood it the price of wheat was the same in Alberta as it is 
in Saskatchewan. Can you tell me that the prices of oil are 
different in Alberta than they are in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again, the member opposite . . . I 
still think that the idea of you calling yourselves the Alberta 
party makes sense. I don’t really think the Saskatchewan Party 
suits you folks for a variety of reasons. But I do think that 
Alberta party might be your answer. 
 
Now to put some facts on the table. It’s a fact that the 
Saskatchewan economy is more dramatically affected by 
agriculture than any other economy in Canada — far more 
dramatically than Alberta, far more dramatically than Manitoba. 
It’s a fact that relative to Manitoba particularly, but even 
Alberta, next to BC (British Columbia) on a per capita basis, we 
do the most trading with the Far East of the Prairie economies. 
That’s a fact. And if I can find the quote from the Canada West 
Foundation, they make the point that it’s almost unprecedented 
in Saskatchewan history to have all of our major commodities 
down at the same time. 
 
You see what I don’t understand about the members opposite 
— and I mean it seriously, we should call them the Manitoba 
Party or the Alberta Party — everything good happens 
somewhere else. Nothing good happens here. We have agencies 
outside of this province — Canada West Foundation — saying, 
gee, look across the piece, across the piece, all of their major 
commodities are on the downs and yet that economy is 
growing. Congratulations to Saskatchewan businesses for the 
diversification they’re doing. 
 
Because that economy — and they say it — 20 years ago, with 
the prices we have, the basic prices . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Oh, you’ve got one simple answer — the basic prices that 
we have, that economy would be in recession. And it’s not, and 
it’s not because of the business and co-op leaders in this 
province and what they’re doing. What I don’t understand is 
why you won’t take some pride in that too. We’re quite proud 
of what the business and co-op leaders are doing here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Actually, Minister, we’re doubly proud of 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

what the business and the co-op sector are doing in this 
province because we recognize that they’re doing it in spite of 
you — in spite of you, in spite of the highest taxes or the second 
highest taxes in this country. They are succeeding in spite of 
that burden and it speaks to the Saskatchewan spirit and the 
entrepreneurial ingenuity of Saskatchewan companies. 
 
So we have a great deal of admiration and respect for 
Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan co-operatives 
because they’re doing whatever they are in spite of the burden 
of carrying you and your high taxes on their backs at the same 
time. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to go a little further in the 
Synchrotron project and ask you if you would outline the 
funding arrangement for this project. I recognize that there are a 
number of partners that are committing funds to this. Could you 
outline the funding arrangement for this project? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, just to take 
the member up on his comment. Just before I came to question 
period, I was at a lunch, a Regina business community lunch. 
Frank Proto — because it was public, the press was there — 
when he introduced me made comments about this 
government’s record in economic development that I’d love to 
quote to you — I’m going to get them for you and quote them 
to you — about how pleased and impressed he is with our 
record in economic development, and how pleased and 
impressed he is with our ability to co-operate with the federal 
government — make things happen in this province. Now I’ll 
bring more quotes for you if you want to get on to that theme. 
 
This is a wonderful partnership. What makes the Synchrotron 
such a great partnership are the different agencies that are all 
working together here. The biggest financial contribution came 
from the Canada Foundation for Innovation which recently 
made the decision to put in $56.4 million. 
 
The next biggest contributor is the province of Saskatchewan 
which contributed $25 million. The next biggest contributor 
after that is the Government of Canada which has contributed 
$21 million. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan has contributed $7.3 million. 
The University of Western Ontario through in-kind 
contributions has $4 million. The city of Saskatoon has 
contributed $2.4 million. The University of Alberta and 
Western Ontario have contributed $600,000 in upfront cash. 
National Research Council has contributed $6.5 million; 
SaskPower, $2 million. 
 
And funding for the operation have been committed through the 
Medical Research Council and through NSERC (National 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council). So that’s ongoing 
operating funding. 
 
It’s a wonderful partnership that has been put together by 
networking, by travelling, by bringing the partners together and 
working together. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, would you 

mind giving me the name of the agency that put in the 56.4 — 
and I just missed that — and could you tell me the nature of that 
agency? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The Canada Foundation for 
Innovation is an agency that was created by the federal 
government but works entirely arm’s-length from the federal 
government. And they have . . . they make R&D (research and 
development) investments in various categories. 
 
Saskatchewan not only won the biggest single scientific 
investment in Canadian history, we also won a series of other 
smaller investments at the two universities which we have 
announced over a period of time. 
 
So it’s an agency that is committed to R&D, and we work in 
co-operation with them and cost-match funding on other 
projects as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I understand 
that I believe it’s the National Research Council operates some 
light beam projects at a Synchrotron in the United States. Is 
there a financial commitment that you outlined, moving those 
projects to this Saskatoon Synchrotron, or is it money over and 
above that shift of research dollars? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — That’s included in the $4 million 
that I mentioned under the University of Western Ontario. 
There are beam lines in Madison which have been moved to . . . 
which are going to be moved to Saskatchewan. 
 
And again I think it is a very important Canadian contribution. 
When the national . . . when NSERC said, okay we need a 
Synchrotron in Canada, it was like a competition: where’s the 
best place to have a Synchrotron? The two final competitors 
were the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Western Ontario. 
 
The University of Western Ontario lost the competition but they 
have been our biggest supporter. So that when we won it, they, 
instead of going away and saying, well you know, we’re upset 
we didn’t get it, we’re going to try to do something to obstruct 
it or call for it to be reviewed, they actually came on side and 
supported it. 
 
In fact every major university in Canada, with the exception of 
UBC (University of British Columbia), has supported this 
project. 
 
And so I think it’s an incredibly important example of how, if 
you put the effort in and you work at it, everybody can 
co-operate and make it happen. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in terms of further opportunity for 
participation in the private sector for example, I would expect 
that perhaps the private sector might indeed initiate their own 
light beam experiments. Has there been any commitment at this 
stage for further ongoing participation by the private sector? 
And if there is, does that run into the operating cost rather than 
this initial capital commitment? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The private sector has been 
extremely supportive, particularly in terms of writing to the CFI 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

(Canada Foundation for Innovation) and saying, look, we 
support this concept, and when the beam lines are up for grabs, 
we’re going to be participating. 
 
The problem in getting the private sector to put their money on 
the table was twofold. It was a speculative project and it’s not 
going to be on stream for four years. But once it’s there, they 
certainly will be paying user fees to access the beam lines. And 
some of the bigger companies will probably be working to 
purchase a beam line, just as NRC (National Research Council 
of Canada) and some of the science agencies have purchased a 
beam line. 
 
Just to give you an example of the kind of potential that I 
believe this holds for this province . . . is one of the biggest 
agencies supporting the Synchrotron is PMAC, Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturers Association of Canada. So they use 
Synchrotrons but they have to travel way outside of Canada to 
use Synchrotrons. 
 
In Saskatoon we already have expertise in agricultural 
biotechnology which companies like VIDO are taking from the 
plant side to the animal side to the human side of health. We 
have excellent research at the College of Pharmacy and research 
at the College of Medicine. The next wing of Innovation Place 
may very well be pharmaceuticals. Also the federal government 
has targeted pharmaceuticals as an area where they’re going to 
put new funds. 
 
So what this Synchrotron allows us to do is to build on our 
existing strengths and through the pharmaceutical companies, 
instead of just coming to use the Synchrotron, our pitch to them 
will be everything else we have here to help you with your 
research, you should be locating here, at least part of your 
office. And hopefully, eventually manufacturing some of the 
drugs right out of this province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, in terms of the light 
beams that can be taken off from the Synchrotron, when this 
was announced there was some technical information that came 
out and it seemed to indicate that there was a certain number of 
these light beam experiments that could be set up in conjunction 
with this Synchrotron. 
 
Do you have the information in terms of how many of these 
independent light beam experiment locations can be set up with 
the proposed Synchrotron? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The initial $174 million will give 
you 12 beam lines, that’s the initial phase one, so that it can 
accommodate up to 50 beam lines. So I think the key thing is to 
get the 70 . . . get the original 12 up and running, and then from 
there it’ll go on the basis of demand. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, how many of the initial 12 beam 
lines that are being proposed are spoken for, if you like, or are 
there commitments to purchase? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We already have full funding in 
place for six beam lines and this is mainly through the basic 
science agencies, so the other six will either be private sector or 
an increasing commitment through the funding agencies. 
 

The other thing too I want to say about the funding agencies, 
not only do they provide operating funding for the beam lines, 
they’re actually backfilling it on the other end. Researchers will 
have to pay fees to access the beam lines. They’re increasing 
their grants to researchers so that the researchers can pay the 
fees for the beam lines. So they’re assisting on both ends here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In terms of the operation of this facility, is it 
the kind of facility that starts up in the morning and initiates 
these beam lines and they run all day or 24 hours a day, or can 
you give me some indication of the normal working 
environment that this is going to take place in? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well to the member opposite, I’m 
not a scientist but I’ve talked extensively with Dennis Skopik 
who of course is the professor of physics who is the architect of 
this. It’ll run for 24 hours a day. 
 
And in terms of scope it’ll be about the size of a football field 
when it’s finally constructed. So it will be even visually 
something quite incredible just to look at. But it will operate 24 
hours a day. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I was leading towards the 
technical staff and the permanent jobs that are going to be 
created in order to operate it. Could you please outline for me if 
you could the jobs that are going to be there on a permanent 
basis to operate this Synchrotron on a 24-hour basis and also 
what the expected jobs are that are going to be initiated by the 
companies that operate the individual 12 beam lines. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It will require 200 people to actually 
operate the facility. But this to me . . . like the 200 people 
operating the facility, those obviously will be highly skilled, 
highly paid jobs, very attractive jobs. But they’re just the tip of 
the iceberg. Where the real benefits will come will be the sorts 
of researchers and companies who will come to this province to 
do that research and to see what else we have to offer in the 
province. 
 
And I guess what I’ve learned from bringing companies . . . I 
had a dinner just last week with Dow Elanco, a major American 
company making a $10 million investment in the Plant Biotech 
Institute in Saskatoon. When they come here, they’re absolutely 
amazed at what we have to offer. Their image of Saskatchewan 
from whatever part of the world they’ve come from — and 
they’re coming from the United States, Germany, France, 
Belgium, all across the world — and locating here, not just 
coming to visit, but actually putting down offices and making 
investments. 
 
The key will be . . . the Synchrotron will bring more and more 
of them here. And when they come, they’re incredibly 
impressed with what we have so that there will be other 
synergies that will result from this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In terms of the 
ongoing operating funding for this project, is it going to be 
funded through the University of Saskatchewan? And if it is, 
how will the funds flow to the university? Will there be some 
from your department or from Post-Secondary Education, and 
indeed private industry? Or how does the ongoing operating 
funding mechanism operate? 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There is, I’ve said to the member 
opposite before in this House; it is the University of 
Saskatchewan that’s the recipient of the award. And as a . . . I 
still think of myself as a current professor at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Governments can sit here and argue about we 
put in this money, we put in that money. Without the professors 
there would have been nothing to put the money in, so they 
created the knowledge and they will be . . . they will house the 
facility and they will be the main recipient. 
 
Now in terms of the way the funding is distributed and how the 
facility operates on a day-to-day basis, it will be done by a 
board and the board will include the key participants; so there’ll 
be federal, there’ll be provincial, there’ll be university, and 
there will be the science agencies. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So will the funding stream through those 
key agencies as well — and the operating costs — so that if the 
province of Saskatchewan is contributing 20 per cent of the 
capital cost, is it expected that the province of Saskatchewan 
will contribute 20 per cent of the operating cost? 
 
What I was trying to get at is how is the operating cost on a 
long-term basis being organized if it’s coming through the 
University of Saskatchewan. Will the university require 
additional funds in order for it to make its commitments is 
where I was asking, Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No. In fact you would know one of 
the key issues on campus is that none of the core funding would 
go into the Synchrotron, which it doesn’t. 
 
The funding won’t come from the province either. The 
operating funding will come from NSERC, which is providing 
almost $5 million operating, the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) through a separate agency but not through their 
core funding; and National Research Council is providing $2 
million in operating funding, Medical Research Council is 
providing 1 million, and the rest will be user fees. 
 
So I think what is so good about this partnership is the 
government’s put in the capital but it’s the science agencies 
across Canada, all of Canada’s major science agencies, that 
have come forward and said we’ll provide the operating 
funding. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I have other issues 
that I would like to discuss with you but I would like to defer to 
my colleague who has some questions at this time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to 
the minister and to the member for Melfort-Tisdale, I did want 
to ask some questions on Synchrotron before he moved on to 
other issues. 
 
And of course, as the minister has pointed out, this is one really 
and truly good news story in the province. Well at the risk of 
being accused of being one of those gloom-and-doomers, I’m 
not sure we’ve had as many good news stories as what members 
opposite would lead us to believe. I’m not sure that I share their 
enthusiasm for the fact that our job creation is now slower than 

that of Newfoundland. But in any event, I’ll leave that aside. 
We have a good news story and let’s make the most of it. 
 
And part of the good news is that, as I understand it, we are 
likely to have the only Synchrotron in Canada for probably a 
generation. It is now . . . of course it will be the only instrument 
of its kind in the country. And I wonder if the minister could 
answer me: am I correct that there is unlikely to be another one 
in Canada in the foreseeable future? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
answer that question. But I want to set the record straight here. 
 
You know to say that Saskatchewan has a worse job creation 
record than Newfoundland, I think illustrates the nature of the 
problem we’re talking about. 
 
What the members opposite do is they pick the lowest part of 
the trough that we’ve had here in the last five or six years and 
they say, my God, here was a time in which Newfoundland 
actually created more jobs. 
 
There isn’t an economist in this country that would say the 
fundamentals of the economy of Newfoundland are stronger 
than the fundamentals of the economy of Saskatchewan. What 
they’re saying is that the fundamentals of this economy are very 
strong, very strong in the long term. 
 
And so I mean I want to set that straight because . . . And you 
know what’s amazing? I want to just go on about this for a 
minute because they’re both on the same wavelength. You get 
out there with the business community. And you don’t have to 
get out there — let’s look at some of the headlines. 
 
They’re not into your gloom and doom. They’re saying things 
are going well, “Chamber survey reveals business optimism for 
1999”, “Job Growth Tops”, “Regina job market makes one 
proud.” I mean the business people of this province and the 
co-op leaders are not into the doom and gloom. They say, we’re 
optimistic about the future. 
 
Conference Board of Canada, the most respected of the 
forecasting agencies says, what’s going to happen in 1999? 
Saskatchewan is going to grow by 2.1 per cent — higher than 
Alberta at 1.5. 
 
So I mean you can peddle the idea that we should be ashamed 
of what we’ve done in this province. We’re not ashamed of it. 
We think we’re doing very, very well despite all of the 
problems. 
 
Now to answer your question on the Synchrotron. Yes, this will 
be the only Synchrotron in Canada for the foreseeable future. I 
don’t think the Government of Canada is going to make another 
$174 million dollar investment in the near future. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. And you mention that one of the major 
applications will be in pharmaceuticals. And we know that part 
of encouraging research and development in this country was 
apparently the extended patent protection, which does cost 
consumers and also governments through the drug plan, 
increased expenditures. 
 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

And I wonder if the minister would comment if that in fact is 
the quid pro quo here of having pharmaceutical research and 
development to accept extended patent protection. Is that really 
what’s going on in the debate? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, it’s not part of the debate at all. 
 
In fact, when I was meeting the other night with one of the . . . 
the company I was talking about, the big American company 
investing $10 million, they said by far the most attractive places 
for an R&D company to locate right now in Canada is Quebec 
and Saskatchewan. And it’s the most business-friendly 
environment. 
 
And they related . . . they talked specifically about the issues 
you folks supposedly talk about all the time — taxes. They said, 
you have a 15 per cent R&D tax credit. You and Quebec have 
the lowest manufacturing and processing taxes for companies of 
any provinces in Canada. 
 
It’s the . . . (inaudible) . . . the fact that our tax regime — that 
word isn’t coming easily — our tax regimes for these 
companies are the lowest in Canada. And I’m amazed as I sit 
here question period after question period, we have high taxes, 
we have high taxes. I wish you’d talk to some of the companies 
that are moving in. They’re talking about our tax regime as one 
of the reasons they’re moving in, if you’re a manufacturer, if 
you’re a processor. So that’s the attractiveness. 
 
My other point, though, was what we have here already in 
Saskatchewan in terms of this province created the first 
genetically engineered crop, the first genetically engineered 
animal vaccines. This research is now being translated into the 
human fields. We have a College of Pharmacy which does 
world-class research. 
 
When you put all that together and the fact that the 
pharmaceutical industry is interested in the Synchrotron, the 
Synchrotron is going to be just another hook for another wing 
on Innovation Place with companies like pharmaceutical 
companies in there. And they’re already talking to us about 
moving in. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I do have some more questions on 
Synchrotron, but before I get to that I would encourage the 
minister . . . I have never wanted to classify myself as one of the 
“gloom-and-doomers.” And I think in my personal life, too, I’m 
not a pessimist. If anything, I’ve probably erred on the other 
side and I think I’ve sort of gone through life with rose-tinted 
glasses. 
 
But there are some gloom-and-doomers out there, and the 
newspaper in your hometown is one of the prime offenders that 
I think the minister will want to be going after. There’s a Gord 
Brock, who . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A doom-and-gloomer. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Oh, a terrible one. Big headlines: “Job numbers 
slump.” And according to him, Saskatchewan down; New 
Brunswick up by 6 per cent; Newfoundland up by 5.4 per cent; 
Manitoba up by 1.6 per cent; Alberta up by 3.9 per cent. And I 
have to check how much Ontario and Quebec are up. Only one 

negative in the entire column and that happens to be us. 
 
So I would suggest, Madame Minister . . . You don’t have to 
convince me. I’m an optimist. I’m big on this province’s future; 
I believe in Saskatchewan’s future. But this Gord Brock is 
someone you better get on to and you better give him a real 
talking-to because he’s one of those gloom-and-doomers that 
you don’t like. 
 
Anyway, Madam Minister, back to the Synchrotron. The 
industrial future of our province, I think all members would 
agree, has to be in value-added agriculture more than anything 
else if our future will be in value added for our primary 
products, especially our agricultural products. And I would like 
you to kindly tell us what the agriculture implications are for 
the Synchrotron project. 
 
I understand that’s one of the reasons that Saskatchewan was 
able to land this project and that genetic-based research of seeds 
and value-added agriculture is indeed one of the major 
applications that the Synchrotron would have. And I would 
appreciate receiving some information from you on that point. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I would say to the member 
opposite the future of this province depends on value-added 
agriculture but it depends on a heck of lot more than that — a 
lot more value added than just agriculture. 
 
In fact before this year is out there were going to be major 
announcements by this government in a value-added sector that 
I’ve yet to hear one member on that side of the House even say. 
They don’t even know what the sector is — they have never 
heard of it I’m sure. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say what it is. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, I don’t think I will. 
 
The reason we got the Synchrotron is simple — because of the 
quality of the physics department at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Because those people were able to create the 
model for a Canadian Synchrotron and their model was the best 
in all of Canada. 
 
Now all of the rest of this helped feed into perhaps the benefits, 
but in terms of the decision, it had in truth nothing to do with 
what we have elsewhere in the economy. It had to do with the 
professors at the department of physics at the University of 
Saskatchewan having a world-class physics department that 
could create a model for a Synchrotron that was better than 
anybody else’s. And every university in . . . every major 
university in Canada couldn’t do better. 
 
Now in terms of what we’re doing in value added, I guess my 
argument to the member opposite would be, we have to do 
value-added everywhere; not just in agriculture but in all of the 
sectors of our economy. We have to say we’re not shipping out 
raw products in the future; that’s not our first choice. Some of it 
obviously will continue, but increasingly we’re going to ship 
out finished products. 
 
And that’s occurring in the province. And that’s one of the 
reasons, despite commodity prices that 20 years ago, as the 



April 12, 1999 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

Canada West Foundation said, 20 years ago these commodity 
prices would have meant a recession in Saskatchewan, we are 
continuing to grow. Because we are doing more value added, 
more processing, more manufacturing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Perhaps it is my fault, Mr. Chairman, for 
having rambled in asking the question, so I won’t be critical. 
But I would like the minister to address us and tell us: what 
specifically are the Synchrotron’s applications to agriculture, 
genetic-based seed research, and to value-added agriculture? 
 
I understand that this will be one of the most important things in 
seed research and development of new varieties, and I would 
like to hear what you understand the potential is in that area. 
And when I asked the question, I didn’t mean to demean the 
efforts of any . . . in any other area to strengthen the provincial 
economy. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, you didn’t, and I know that you 
didn’t, and I didn’t mean to suggest you were. All I was saying 
is that we’ve got to get beyond just value added in agriculture; 
you have to have value added across the piece. I know you 
weren’t being critical. 
 
I think probably the best way to answer your question . . . I’m 
not a scientist, but I know Dennis Skopik, the man, the architect 
of the Synchrotron quite well. And I said to Dennis, I said: how 
do I explain to farmers what the Synchrotron is going to do for 
them? Because, you know, you can do all your technical 
designs but that’s not going to help me. 
 
And he said, okay, try this explanation. Right now in the Arctic 
there are fish swimming around that should freeze in the winter, 
but they don’t. Fish that should freeze because of the 
temperatures. They don’t freeze because they have a genetic 
structure that prevents them from freezing. What this 
Synchrotron will allow us to do is to basically take that genetic 
structure that exists in a fish, transplant that genetic structure 
into wheat or other products or other agricultural products so 
that you can actually move toward frost-resistant wheat. And 
you can create crops that will be resistant to frost by taking the 
genetic structure out of other organisms that are resistant to 
freezing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s indeed 
very interesting and the economic applications are obvious. But 
I then have to ask the question that I think there is increasing 
concern . . . I think there is increasing concern in the 
agricultural community though that the new patent protections 
being offered to seed manufacturers is ongoing and permanent. 
In times past when a new variety was developed it came on the 
market and the first seed of course would have to be purchased 
but after that it was owned. 
 
And as you know, we seem to have a development which has, I 
think, potentially sinister applications where either the seed will 
always be owned by the company, never owned by the farmer. 
Or we’re also hearing of the seed varieties will be specially 
treated to be sterile, so that some of these new varieties you are 
speaking of with the tremendous scientific advances will be 
sterile and cannot be . . . it can never be used for next year’s 

production. 
 
So I’m wondering, first — I have two questions here — first of 
all, in view of the heavy government investment, the heavy 
public investment in the Synchrotron, what can you tell us as to 
who will own these new varieties? 
 
Will the new varieties be in someways, as I understand Marquis 
seed was nearly a hundred years ago now, in the public domain 
or will they be owned by companies? And if they are owned by 
companies, will it be a case that the first generation has to be 
purchased by the farmer or will it be a case where the seed will 
have to be purchased each and every year by the farmer and will 
never become the property of the producer? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
is talking about the terminator gene, as it is called in scientific 
circles. I think that has to be taken as a separate issue. As an 
agricultural province we obviously have to look at issues like 
the terminator gene. 
 
But the question that you have to ask, have to ask the member 
opposite is, just because we share farmers’ concerns about the 
implications of something like the terminator gene doesn’t 
mean to say well therefore we’re not going to do any of this 
research in this province. Because a very, very, very, very, very 
small percentage of the research done here would have anything 
to do with the terminator gene anyway, but it’s going to be done 
somewhere. 
 
So I think that we can as a province say we’re concerned; we 
want to look into the terminator gene and what it means in the 
long term. But it doesn’t mean that you back out of this sort of 
research. 
 
In terms of the research, the people who own the research are 
the people who pay for it. So if they come and they own a beam 
line and they do their research, they’ll obviously own the 
product. We can’t own the product when they pay for the 
research. And people who come and use the Synchrotron, the 
private companies, will be paying for the research. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I agree with the answer the minister has given, 
Mr. Chairman, but I wonder if . . . Does the government of 
Saskatchewan have a policy? Have we formulated a policy on 
ongoing and continuing ownership of seed as opposed to 
purchase of first-generation seeds when, say a 
chemical-resistant seed or you’ve mentioned a frost-resistant 
seed . . . If it will be owned by the company developing paying 
for the research, will it be the first-generation seed that will 
have to be purchased or will it be seed that will forever and ever 
be owned by the research company? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think you’ll want to get into that in 
more detail when the Minister of Agriculture is here. But 
simply put, it’s the federal government that will decide 
legislation in terms of patent rights. 
 
And again I go back to my point — the government doesn’t pay 
for any of this research being done. Even take Innovation Place 
— all we are really there is the landlord. We build the facility, 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1999 

we rent it out, we recover our cost. So the people who do the 
research there, they own the research cause they’re the ones 
who pay for it. And it will be a similar principle here on the 
Synchrotron. When we develop it to the point that the private 
companies are coming in, they’re going to be paying fees to 
cover the cost, the total cost of the research. So of course 
they’re going to own the research. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The construction phase of the project, is this 
something that can be done by Saskatchewan companies and 
Saskatchewan workers? I mean, I understand it would be 
tendered but my question is, do we in fact have the expertise to 
bid on and work on this project or is it something that we will 
have to rely largely on outsiders to get constructed? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There are obviously a lot of 
opportunities for Saskatchewan companies to participate in this 
project, and we will maximize them. I know that what we need 
to start doing. I met on Friday with the president of the Medical 
Research Council of Canada and he was urging me to go to 
Japan to look at their Synchrotron and how they constructed it 
so that we get some first-hand experience on how to do this. But 
obviously our goal will be to maximize the local input and to do 
the best job we can to learn from other countries that have gone 
through the process of building one. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the point that the 
operating expenses, after construction, will be self-financing 
through those companies which are using the facility. But is 
there an agreement in place for cost sharing any potential 
deficits in operating? Has the Government of Canada made an 
ongoing commitment for operating beyond construction phase 
should that become necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the key part is that the 
province is not involved at all in the operating costs of the 
facility, so it’s the other agencies that would pick it up. But I 
think what has to be emphasized here is what the process was. 
 
Two years ago the province agreed, along with the federal 
government, to establish something called the collaborative 
committee which was chaired by Bernard Michel, the president 
of Cameco. And this committee took at least two years to verify 
the costs so they had all kinds of consultants’ reports done. 
They had engineers in; they went through the thing with a 
fine-toothed comb because we had the bad experience in this 
province of megaprojects that supposedly were going to cost X 
dollars and turned out costing Y dollars. 
 
Bernard Michel and his committee of experts went through the 
costing of this project for the two governments with a fine-tooth 
comb and reassured us that the costs that we put forward are the 
costs that will be delivered. So we are not anticipating cost 
overruns. 
 
But in terms of the operations, we’re not even a player in terms 
of the operations, so any of the issues would have to be dealt 
with, with the science agencies. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, and again, I don’t want to be pessimistic 
of what is one of the best stories to come out of this province in 
a very long time, and it’s something we should all be 
celebrating rather than complaining about — and I certainly 

don’t want to do that. But when you say agencies, Madam 
Minister, is it not correct that one of those agencies is the 
university which, in effect, is the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The main agencies that are doing 
the operating funding are federal agencies. The main operating 
funders are NSERC, National Science and Engineering 
Research Council; MRC, the Medical Research Council; NRC, 
the National Research Council which are funded by the federal 
government exclusively. So they are the main agencies that are 
providing the operating funding. So it’s the federal government 
that in that sense has lined up. 
 
And some of them have told us, by the way — and I don’t want 
to be too specific — their level of operating funding right now 
is their minimal. They probably will gear it up to . . . they want 
to put more money in. Because all the talk about industry takes 
away from the point that the key people using the Synchrotron 
will be researchers. And so the scientific agencies have the 
biggest vested interest in ensuring that this project goes, and 
that it goes as quickly and as effectively as possible. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank the minister 
for her answers on Synchrotron. I think it is obvious that she is 
knowledgeable in this area and, as I said before, it’s something 
that I think everyone in this province should celebrate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
is a number of other issues that we would like to talk about. 
And I would move that we rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


