





























































Hansard: June 14, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1803 
 June 14, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to present again to keep the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Lanigan, 
Drake, Saskatoon, and Meacham. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of their health care 
facilities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners may ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from Gordon 
MacMurchy’s home town of Semans. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding hospital closures. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
community of Viscount. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to people concerned with health care. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the community 
of Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the future of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Elstow, Colonsay, and Allan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people who are very concerned about the 
health care crisis in Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this is signed by persons from Lanigan, Leroy, Drake, and 
Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present from concerned people in Saskatchewan 
about the possibility of hospital closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Lanigan and the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding hospital closures. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Plunkett, Lanigan, 
Saskatoon, and Jansen areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about hospital 
closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Lanigan 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people from Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the communities of Guernsey, 
Lanigan, Viscount, and Plunkett. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Colonsay. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with possible municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamations of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Coderre, Mossbank, and Courval. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 

 
The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and 
Cudworth; 
 

Keeping the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals open; and 
 

Restoring the Paddockwood access road. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication First Report 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Communication presents the first report of the 
said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the recommendations of 
the Public Documents Committee under The Archives Act 
contained in retention and disposal schedules comprising 
sessional paper no. 219, including schedule no. 341 — 
capital pension plan; schedule no. 342 — Saskatchewan 
Health, drug plan and extended benefits; schedule no. 343 
— Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, lands branch for 
this first session of the twenty-fourth legislature and 
referred to the committee by the Assembly on May 9, 
2000. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules nos. 341 through 343 be accepted. 
 
Your committee considered the issue of its role in the 
review and approval of retention disposal schedules. The 
committee makes the following recommendation to the 
Legislative Assembly: 
 
That The Archives Act be amended so that retention and 
disposal schedule recommendations, made under the 
authority of section 11 of the said Act, may be approved 
without reference to the Standing Committee on 
Communication; and further, 
 
That the government take into consideration, when 
amending The Archives Act, that provision be made so that 
said schedules continue to be tabled in the Legislative 
Assembly and that the Speaker be the final authority on the 
approval of retention and disposal schedules. 
 
It is your committee’s intention to revisit the legislative 
review process of retention and disposal schedules in three 
years time if The Archives Act is amended to reflect the 
recommendations of this report. 
 
Your committee reviewed the report of the Legislative 
Library for the period ended March 31, 1998, and your 
committee also considered issues related to the broadcast 
of legislative proceedings. Your committee has directed the 
director of broadcast services to investigate and make 
proposals with respect to increasing the accessibility of the 
broadcast of legislative proceedings through the services of 
the Saskatchewan Communications Network and by other 
means. 

 
Signed Hon. Ron Osika, Committee Chair. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

the hon. member for Cannington: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
questions I would like to present this morning, so I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: what is your 
department doing to correct the discrepancy between the 
tuition charged by SIAST Saskatoon versus that charged 
by SIAST in Prince Albert for the chemical dependency 
worker program? 
 
To the Minister of Education: how many complaints have 
been lodged regarding the mould in Dalmeny school; and 
what are the plans for getting rid of that particular mould in 
Dalmeny school? 
 
To the Minister of Environment: has your department 
studied whether or not to make beer bottles mandatory as a 
way to reduce incidents of broken glass? 
 
To the Minister of Highways: what is your department’s 
plan to fix the railway crossing on Highway 12 north of 
Martensville? 
 
To the Minister of Highways: has your department 
conducted a safety study regarding the intersection of 
Highway 305 and the Dalmeny access road; if so, when 
will it be released; and if not, when will such a study be 
done? 
 

And of great import, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what is a musical pumpjack? 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: has your department looked 
into taking the necessary steps required for the production 
of organic milk in Saskatchewan since we currently import 
it from other provinces? 
 

And the second question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: has your department looked 
into a program similar to one in British Columbia known 
as the cottage industry program which access a speciality 
pool of milk quota for organic milk from the federal 
government? 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: what is the province’s share in the profit 
generated by Lotto 6/49 and what criteria are used to 
determine which provincial projects will benefit from those 
profits? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to say that it’s my great honour to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a truly special visitor to our province. In your gallery 
is His Excellency Sir Anthony Goodenough, the High 
Commissioner of Britain to Canada, accompanied by Mr. Alan 
Campbell, the head of the political section of the British High 
Commission in Ottawa. I’ll ask them to stand in just a few 
moments. 
 
His Excellency is a distinguished diplomat who represented Her 
Majesty and the people of Great Britain in Ghana, Pakistan, 
France, and Greece. He served as assistant undersecretary for 
Commonwealth and African affairs before being appointed as 
High Commissioner to Canada in 1996. And in 1997 he was 
made a knight commander of the Order of St. Michael and St. 
George, which is the order reserved for the diplomatic service. 
 
His Excellency’s term as High Commissioner will conclude 
shortly and he’s visiting Saskatchewan as part of a farewell tour 
of Western Canada. But always at work, it’s a very full 
schedule he has including meetings with Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, colleagues in Finance and 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition. Also I’ll be meeting him this afternoon in my 
office where we’ll be able to witness and hear the musical 
pumpjack. 
 
This evening His Excellency will be the guest at a dinner hosted 
by Mr. Speaker, to be attended by some members of the House, 
government officials, and representatives of the business, 
education, and British communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has enjoyed a long and mutually 
beneficial relationship with the United Kingdom, which is our 
fifth-largest European trading partner. We look forward to 
working with the British government on matters of mutual 
concern and interest so that we might build upon that solid 
foundation. 
 
And of course, before I take my place, I’d be very remiss while 
on my feet if I didn’t mention the fact that we have a very long 
and proud tradition of British parliamentary democracy — we 
celebrate it, Mr. Speaker, at your Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association annual meeting. Democracy which is in many ways 
Britain’s greatest gift, not only to Saskatchewan to Canada but 
to the Commonwealth nations — and to democracy itself. 
 
The American, Alexander Hamilton, one of the so-called 
founding fathers of the United States, believed that that new 
nation should adopt the British parliamentary system. And he 
said, “The British government forms the best model the world 
has ever produced.” The British government, in the words of 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Hamilton. 
 
Well history tells us that Hamilton’s colleagues decided not to 
follow his advice and history shall judge the merits of his 
decision. 
 
But as far as I’m concerned, we in Canada and in this House are 
very proud that we have built our own democratic government 
by following the example of, in the words of Hamilton, the best 
model — rightly called the Mother of all Parliaments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the people of this province, I want to wish His Excellency Sir 
Anthony all the best in his future endeavours. And I would 
invite His Excellency and Mr. Campbell to now rise and accept 
the heartfelt greetings and best wishes of you, Mr. Speaker, and 
all members of this Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege, on behalf of the Leader of the Official Opposition and 
our caucus, to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Sir 
Anthony Goodenough to our Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a pleasure to have representatives 
from other countries to come and visit our Assembly. And I 
look forward as well to having a meeting with His Excellency a 
little later this afternoon. 
 
So I again ask all members to extend a warm welcome to His 
Excellency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of this House some 
long-time friends, Dave, Yvonne, and Mykola Kyba who are up 
in the west wing. A wonderfully trilingual family. 
 
And to the family I would say in my best Ukrainian, Vitaemo; 
in French, Bienvenue; and in English, welcome to this House. 
And I would ask all to join me in welcoming them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And also I would like to welcome to this 
House and introduce to you and through you to this House, a 
new friend Kathleen Hewitt. I worked with Kathleen’s mother 
on the Regina presbytery of the United Church. And Kathleen is 
also in the west balcony. 
 
She is the executive director for the gay and lesbian community 
association of Regina. And I would ask all to welcome Kathleen 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this Assembly, sitting in the east gallery, 32 grade 5 and 6 kids 
from the Wild Rose School of Shellbrook and their teachers: 
Mrs. Sharon Kilmer, Mrs. Merle Roberts, Mrs. Ruth Peake; 

chaperons; Mr. Pletz, Mr. Williams, Mrs. Oleksyn, Mrs. 
Herdin, and Carla Burgess. 
 
And I look forward to speaking to you later on after the session. 
I would like the members all to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with my colleague in welcoming Kathleen Hewitt to the 
legislature today. 
 
Kathleen and I met when she was a shop steward with Silver 
Sage Casino during the Casino Regina discussions. And I have 
become closer friends since then, because I found her to be a 
person of good humour, mixed with determination. 
 
So I just again ask everybody to welcome her today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Trans Canada Relay 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my distinct pleasure this 
afternoon to stand in this Assembly and pay tribute to a group 
of people who have worked so diligently in the passing of the 
waters in the Trans Canada Relay through our area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the passing of the waters 
— and the members opposite are wondering exactly what this is 
and I guess we’ll maybe leave them in limbo for a while — but 
what this relay is, Relay 2000 is an effort to bring to the 
attention of all Canadians, the Trans Canada Trail. 
 
And what we had this on Sunday morning was the recognition 
of a sample of water from the Pacific and the Arctic oceans 
which passed through our area and will meet up with a sample 
of water from the Atlantic Ocean in Hull, Quebec in September 
signifying unification of our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the little community of Ellisboro where there 
will be a pavilion erected to recognize the Trans Canada Trail in 
this province, Mr. Gordon Dunn, 91 years young, proudly 
brought into the ceremony — and travelled the last kilometre of 
the trail — the waters and passed them on to Connor Tubman 
who was seven years old, and he began the passage on from the 
community of Ellisboro. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I extend congratulations to all those involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Day of Warning for Medicare 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
has been a good day for medicare in Saskatchewan. This 
morning our Premier announced a provincial health care review 
aimed at providing a new vision for publicly administered 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
And at noon today, people from across the country participated 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

in a National Day of Warning Against the Privatization of 
Health Care. This event was organized by the four largest health 
care unions, representing health care workers across Canada. 
 
Recent attacks on our health care system have caused concern 
amongst the public. From the federal government’s reduction in 
transfer payments to the introduction of Bill 11 in Alberta, the 
future of health care has been on many people’s minds. 
 
And today people across this province and across the whole 
country have said no to privatized health care, just as they did in 
the recent Alberta by-election. 
 
In Saskatchewan, citizens of Weyburn, Regina, Humboldt, 
Saskatoon, Davidson, Biggar, Rosetown, and many more came 
out to support our health care system. I attended the event in 
Regina today and can tell you that the participants feel that it is 
imperative that we pressure Ottawa to restore funding and that 
we continue to fight against private health care. 
 
We must be ever vigilant against those who call for the 
privatization of health services. I, as my button says, am on 
medicare alert and I urge all members to be on alert as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High School Debate on Privatization of Medicare 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last week I had the honour of 
attending a debate by the grade 11 economic class in Porcupine 
Plain composite High School. The debate topic was simple and 
timely: be it resolved medicare be privatized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young students had researched both sides of 
the topic very well. They presented their arguments with 
passion and enthusiasm. 
 
The pro-privatization side used arguments like, it’s a denial of 
my civil liberties, what’s so evil about spending one’s own 
money on one’s own health; and to describe Canada’s health 
care as the best in the world is patriotic but untrue. 
 
The con side, against privatization, argued that private health 
care would lure the best professionals away, that it would set up 
a class system separated by money, and that in the UK (United 
Kingdom) the number of private hospitals was decreasing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statement that most of us remember was from 
one young man who talked about Tommy Douglas and his 
vision, and he said, that struck me right in the heart and made 
me proud to be a Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a well-fought battle but the argument put 
forward by the side determined to privatize medicare won. For 
your information, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t one of the judges. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the students and teachers for their work 
and their enthusiasm. I believe this province will be in good 
hands when we turn the control of the province over to the 
students in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
to tell the members about a success story. It’s about the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program (CSAP). 
 
It is a success story on two fronts. First, the Government of 
Saskatchewan was able to secure federal funding for this 
program when people had given up hope of federal action. This 
is due in no small part to the efforts of Saskatchewan farmers 
and the farm coalition. 
 
Second, we got the funds in the pockets of farmers in a timely 
and efficient fashion. When we announced the program, we said 
the funds would be in farmers’ pockets for spring seeding and it 
was. 
 
I ask the members to look at the facts of this program. Over 
25,000 cheques for $107 million were mailed out by May 1, 
2000. By May 15, nearly 40,000 cheques for $163 million were 
sent to farmers. The latest numbers indicate that almost 46,500 
farmers received just over $190 million in payouts — an 
average initial payment of just over $4,000 per producer. A 
total of $260 million will be paid out to farmers, with the final 
payment calculation after June 30 deadline. 
 
This happened because Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food has 
a designated group of employees who, in addition to operating 
the crop insurance program, delivered CSAP. 
 
I want to tell the members of the Assembly that I will be 
sending a letter to each and every employee of Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance, and thanking each and every one of them for 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Grain Council 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you will 
know that for the next three days Regina is the host of an 
international conference on grain. Delegates from around the 
world will be discussing issues about subsidies, world trade 
discussion, and investment opportunities. 
 
I’m sure all farmers here in Saskatchewan would want to 
welcome the delegates, and sincerely hope that the discussions 
will be beneficial to all. International trade subsidies have 
resulted in record-low grain prices, so any discussion in this 
area of reducing export subsidies worldwide would indeed be 
helpful to our farm community. Saskatchewan and indeed all 
Canadian farmers are at a significant disadvantage, and without 
trade liberalization the future remains difficult for our farm 
families. 
 
This is the first time this international event has been hosted in 
North America, Mr. Speaker, and we welcome all delegates to 
Saskatchewan. Congratulations to all who worked to organize 
and host this very important event on the future of the grain 
industry worldwide. 
 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I am no 
farmer, I want to join with other members in welcoming to 
Regina and to Saskatchewan the members of the International 
Grain Council. The 500 delegates from 40 countries are 
meeting here for the next three days, and it goes without saying 
that their deliberations are extremely important to 
Saskatchewan’s number one industry. 
 
As an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Regina, 
it goes without saying, that I’m also extremely pleased to have 
500 visitors join us here in this beautiful Queen city of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while it is unusual for members of this Assembly 
to say kind words about the efforts of ministers Goodale and 
Vanclief, I do want to acknowledge their effort in helping bring 
this conference to our city. This conference, as you know, is 
usually held in London, and it is fact a very great honour to 
have it in North America and especially here in the heart of our 
grain belt. 
 
This conference provides an opportunity to showcase our grains 
industry to the world, as well as presenting opportunities for 
other agri-business for greater sales and investment. It also 
gives us the opportunity to discuss the problem of international 
grain subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact the IGC (International Grain Council) 
conference is being held here is a recognition of 
Saskatchewan’s important place in this very important global 
industry. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Letter Regarding Highway No. 42 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have before me a 
letter dated June 8 from a Dr. Robert Hamilton of Regina in 
which he states: 
 

I’m writing to bring the deplorable state of Highway 42 to 
your attention. On the May long weekend, my family and I 
were travelling to Palliser Regional Park, pulling our boat, 
when we hit what can only be described as a crater. It was 
at least 8 feet long, 4 feet wide, and 8 to 12 inches deep. 
Our trailer bounced off the hitch, breaking the security pin 
and snapping the metal safety chain. It was really a miracle 
that our family was spared any serious injury. 
 
As we continued our trip, we made a game of counting 
potholes. Between the town of Eyebrow and Keeler we 
counted 313 major potholes and 13 stretches of thick layers 
of dangerous gravel had been spread on the road. I found it 
very difficult to maintain control of our vehicle when I hit 
these patches. 
 
We passed one sign which read, broken pavement 5 
kilometres. But when that 5-kilometre stretch ended, we 
were confronted with another identical sign followed by a 
third sign indicating a further 10-kilometre stretch of 
broken highway ahead. 
 

I contacted Highway officials who were courteous but not 
very helpful. They proposed a theory that increases in grain 
transportation accounted for the deterioration of this road. I 
was told that the problem could be resolved by allowing 
deteriorating sections of the road to return to gravel. 
 
Certainly grain traffic has increased; however, I believe the 
Highways Department is mistaken in the assumption that 
this is the only cause. 

 
And he concludes by saying: 
 

I strongly urge the government to instruct the Highways 
Department to rethink plans for Highway 42 . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — To make a member’s statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has expired for member’s statements. 
And hon. members, I would just like to remind all of you that 
today is Wednesday. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Review of Health Care System Announced 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all knew it 
was Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s 
about time. The Saskatchewan Party has been calling for a 
complete review of the health care system for almost two years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And we need a full review because nine 
years of disastrous NDP (New Democratic Party) 
mismanagement of health care. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s health care 
system is on the brink of failure and a lot of people are telling 
us it’s already failed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s system is soaking up public funds 
like a sponge. People are spending more and more time on 
waiting lists. Communities are worried about where they will 
go even to get health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit today that while your health care 
review is two years late, it’s an indictment of the failure of the 
system you’re responsible for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to the 
question is no, because it is not an indictment of our system. 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

And I want to add specifically to the hon. member the farthest 
thing that we have done is from the suggestion and the 
advocacy of the position of your party. Your party in the last 
election campaign wanted, quote — I’m reading from their 
campaign literature; this is right from their platform — “the 
Provincial Auditor to launch a comprehensive value-for-money 
audit of the health care system.” Value for audit. 
 
That’s what they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And they applaud that. 
 
What they’re telling the people of Saskatchewan is they’re 
going to have an accountant over every nurse’s shoulder, 
they’re going to have an accountant over every doctor’s 
shoulder, they’re going to have an accountant over every LPN 
(licensed practical nurse). 
 
And you know what they’re going to do? They’re going to 
advocate the privatization of health care. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, it is incorrect for you to suggest that 
there will be hospital closures pending this review. There will 
be none. We’re for medicare; you’re against medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again to the Premier. Well it’s a little late to be arguing about 
how the wellness model is working and how wonderful 
everything is, because it isn’t. It’s a disaster under your 
administration. The health care system is a failure, and the 
reality is you had no choice, Mr. Premier, but to call this 
review. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party fully supports a health 
care review. We’ve been saying it for two years and you come 
along johnny-come-lately and finally catch on. But more 
importantly, Mr. Premier, while this review is taking place, will 
you put a moratorium on further closures of facilities in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I already said in answer 
to the first question posed to me by the member opposite that no 
hospitals will be closed while this review is going on. I said that 
there . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I said at my press conference, that 
does not mean that there’ll be no changes to the system. 
Obviously the system has to continue. But there will be no 
hospital closures. The system can’t stand still. 
 
But I want to say something else. We are not . . . for the 

position that you’re in. Your leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition, says the following, quote: 
 

Ottawa should hold back on more cash in the province of 
Saskatchewan (until what?) until the Government of 
Saskatchewan has a value for audit system . . . 
 

A value audit system, the Texas-style system that you’re 
advocating. 
 
So he says to Ottawa, don’t advance any money to 
Saskatchewan. Make the difficulty even worse and then have an 
auditor overlooking every nurse’s shoulder. 
 
Shame on you. You want to privatize medicare. We . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, these words coming from the 
great defender of the Canada Health Act and medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the time we see this Premier stand up in this 
province and wrap himself in the mantle of the Canada Health 
Act. According to your press release, you pledge your 
allegiance to the five principles of the Canada Health Act and 
yet not three months ago you gave a speech in Ottawa in which 
you said, and I quote: 
 

The current preoccupation with the Canada Health Act 
may be counterproductive as we build a public health care 
system for this new century. 

 
And you went on to say that the Canada Health Act is a, quote: 
 

. . . a relatively minor part of the story. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that your position, that the principles of the 
Canada Health Act are counterproductive and a relatively minor 
part of the story? Or are you out there saying one thing in 
Ottawa while you’re flogging your resumé and sucking up for 
an appointment? Or what are you saying in this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just ask all hon. members to be 
respectful of one another. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t expect very 
much more from the hon. member from Melfort. He has such a 
wonderful way with words and he’s such a civil and decent 
debater. But I’ll tell you, knowing where he comes from, 
putting him in charge of the health care system is like putting 
Colonel Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. And that 
particularly applies to him. 
 
And when I said . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And when I said, and when I said in 
Ottawa that we shouldn’t only focus on the Canada Health Act, 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

I mean that. I mean that we move beyond the minimum 
standards of the Canada Health Act that we support, on to a new 
and additional system that complements the Canada Health Act 
— a wellness model. 
 
And what I mean also by that is we are opposed to a private 
health care system that the member from Weyburn advocates, 
that your candidate down in Wood River advocates, Mr. Yogi 
Yogibert, candidate for leader of your . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yogi Huyghebaert. You know what he says, quote, “I’m in 
favour of private clinics.” That’s your candidate in Wood River. 
He’s for privatization. We’re against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier. Well obviously 
he must have hit a nerve, and the resumes aren’t getting peddled 
around very well because you’re not getting any jobs. 
 
Why are you inconsistent about your words in Ottawa which 
you are in Saskatchewan. On March 31, you told a public policy 
forum in Ottawa, and I quote, you said, “The current 
preoccupation of the Canada Health Act may be 
counterproductive.” That’s a direct quote, Mr. Premier. You’re 
saying one thing in Ottawa while you’re telling the people in 
Saskatchewan another thing. 
 
Mr. Premier, why won’t you come clean with the people here 
and tell them that this commission is something that will cover 
up the mess that you’ve made of health care; and indeed, I want 
them to investigate your violation of the Canada Health Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I want to tell the hon. member I’m not 
going lie awake at night thinking that Ottawa is going to be 
investigating our so-called violation of Canada Health Act 
because we haven’t violated it. 
 
We support the Canada Health Act, and that is exactly our 
position. But we want to say that in addition to the Canada 
Health Act, we should be adding on the additional services of 
wellness and prevention, we’re moving on to the Canada Health 
Act and the reforms we’ve initiated in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I tell you what we don’t support. We don’t support Mr. 
Yogi’s comment that he’s in favour of private clinics. We don’t 
support the member from Weyburn who says, quote, in the 
Weyburn Review, one option Bakken put forward, and I quote, 
in the course of her campaign was the privatization of health 
services. I think that should be an option. 
 
We don’t support your value-for-money audit, Texas-style 
either. I say to everybody who is concerned about the protection 
of medicare for the 21st century, there’s only one party that’s 
committed to that defence — that’s this coalition government 
right here, and not your opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, very brave accusatory words 
but let me ask you, Mr. Premier. The five principles of the 

Canada Health Act — universality, what does that mean? Does 
it mean that there’s health care for everyone in this province or 
only for those that are prepared to wait on waiting lists instead 
of the ones that can afford to bail out to Alberta or the United 
States? 
 
Where’s portability? Does that mean you have to take your 
cares out of the rural Saskatchewan into the cities and wait in 
line there? 
 
Where, Mr. Speaker, are accessibility — why people wait for 
need of care? Where’s comprehensiveness? 
 
The only thing you got is administration, while you sit there and 
soak up public funds without being willing to look at it. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re in violation of the Canada Health Act and I 
hope this commission will cite you for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this comes from the 
so-called Health critic of the so-called Saskatchewan Party 
which advocates a five-year freeze on health spending, a 
five-year . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A five-year 
freeze on health care spending. That’s your position. An audit, 
value-for-money audit. We’re going to have the accountants 
overlooking the nurses when . . . (inaudible) . . . work. Those 
who support Alberta and Bill 11, those who support the 
privatization of the health care system, the member from 
Weyburn, the candidate down in Wood River. 
 
I tell you this party opposite — and I warn the people of 
Saskatchewan — this party opposite is a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing. This is a party which is a wolf which will destroy 
medicare. 
 
We dream medicare for the 21st century. We dare to be bold. 
We invented medicare. This coalition government is determined 
to protect it, notwithstanding your best efforts at destruction. 
They can’t be trusted. Only this coalition government can be 
trusted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll find out soon 
enough whether the people of Wood River believe in the NDP’s 
system of health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Madam Minister, this morning your government 
announced that Ken Fyke will head the health care commission. 
And I understand that Mr. Fyke is a well-regarded health 
administrator. 
 
However, you will forgive the people of Saskatchewan if they 
are just a little cynical about the NDP’s commitment to a fully 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

independent review. Just look at the massive government 
interference in Channel Lake inquiry, the no-fault insurance 
review, and the review of the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement). 
 
Madam Minister, does the NDP intend to appoint more 
members to the commission? If so, will you release their names 
and professional background today, and will you make the 
commitment to keep NDP politics out of the work of the 
commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question comes 
from the member who believes in privatization. This question 
comes from the member who believes in the privatization of 
medicare. This question comes from the member and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question comes 
from the member and the party that believes in privatization in 
medicare. 
 
From the Health critic the earlier question was, when he asked 
about the principles of the Canada Health Act — what they 
were, what they meant — here’s what today’s Leader-Post, an 
article by Mr. Murray Mandryk, talks about respecting a 
convention of the Saskatchewan Party. Quote, and I’m quoting 
directly here: 
 

Nor were many of the comments coming from the floor the 
least bit conciliatory to the left referring to their 
convention. One delegate described the five principles of 
medicare — universality, portability, accessibility, 
comprehensive and public administration — as socialist 
rhetoric. 
 

From your convention. No wonder the hon. member doesn’t 
have the foggiest idea of what the principles of the Canada 
Health Act are, and no wonder, I say again, you can never trust 
any Saskatchewan Party member with the defence of medicare, 
only this coalition government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the 
Minister of Health. Madam Minister, this morning you 
committed to broad public consultation on the health care 
review. According to the Premier there will be three reports 
completed in the course of the review. 
 
The first interim report is due this fall, the second is due at 
Christmas, and the final report is due next spring. 
 
Madam Minister, will the NDP make these reports public when 
Mr. Fyke submits them. And will you commit to submit each of 
the reports without the NDP whitewash that your government 
applies to most of the information that you do release to the 
public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, nominated today was a 
very distinguished . . . is a very distinguished Canadian who 
knows the health care system inside and out. Who served two 
years as deputy minister of Health under the former Devine 
administration. He served for several years as deputy minister 
of Health under the Blakeney administration, and has a record 
of distinguished service and commitment to public health care. 
 
The question asked comes from a member who does not have 
the commitment to public health care. Her commitment is — 
and she’s nodding in support — her commitment is to 
privatization. And she would have us believe, she would have 
us believe that somehow under this chair of this distinguished 
Canadian committed to the public health care system, that there 
won’t be full revelation and full accountability and full 
consultation. 
 
I tell you what Mr. Fyke said today at the press conference — 
very wise words. He said the inspiration for medicare in 1960 
came from the hearts and the minds of Saskatchewan people, 
and he said the solution will come from there — and it will — 
not from the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 18 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, tomorrow the residents of 
Climax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask members on 
both sides to please come to order. The question will be heard. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow the 
residents of Climax are planning to gather on Highway 18 near 
their community, Mr. Speaker. They’re going out to patch some 
more potholes, just like the people of Val Marie did a week ago. 
 
But unlike the people of Val Marie, residents of Climax are 
being told that they won’t have access to asphalt or oilers. Bill 
Lowe, the reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Lone Tree, 
says, Mr. Minister, that your department doesn’t seem 
interested in assisting them. 
 
He says they’re not getting much co-operation from your 
department, and the people from the community are wondering 
why they are not being treated the same as the people of Val 
Marie. 
 
Mr. Minister, you told the media yesterday that Highways 
department people would be on Highway 18 to make sure the 
people of Climax are safe during their work. But specifically, 
will your department be giving these people asphalt and oilers 
the same as you gave to the people of Val Marie? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The member knows very well that we have said publicly, and 
we have repeatedly said this and are continuing to do this, we 
will meet with the community of Climax and affected 
communities along the road, Mr. Speaker. We’ve committed to 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

that and we’re continuing to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member also knows, and factually, that 
the two roads that he’s referring to are very different surfaces as 
well, Mr. Speaker. One is a thin membrane surface that is badly 
broke up; another one, Highway No. 4, was a road where the 
community worked together to repair a pothole. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a quote from the member 
from Saltcoats who said the following, Mr. Speaker — if the 
member from Cypress is opposed to this — the member from 
Saltcoats says: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back in gravel (Mr. Speaker) and I don’t think I’d 
probably have many of my constituents agree with me on 
that at this point, but I honestly feel there must be some 
point there where we have to give up (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Well, we’re not going to give up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The member of Saltcoats may have realized 
also that it was an idea that’s impossible to sell. I can’t defend 
his comments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister has said his officials will meet 
with community leaders from Climax on Friday, but those same 
community leaders say that his officials were supposed to meet 
with them last Monday but they didn’t show up. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that how you treat people with concerns about 
the state of our highways? The people of Climax believe this 
section of Highway 18 is salvageable. They don’t buy your 
argument that gravel roads are safer at all and they will not 
stand for this highway, which they rely on to do business and 
for daily life, to be reverted to gravel. 
 
Your department, Mr. Minister, has told them to expect no help 
and then they stand them up for a meeting. Yet you suggest that 
people will get help and their concerns will be heard. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, do you know what the story is in your 
department? Who is making the decisions — you or your 
bureaucrats? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve made the commitment 
that we will meet, and we will meet if the community wants to 
meet with us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association. It says the following, Mr. Speaker. They say that: 
 

If gravel surfaces are going to stand up better than . . . thin 
membrane payment, then I guess that is what we’ll have to 
do in the interim until there is enough funding to put . . . 
back into pavement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that member over there acknowledges there needs 
more funding, as I do, from the federal treasury. But, Mr. 

Speaker, on gravel roads — in case the member didn’t hear it 
— the member from Saltcoats says: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back to gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me on that . . . point, 
but I honestly feel . . . (that at) some point . . . we have to 
give up, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
trucker’s association may be willing to live with gravel but the 
people of Climax and Bracken aren’t. The people of Climax 
don’t believe gravel will be safer and they have vowed not to 
allow your equipment to attack Highway 18. 
 
Gravel doesn’t allow for all-weather travel, and stone chips are 
very common. Sask Tourism might as well print up a bumper 
sticker that says, I drove through Saskatchewan and all I got 
were these lousy stone chips. 
 
If gravel roads aren’t properly maintained, there are more 
frequent accidents and a host of other problems for drivers 
when one suddenly drives from pavement on to gravel. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much will it cost for you to grind up the 
existing pavement and maintain that surface compared to 
sending your crews out to patch the existing road surface? 
 
And finally, Mr. Minister, will you patch Highway 18 and work 
with the community to plan for the future instead of forcing 
them to take more drastic action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the cost is $700 million a 
year for interest on their debt, Mr. Speaker. The cost is $320 
million a year on top because they voted in favour of 
abandonment of the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
cost is. Over $1 billion a year because of the decisions that they 
made and supported, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last four years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
increased our budget by 49 per cent. And on areas that that 
member is referring to, Mr. Speaker, in areas of maintenance, 
we’ve increased our budget in maintenance by 68 per cent. We 
know that’s not enough, Mr. Speaker, but we’re doing the best 
with the money that we have. We need support from the federal 
government as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teachers’ Job Action 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question’s for 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, today and tomorrow teachers are taking a strike 
vote. If they vote to go on strike the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation) is now saying the strike could take place 
before the end of this school year. 
 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

Mr. Minister, what plan do you have in place to deal with that 
possibility? What will you do to ensure that Saskatchewan 
students are able to complete their school year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the teachers federation has called for a sanctions vote which 
will occur today and tomorrow. 
 
It would be presumptuous of me to determine what the result of 
that vote would be. But in the eventuality that they are given a 
mandate to proceed with job action the department as well as 
the school trustees have had plans and are working on plans to 
make sure — to make sure — that no student in the province of 
Saskatchewan will suffer from any job action with regard to the 
teachers’ contract. 
 
And what we are saying is that we are working right now in fact 
on providing some direction to the department, as well as to 
school divisions, to make sure primarily for our Grade 12 
students that their exams will be marked, that records will be 
provided, and that they will be able to move on for their credits 
for their university and post-secondary training. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, yesterday in estimates I asked 
you the same question six times, and I never did get an answer. 
 
I wanted to know how many school divisions in this province 
have seen their funding increase enough this year to cover 
teachers’ salary increase of 7.2 per cent and how many will not 
receive enough to cover this increase. It was a fairly 
straightforward question, Mr. Minister, and you couldn’t give 
me an answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve had a whole day to think about it, and I’m 
going to try again. How many school divisions will receive 
enough money to cover a salary increase of 7.2 per cent and 
how many will not receive enough money to cover that interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when we were 
doing estimates I answered that question on several occasions. 
And it’s my understanding that perhaps the member opposite 
doesn’t understand the answer so I’ll give it to her again. 
 
Certainly, when we talk about the impact, the impact of a 
teachers’ negotiated salary in terms of how this would apply to 
the foundation operating grant and also to school divisions, 
what I answered yesterday, what I’m answering here today to 
the member opposite, is that any amount that will be required to 
cover a teachers’ negotiated contract will be provided by the 
provincial government on a global basis to the foundation 
operating grant. 
 
We also recognize that the foundation operating grant is an 
equalization formula so it is applied. And as I said yesterday, 
we have school divisions who have assessments of over 
$700,000 per student who will receive no grant. They have 
made . . . They knew the formula. The formula is transparent 
and they will move on with that information . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, we realize how this formula 
works. But what I’m saying is you know there’s going to be a 
number of school divisions who will not get enough money. 
 
The question was simple: how many school divisions out there 
are not going to get money to cover that teacher salary increase? 
In a global budget means that there will be enough to cover it 
for everyone, but individual school divisions may not get it. 
How many are not going to get enough money to cover that 
teacher salary increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite’s 
question indicates a profound lack of understanding of how 
education is funded in this province. 
 
No school division will suffer because of the arrangements. 
They have all agreed. All stakeholders have agreed on the 
formula of the foundation operating grant. The fact of the 
matter is that some school divisions who have high assessments 
will receive no grant. But they also know that there will be a 
negotiated settlement and they will have to recoup that from 
within their resources. But for them to have massive resources 
and low mill rates to cover that, of course, that’s the way the 
system works. We have an equalization formula. 
 
And I must remind the member opposite that this has been 
explained to her on numerous occasions, and I’m just amazed 
that she has not been able to understand a simple concept of 
foundation operating grant and equalization. And it’s clear to 
me that the member opposite doesn’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an open 
and accountable government, we are very happy to table the 
answer to question no. 176. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 176 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I would like to table a revised answer to written 
question no. 171 and ask that the official records be amended as 
such. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has tabled a 
revised answer to question 171. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Department of Justice Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
the debate with respect to Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The 
Department of Justice Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main principles of the Bill is an attempt 
to augment the recognition within our justice system of the need 
for increased cultural sensitivity for First Nations people within 
our justice system. The Bill addresses that in a number of ways, 
not the least of which is the extension of protection from 
liability to Aboriginal courtworkers — in fact to all 
courtworkers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the other issue in this Act bears some, I think, some more 
questions that need to be asked, and we’ll be doing that in 
Committee of the Whole. And specifically that other issue is the 
extension of the solicitor-client confidentiality privilege to the 
relationship between a courtworker and an accused. And that’s 
of course is a very serious and solemn privilege that has 
wide-ranging implications in terms of our judicial system and in 
terms of the treatment that the accused can receive in our 
system. And so we will be asking a number of specific 
questions regarding that particular provision of Bill 15 in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 16 — The 
Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few brief remarks 
on this Bill, and we intended to pursue it further in committee 
as well. A number of my colleagues have spoke to Bill No. 28 
and they have outlined some of the concerns that we have, and 
we’ll be looking for clarification of those concerns in 
Committee of the Whole with the Minister of Justice and his 
officials. 
 
There are some very significant changes represented in Bill 28. 
They affect of course both the individual officers that we’re 
talking about, the Child Advocate and the Ombudsman, as it 
relates specifically to their remuneration and the compensation 

that they receive in exchange for the performance of their duties 
on behalf of taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Assembly will know that the current 
relationship is tied, as it relates to salary and benefits, is tied to 
the salary and benefits of our provincial court judges, and this 
Act will make some changes there. And it will place authority, 
probably rightfully so, with the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
But at the same time it does that, Mr. Speaker, it still provides a 
number of powers to the cabinet of the government in terms of 
directing both of these officers. Both the Child Advocate and 
both the Ombudsman will be under the direction of cabinet. 
Cabinet has some very specific authorities as laid out in this Bill 
and yet the Board of Internal Economy is, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker, cutting the cheques. 
 
And there is maybe a bit of a discrepancy there that we would 
like to question which we are prepared to do when the Bill is in 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 29 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again a number of my 
colleagues have spoken to this Bill as well, Bill No. 29. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that shortly after I was asked to take 
on the responsibility as the Justice critic for the official 
opposition, I had a very good meeting with the Saskatchewan 
rental housing association. And they outlined a number of 
concerns as it relates to the current damage deposit process they 
must go through and various other issues they had with the 
Rentalsman at the time. 
 
Now I can also confirm to the Assembly that a number of the 
concerns that they registered with me during that meeting have 
been addressed in this particular Bill, and quite rightly so I 
think, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Specifically prior to the changes that are currently in effect with 
respect to damage deposits and the process in place when there 
is a dispute between a landlord and a tenant, prior to the change 
being made, we had a damage deposit that was just 
fundamentally too low in the province. I think everybody 
agreed with that. It was a $125. 
 
I know from firsthand experience, at least through anecdotal 
evidence provided by my father who has some rental properties, 
$125 was simply inadequate for a landlord to continue to 
provide adequate, and comfortable, and modern, and safe 
accommodation for people when their properties were damaged 
by previous tenants. 
 
And so a change was made by the government to increase the 
level of the damage deposit — this government — Mr. Speaker. 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

But in some, I guess, in some sort of strange, twisted NDP quid 
pro quo for this particular change, rental property owners in the 
province were stuck with a damage deposit process that was 
extremely cumbersome and was frankly not working for . . . I 
don’t think either for tenants or for landlords. 
 
And the proof is in the pudding, Mr. Speaker, because before 
these changes were made there were 2,000 security deposit 
hearings being held . . . or rather, I beg your pardon, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 1,000 security deposit hearings being held 
— in other words disputes between landlords and tenants. And 
after the changes were made the number went up to 5,000, Mr. 
Speaker; 2,000 of the 5,000 were hearings where the tenant 
didn’t bother showing up. And so there were some major flaws 
with this particular process. This Bill does seek to address them. 
 
We have some concerns about some of the specific ways it goes 
about addressing them and whether the Bill has gone far enough 
in alleviating the problem that property owners have had in the 
province in trying to ensure that we have good 
accommodations, good rental accommodations and enough 
rental accommodations for the marketplaces in our . . . across 
the province. 
 
And we’ll get into those questions in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
And with those remarks, we’ll end the second reading debates 
and look forward to Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 31 — The 
Police Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And once again, a 
number of my colleagues have spoken to Bill No. 31, An Act to 
amend The Police Act, 1990. And in the course of my duties 
I’ve tried to consult with the various stakeholders involved or 
who will be impacted by this particular Bill. 
 
And I think we have some very specific questions that we 
would like to ask in committee related to the changes that An 
Act to amend The Police Act, 1990 is proposing. 
 
One of the areas that I think that we will want to be touching on 
in committee — and I’ll do that very, very briefly at this time, 
Mr. Speaker — is the impact of the Act on the current and 
future special constable provisions in our province, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And special constables — I think, Mr. Speaker, you would 
agree with your first-hand knowledge, I think members of the 
Assembly would agree — special constables can be a very 
useful tool to municipal police forces; and certainly for the 
mounted police force, which is the city detachment I’m most 
familiar with in the city of Swift Current, where their own 
program has been very successful frankly and well-received by 
both the community, the regular force members, as well as 
those who have the privilege of serving as special constables 
with the mounted police which, as I say, is the force I’m 

familiar with. 
 
A number of other communities that have municipal forces 
have special constables in place. But, Mr. Speaker, what this 
Bill does not do, what this Bill does not do is extend that 
privilege, extend that very useful asset a community could have 
to a number of communities who have chosen to have 
municipal police forces, very small communities. 
 
Some of the examples of those, Mr. Speaker, are Watson, 
Luseland, Churchbridge, Cudworth, and Caronport. These 
communities have single-person detachments but they are 
municipal detachments. 
 
The situation that we have in our province currently, Mr. 
Speaker, is such that special constables can only operate . . . can 
only offer their services and be an asset in communities where 
they are under the full-time and direct supervision of a regular 
force member, be it a municipal force or the mounted police. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, these communities and other 
communities, who choose to go to single member or 
single-member forces in their communities, the concern that 
they have is that the special constable asset, as it were, is simply 
unavailable to them as a result. Because if, for example, they 
would like to utilize a special constable to relieve their regular 
member, who may need to take a holiday or may need to attend 
to sickness, or whatever reason that that regular member may 
have, the special constable tool is simply not available to them 
as it is to other people . . . other municipalities in the province 
— cities and larger towns that have multimember forces, be 
they municipal or be they with the mounted police. 
 
And I think these are some of the questions . . . We’d like to ask 
some  questions surrounding that specifically in Committee of 
the Whole. The member for Regina Elphinstone will be happy 
to know we’re going to do that in Committee of the Whole. 
 
They’re good questions, Mr. Speaker, because I think if we all 
agree that there are benefits to having special constables as 
assets in these communities, then they should be available to 
every community, whether they have a single-member 
municipal detachment of their own force or not. And that’s the 
questions that we will be asking in Committee of the Whole. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Finance to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 
with me today sitting to my left, Mr. Brian Smith, who is the 
executive director of the Public Employees Benefit Agency. 
 
Clause 1 
 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
and welcome to your official once again. I just have a couple of 
short questions and then we’ll get on with this particular Act. 
 
I noticed that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been in 
operation for a long time. And in fact, it’s one of the few 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people to invest in a pension 
plan that is really outside of the RS . . . (inaudible) . . . RSP 
(Retirement Savings Plan). 
 
So, I guess my question is that some of these amendments allow 
for a charge of fees. My question is, what services will you be 
charging a fee for in regards to this pension plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The commission does not presently 
contemplate charging any fees. This is designed to allow them 
to charge a fee in the event that it should be advisable. 
 
One example of where it might be advisable might be, for 
example, where there’s a marriage breakup and one of the 
parties, or both of the parties, desire some kind of evaluation to 
be made as to the value of the investment. And they might wish 
at some time to charge a reasonable fee for the expense of doing 
that valuation, and then they would charge that to the member’s 
account. 
 
And I suppose the theory would be that in some cases it might 
be more fair for the member concerned to pay that fee than for 
all the members, you know, to pay the fee where really the cost 
of the service relates to that one member. 
 
And I should advise, Mr. Chair, that I have a House amendment 
to clause 1 of the Bill. And I don’t know if you want me to 
present that at the present time or whether you wish me to 
present that at another time. 
 
The Chair: — Minister, we thank you for advising of a House 
amendment. We would need the amendment before we finish 
Clause 1. Now whether it’s immediately or . . . probably present 
the amendment now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the amendment is simply to amend 
clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out the 1999 and 
changing it to 2000 so that the title should not be The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1999. The title 
should be The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2000. Really more of a typographical amendment than anything 
else. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Now if I could, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
going back to your earlier response for fee-for-services, I 
understand then it’s an enabling amendment to your Act. 
 
Who then, who then decides whether a fee can be determined or 
should be subjected? Is it the management or does it come back 
to the management of the fund or does it come back for 
approval to any kind of a legislative committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would be a decision for the board of 
trustees of the plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
don’t really have any other questions pertaining to this one, and 
we’re prepared to allow it to move forward, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member for Lloydminster for that. 
 
Committee members, what we have to deal with first is the 
amendment to Clause 1 as moved by the Minister of Finance. 
The amendment will read: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1999” and 
substituting “The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 
Act, 2000”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the opposition 
for their co-operation with respect to moving the Bill along to 
third reading, and I will move that we report the Bill with 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Minister, are you . . . the Minister of Finance, 
we have the same minister, the same official? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Minister of Finance is still the same 
minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, and we still have as executive 
director, Mr. Brian Smith, and he will still be the same official. 
 
The Chair: — This is wonderful news. Thank you for that 
humour, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Humour aside, 
we’re going to try and get on with a couple of other questions if 
we could on this particular Bill. 
 
We’ve had several members of the opposition discussing this 
Bill certainly in debate. And one of the things that we noticed 
that this is, in fact, quite a good news fund and has accumulated 
to a very significant amount. 
 
I guess my opening question, Mr. Minister: how broadly did 
you consult with this with the municipalities and some of the 
employees prior to putting the amendments together in this 
introduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s quite accurate to say, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that we consulted very, very broadly and extensively. We 
distributed the survey about what changes would be desired to 
14,262 active, inactive, and retired members, and also to 772 
different employers. So it’s been very, very expensive 
consultation. 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, because the surplus has run 
up to such a very large extent, the obvious question is, is how 
did this . . . What events occurred? How did this pension plan 
become such a large number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The surplus was run up because there were 
higher than expected returns on investments. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
when there is a downturn in the economy, which will likely 
happen because things are very cyclical, how is this going to 
affect the pension plan? 
 
And I’d like to ask another question while I’m on my feet, Mr. 
Chairman. The pension plan itself, was there any suggestion or 
thought given in the amendments to maybe restructuring the 
amount of fee paid toward the pension plan fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the first question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I can advise the member that all of these changes are 
based upon the advice of actuaries who set out what the surplus 
is and what can be done to use the surplus while, at the same 
time, maintaining the integrity and sustainability of the fund. 
 
Some of these changes are only for five years. But the answer is 
that the actuaries, their job is to give advice about how to deal 
with the surplus. And of course if you don’t deal with the 
surplus, Revenue Canada will deal with it for you by 
deregistering your pension plan. So it has to be dealt with. 
 
In answer to the second part of the question, no, I don’t think 
that either the employers or the employees were interested in 
necessarily changing the rate of contribution to the plan. They 
were more interested — and this is where the consultation was 
done and gave the advice — in improving the benefits to the 
members. And this is what was done. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I just 
wanted to say that there’s no further questions, and we’re 
prepared to move this one along. And I want to extend a thanks 
to your official for helping us through this. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I 
do that I would like to thank the member from Lloydminster 
and the opposition very much for moving the Bill along to third 
reading, and for their very insightful questions with respect to 
the Bill. 
 
And also I’d like to thank Mr. Brian Smith, not only for the 
good work he does every day and throughout the year managing 
the Public Employees Benefit Agency but for his assistance 
here today. 
 
And with that I would like to move that we report the Bill 

without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move that Bill No. 4 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
speak to the House on Bill No. 59, the construction labour 
relations Act. The introduction of this Bill is a clear example, 
another example, of this government’s lack of commitment to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister, in her preamble on the history leading to this Bill, 
stated that unionized contractors, who are having a hard time 
competing with non-unionized companies in the ’80s, created 
spinoff non-unionized companies. We all know that trade 
unions couldn’t organize these spinoff companies, so they lobby 
the government for a Bill that will do the job for them. 
 
At a recent meeting of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce delegates, they passed a number of resolutions to the 
government. One was to scrap proposed changes to The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 which would 
force unionization of non-union contractors. 
 
IPSCO vice-president Mike Carr, of the chamber’s labour 
committee, said the proposed legislation is more objectionable 
than the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement which 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

required 75 per cent of the employees working on Crown 
projects to be unionized. In practical terms, we’re going from 
bad to much, much worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just have to wonder what it’s going to take to 
make this government listen to the people of this province. The 
minister claims that these measures are essential to fair 
competition within Saskatchewan industry and will encourage 
skilled construction workers to remain in our province. That is a 
fallacy. I’d like to know what data the Minister of Labour 
utilized to support this assumption. 
 
The National Institute for Labor Relations Research in Virginia 
states that overall the states with right-to-work laws, banning 
the forced payment of union dues, increased their total 
non-farm employment by an annual of 2.1 per cent in 1998. 
That’s a 40 per cent faster rate of growth than the 
non-right-to-work states growth at only 1.5 per cent. 
 
The institute’s program director, David Kendrick, further states 
that right-to-work states offer an environment of voluntary 
co-operation between labour and management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 59 will force unionized workers to join 
unions, or non-unionized workers will be forced to leave the 
province just to find work. This government in its arrogance 
and determination to protect and expand one of its sources for 
election funding is willing to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve received phone 
calls and letters from both unionized and non-unionized 
workers opposed to this Bill. They feel their freedom of choice 
is being eroded. 
 
One constituent stated: 
 

I don’t deny that there is a place for unions and that history 
shows the work that they have done for labourers over the 
years. However, living in a free country, it has always been 
my right to choose. If it is my wish to join a union, I would 
vote for certification and not to be ordered to do so by a 
democratic government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s determination to protect trade 
unions is at the detriment of all taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The National Institute for Labor Relations Research has some 
remarkable statistics from the US (United States) Bureau of 
Labor Statistics on state-by-state employment reports dating 
back for more than two decades. It shows a consistent pattern of 
higher job growth in right-to-work states than in forced 
unionized states. 
 
Overall the 21 right-to-work states created 10,100 more jobs on 
average than the 20 non-right-to-work states. Eight of the top 
ten states in manufacturing job growth were right-to-work 
states. Between 1990 and 1995, right-to-work states raised their 
non-farm employment by an annual of 4.5 per cent — nearly 
four times the non-right-to-work-states paltry growth of .64. 
 
Right-to-work states have also shown greater gains of income 

growth, and local cost of living figures show that families in 
right-to-work states actually have more real income than 
families in non-right-to-work states. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the statistics that support my 
constituents’ wish to have a choice on whether they want to join 
a union or not. Yet, Mr. Speaker, this government is attempting 
to push a Bill through that will inhibit the rights of workers in 
non-unionized companies and force them to join a union in 
order to work, or else they’re going to have to leave the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since this government has come to power Saskatchewan’s 
population has remained stagnant. Other provinces boast of 
increased population growth, but Saskatchewan is stagnant. 
 
Bills like Bill 59 drive out our workforce and then they drive 
out our companies, Mr. Speaker. North Saskatoon Business 
Association recently released the results of a survey which said 
1 in 10 members were considering moving all of their 
operations out of this province; 1 in 10 businesses are 
considering moving their businesses out of Saskatchewan yet 
this government, instead of choosing to address this very 
potential problem, prefers to bring in more restrictive legislation 
which will push those who are only considering leaving into 
actually leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan desperately needs population 
growth — not population stagnantation. This government 
continues to place restrictions limiting fair competition and 
growth on companies. Even our young people realize this and 
they realize this province has nothing to offer them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my CA’s (constituency assistant) problem is a 
glaring example of the loss of young people. They have one 
daughter working in Switzerland. She intended to go there for 
only one year but she will currently be entering her third year 
there. 
 
Their second daughter, who is graduating this week from high 
school, is planning to go to Switzerland to work as well. Their 
son, who was part of an exchange in Ontario and Thailand last 
summer, returned in January and he’s headed for Calgary for 
employment. From his travels he realizes that Saskatchewan has 
very little to offer him, including the university classes that he 
wants, so he’ll be willing to move to Ontario this fall for 
university. 
 
This is a third-generation family farm, and their older son 
recently commented that even though he’s enjoying farming 
this spring, he knows there is no future for him on the farm. 
And the younger son, who is still at home, unequivocally states 
that if the farm is left to him he’s going to sell it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my CA and her husband do not want their children 
living out of province but they know there is no future for them 
here in Saskatchewan in the place they have proudly called 
home. They know that Bills like Bill 59 will continue to drive 
companies and the workforce out of Saskatchewan until only 
our seniors, who have no choice, will be left to stay here. 
 
Madam Minister, in her introduction of Bill 59, The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000, 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

stated that, with the passage of this Bill, the building trade 
unions covered by the certification orders that are still in place 
will need to apply to the Labour Relations Board on a company 
by company basis to request a ruling on whether the unionized 
parent company and the non-unionized, spinoff company are 
related. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the boards leaning towards the trade unions, 
it’s a foregone conclusion what the rulings will be. And it 
definitely will not be in favour of the non-unionized workers or 
the companies. 
 
The whole issue of the Labour Relations Board and the laws 
regarding them have been at the forefront of labour relation and 
trade union certification within the targeted manufacturing 
constituency that I could proudly call mine, Mr. Speaker — 
within the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Many are aware of the situation at Doepker’s where workers 
feel they were duped by union representatives into signing a 
union card. They were erroneously led to believe that there 
would be a vote on their right to certify. The majority of the 
workers there were extremely disappointed when the Labour 
Board granted automatic certification for Doepker Industries. 
 
This government has often touted the manufacturing industries 
in my constituency as a shining example of economic 
development. Yet now they are unwilling to listen to them when 
they have a problem with major implications this Bill has to the 
province of Saskatchewan and to their business. 
 
I’d like to read a letter from one of the founders of Doepker 
Industries, Francis Doepker, which is published in the 
Humboldt Journal on April 27, 2000: 
 

As I look back over the years, I observe that the 
community of Annaheim and Doepker Industries have 
survived, in spite of the repeated efforts by people in 
positions of power to punish . . . small town manufacturing 
business, and others in our area, with threatened school 
closures, seemingly for the crime of providing good job 
opportunities for so many people. 
 
I hope that the present attempt by a few of these job 
beneficiaries to again wreck the peace and quiet of our 
people by their union activity will end up turning to (and 
that the community will end up returning to) normal . . . 
when all is said and done. 
 
I made a direct personal plea to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan to take advantage of his position of the 
highest power in . . . (Saskatchewan), to intervene in the 
unfair threat of automatic certification of our company 
workforce by the Labour Board, and to please order that a 
secret ballot vote take place to allow a fair outcome of their 
wishes. 
 
I was disappointed with his answer, which was: “I am sure 
you will understand . . . it would be inappropriate for me as 
(the) Premier of this province to comment on the decisions 
of the Labour Relations Board. I will, however, forward 
your letter to the Honourable Joanne Crofford, Minister of 
Labour, for her consideration.” 

The neglect by both the Premier and (his) minister to act 
on our company’s behalf results in the notice of automatic 
certification of both Annaheim and Moose Jaw plant 
workers. We are asking ourselves who one might have 
judged to turn to for assistance in a case of such unfair 
activity by union activists — maybe Minot or Calgary? 

 
Why couldn’t the freedom to avoid joining a union qualify 
the same as (the) freedom to join? 
 

Mr. Speaker: 
 

In political terms, it’s obvious that both carry the same 
right. The above uncontrolled outcome points to an urgent 
need for changes to the present . . . labour laws before the 
remaining job-supplying companies are subjected to the 
same unjust procedure our company received last week. 

 
For the brother and myself who spent four of the best years 
of our lives in the armed forces, being led to believe we 
were protecting freedom and democracy, we can only feel 
betrayal and disillusionment with the reality before us. 
Plenty of young men died for the cause — can’t our 
legislators feel or see the disappointment in our midst? It 
would be in their interest of protecting our small 
communities that they should do . . . (it). 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Francis Doepker, founder of Doepker 
Industries, wrote this article in the Humboldt Journal this year. 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I thank the hon. member 
for assisting and supporting the call for order, but the Chair will 
be doing that. Order, please! There’ll be ample opportunity . . . 
there will be opportunity for members to enter this debate, and I 
would ask that you allow the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
to continue with her presentation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
says it all. This NDP government prefers to protect the trade 
unions by introducing Bill 59 which will force non-unionized 
workers to join trade unions, yet it is unwilling to make the 
changes to the way the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board 
operates and to The Trade Union Act that Mr. Doepker and 
PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association) and the 
Saskatchewan Party are calling for. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
says scrap this Bill. Mr. Carr of IPSCO says that we’re going 
from bad to much, much worse. Non-unionized workers are 
saying, what about my right to choose? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan is listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan and will not support Bill 59. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate on this Bill at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Vote 53 

 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the hon. 
minister responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And it’s a 
pleasure for me today to introduce the officials for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that are with 
me. To my right we have John Law, the president. And behind 
John is Debbie Koshman, who is vice-president of finance and 
risk management. To the left, Al Moffat, who is vice-president, 
commercial services. Directly behind me would be Garth 
Rusconi, vice-president of accommodation services. And 
diagonally to John would be Paul Radigan, director of financial 
planning. 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
committee, welcome the minister, and we welcome this 
opportunity. 
 
Would like to start off with, can you tell us of any major 
changes that happened in your department last year? Are there 
any major changes . . . do you foresee any major changes 
coming in this current year? 
 
(1515) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Southeast on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — To ask for permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to introduce a constituent of Regina 
South, but someone well-known to all members in this 
legislature since he was a page in the last session. And I am 
referring, of course, to the very fine looking gentleman in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Daniel Abramson. 
 
Daniel and I have had many long and interesting discussions 
about Hebraic culture and Jewish religion. 
 
And I also would like to let you know that Daniel has just been 
accepted into the Ontario College of Art & Design. So I’m sure 
that all members of this Assembly wish him all the best with his 
studies, and that we’re just as proud of him as his family is. 
 
Welcome, Daniel. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Vote 53 

 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the 
member for his question. I think I would say probably he would 
note that the one big change would be the reduction in the grant 
amount allocated to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) by about $12 million. But we would 
note it’s because of the change in the kinds of projects we 
would be involved in. 
 
You’re aware that we have come to near completion on some of 
the work that’s being done for example in the Legislative 
Building and the stabilization of the wing of the building. 
We’ve done extensive work on the Centre of the Arts, and 
that’s been completed, as well as the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campus 
consolidation that’s been underway. And we won’t have nearly 
that magnitude of project work next year. 
 
I think you would probably also note that over the last few 
months we have made announcements with SaskPower for 
example on energy management efficiencies that we can 
achieve in some of our buildings when we work together in that 
way, and some of the environmental projects that we’d be 
entering into. 
 
But I think that would be the one area that I would say you 
would see the reduction in dollars and the big change, and a 
work schedule that’s not as energetic as it has been in the past. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Hon. Minister, the 
overall budget estimate for this year is a whole lot less than last 
year, and can you explain why — and of course you did that. 
But is part of it because of the transfer of the expense to the 
new Crown corporation overseeing the land information 
system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Yes, thank you. Mr. Chairman, and to 
the member opposite, I think it’s SaskGeomatics that you’re 
referring to. We developed the system within Sask Property 
Management and that part of the new land corporation has been 
going over in two phases, the year before and then last year. 
 
So there would be about $2 million of that amount that would 
be allocated to the asset of the SaskGeomatics that’s gone over. 
So the one million this year and one million last. And that’s the 
base computer information system that would be used to 
complete the land project. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Hon. Minister, how 
much space currently leased by your corporation is currently 
unoccupied by government agencies? The properties that you 
have leased — are there some vacancies? And if there are, 
where might they be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. To answer the 
member’s question, we have in total at March 31, 2000, about 
55,424 square metres of vacant space. When it’s considered as 
compared to the entire property management portfolio, the 
usable vacant space is about 3.6 per cent. 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

We have been doing some program consolidation over the last 
three to four years, and we’re seeing to those moves and 
changes either in our own space or leased space, a saving of 
about 3 to $4 million. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would also like to point out to the member that 
where . . . in this area there is an industry standard. The 
standard is about 5 to 7 per cent of vacancy rate, and we’re well 
within, or actually we’re quite well below, that standard. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Are there any special . . . where are 
those locations? Where is the majority of those vacant 
properties? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, we have in the 
portfolio about 1,300 locations. Some are our own space, some 
are leased spaces, and we would be pleased to get together a 
listing of the areas where most of those vacancies occur. And 
then you would know of course that we have in Regina, if you 
look at the old normal school property, the archdiocese 
property. In Weyburn there’s Souris Valley, an amount of space 
there. 
 
So there are a number of locations spread throughout the 
province but we’ll get a list together for you very quickly and 
have that information available, where it’s a large space of 
vacant. If there’s more information the member would require, 
if he’d just ask and we’d provide that. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That is now the 
total . . . that’s the leased and owned property? I asked if there 
was a breakdown. Can you break — when you give me that 
answer — could you break what is leased and what is owned, 
the vacancy rates or those numbers? Is that a possibility? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — That’s . . . we can do that. 
 
Mr. Peters: — What is the corporation’s policy in regards to 
signing long-term leases and what would you consider a 
long-term lease, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I would answer 
the question in this way. When we in ’91 took over the 
portfolio, there were many leases that were longer-term leases, 
and we’ve managed those. And when they would be able to be 
renegotiated, we’ve attempted to do that. 
 
But our policy has been a standard of about five years. So leases 
could be asked to . . . When we put out a proposal call we 
would ask for what a five-year lease might look like, what a 
ten-year lease might look like. But anything beyond a five-year 
lease would require board approval and be very carefully 
considered by board before it would go into anything beyond 
the five-year time frame, because that’s the standard we’ve 
developed and utilized. 
 
Now we do have some northern locations where we’ve entered 
into co-operative arrangements with municipalities to do some 
shared spacing. And it makes some sense in those communities, 
where they want to work together with us to save dollars and to 
provide efficiencies and also to be able to support the 
community providing the programs and services they need. 

And so there may be some of those that from the past are longer 
terms and we’ve still looked at those leases and kept them with 
that arrangement. But that would be the only anomaly that I can 
think of at this time. 
 
So the answer would be: usually a five-year lease. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
does the corporation sublet or rent out any of its space to private 
business or agencies? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. As you would know, our primary focus is to provide 
space for government departments and government services in 
the community. So the vast majority of our space would be 
utilized in that way. 
 
We have entered into some arrangements with the federal 
government to accommodate some of their space. But a very, 
very small fraction of the portfolio might be a sublease for 
whatever the reason could be on a very short-term basis to try 
and accommodate a private group or an individual. 
 
Someone mentioned a location that may for example, if we’ve 
got a space available, that was rented to a dental business for a 
short period of time, those kinds of things. But those would be 
very few times during our portfolio that we would go outside of 
the government, either ourselves or federal. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, 
does this corporation have any property rented in the Wascana 
Oil Building? And if they do, what might it be used for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, the answer to that question 
would be two departments — the Social Services department on 
a five-year lease basis, and the Department of Justice. With 
both those departments together we have about 400 square 
metres. 
 
So it’s been a very specific program that may have asked for 
accommodation of whatever location or whatever. But it would 
be less than 400 square metres with those two departments. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, if a 
Crown Corporation is looking to move, do you have any 
control? Moving from one location to another, do you have a 
definite control or do you have any say into where this 
corporation can move or Crown can move to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chairman, we do not have 
responsibility for Crown facilities and Crown space, 
accommodation, or choices. 
 
What we’ve attempted to do over a number of years is bring 
everyone together and working in a space coordination 
committee to try and understand what each area’s needs are. 
And if there’s an ability, it might be even through Education or 
through some of the Crowns, to say if there’s a location where 
you can co-operate. Or if one space is going to become vacant 
and it could be used by another group, then that’s done through 
the co-operative approach of the committee work. But we do 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

not have the purview of the Crown decision making; that’s a 
separate entity. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, can you give us an update on the renovations 
of the old Plains hospital site to now the SIAST site — is that 
work complete? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Chair, as you 
would know, the SIAST consolidation project is a positive 
addition to the knowledge corridor in Regina. And the project 
remains on schedule with the campuses to be completed there 
moved by the fall to accommodate students in their fall 
location. 
 
And the new classes that are in the facility at present would be 
the agricultural program, with shop space; a welding program, 
with new shop program space; the machine shop program; the 
GMASEP (general motors auto service educational program) 
program; the automotive service technician program; the auto 
body technician program; the early childhood development 
program; the resource centre; the dental program; and the night 
extension classes. 
 
We have a total of five programs that will be relocated there in 
the month of June. And that’s the building system technician 
program; the graphic arts production program; the electronics 
communication technician program; applied photography; and 
new media communications. 
 
There was a pamphlet I got from SIAST to talk about what was 
now available there, and certainly the tour of the building when 
we’re looking at the ability to share the resources and to have 
the space available for many of the trades and technologies that 
are the area that people indicate would be a growth engine in 
our economy, is certainly welcome to the students. 
 
And we’re pleased to be able to accommodate their programs, 
as I said, on the schedule that we allocated and to be able to 
have them in, in total in the fall programming. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So is the 
renovations complete or not? That’s the question I asked. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — No, it’s not complete. But I would say 
that it is substantively complete by the end of July. And we do 
have areas there that will also be spaces for future program 
needs or growth or development. So there are spaces that you 
note when you with the student body enjoy the new campus, 
you will note that there are areas that are set aside for that. 
 
But within the budget and the consolidation moves that we were 
asked to do, they will be for the most part complete by the end 
of July. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What was the 
original budget to renovate this building to its present . . . what 
was the original budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — That, Mr. Chair, as you would note 
through budget allocations that have been before you — we 
were allocated $29 million for the project. We have committed 
authorizations for expenditures that total $21.6 million, 

uncommitted authorizations for expenditures of about 4 to $5 
million, and for a total project cost to date of $26.2 million. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So the other 
overruns were carried by the Regina Health Board then. Is that 
what you’re suggesting — the overruns on this project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, I can say that our 
responsibility began once the health board decommissioned the 
building and vacated the building, and then our project started. 
So Project ’98 and the health board and whatever, all of those 
numbers that you saw in the Provincial Auditor and the 
responsibility of the health board, would be those 
responsibilities. 
 
Our numbers begin when we move in to begin the project we 
were asked to do, which would be the consolidation of the 
SIAST campuses and to provide the programming. And it was 
our hope, and now we see it almost within our grasp, to have all 
of the students there by the fall schedule and semester. 
 
So we have managed the program very carefully. I can say that 
it’s consumed many, many hours of work by our officials, and 
they’ve been very diligent every step along the way, reporting 
to me every step along the way. And we have no cost overruns 
from our perspective of the SIAST project. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are all of the . . . 
Mr. Chairman, are all of the students now going — that are in 
the SIAST program — are they all going to be going to that 
facility or are there going to be other facilities in the . . . within 
the city limits of Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the 
question is . . . and probably would be more correctly asked of 
our Minister of Post-Secondary Education, but I’ll try it. 
Because I really wouldn’t say to him 100 per cent for certain, 
are there any stragglers or any programs anywhere else within 
the city. 
 
But what we were asked to do for SIAST was to have a fully 
integrated facility that would be in the location of the 
knowledge corridor and have the synergy and the dynamism 
that would be the relationship with the university and so on. 
 
So we were asked to consolidate eight campuses into one. And 
all of the benefits of resources and students in one location 
coming together, has in our minds been accomplished. 
 
I will endeavour to find out for you if there’s a program we’re 
not quite certain of — because ours was the space requirement 
— whether perhaps a new program was set up that couldn’t be 
accommodated. But what we were asked to put into the 
program space has . . . will be complete by the end of July. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, and 
Madam Minister, what happened to the old building, or what’s 
going to happen to the old building that SIAST was in 
formerly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank the member opposite for the 
question. There were some locations . . . it’s not just one 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

location, and he may have a particular location he’d like to 
question us about. But there were many locations. The ones that 
we had leased for SIAST, the leases no longer exist, and those 
will be savings to government. 
 
The buildings that we own, again perhaps through the space 
coordination committee or through knowledge of other 
government programs and services, we would attempt to have 
adaptive reuses for those locations. 
 
So the answer would be, the leases are no longer for SIAST 
programming. And the other ones that we own, we’ll try and 
accommodate a reuse. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
Madam Minister, are there other buildings being used for 
education and post-education that are owned by the 
corporation? Or as minister . . . (inaudible) . . . you know, 
controlled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Perhaps, Mr. Chair, if I could for 
clarification, because we were talking about SIAST and 
predominantly Regina. And so I’m not certain if you were 
asking about Regina locations or other locations. Because 
there’s Kelsey of course and there’s a number of other 
institutions that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just Regina. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Just Regina? All right, thank you. 
 
We’ve had eight, as I mentioned. Four were leased; four were 
owned. I did fail to mention that if we aren’t able to have a 
reuse, we would then go through the normal disposal policy that 
government follows for vacant buildings. And so that would go 
into that process. 
 
But as far as we’re aware, unless, as I said, there’s some 
stragglers of SIAST that we can’t think of right now, that would 
be the case. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, and 
Madam Minister, can you give us an update on the restoration 
of the Legislative Building in terms of progress of work and 
also whether or not it’s on budget. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, this is an exciting project, Mr. 
Chair. And certainly, as the chairperson as well of Wascana 
Centre Authority, we all know what this means to the capital 
city of our province. 
 
So I get quite excited when I want to talk about this, because I 
also know that we’ve worked with students on web sites to 
share information as it goes along. And of course you saw the 
school group the other day that did the time capsule. 
 
There were other students that made mock-ups of the building 
and the work that was being done. And we did discover 
workers’ tools from the original construction. And so there’s so 
many good things to talk about. 
 

And I guess the acceptance of the community — that they really 
take pride in the seat of government and want to see it restored 
for future generations. So I’ve had all kinds of comments like 
that as well. 
 
To the member’s direct question about where we’re at in the 
project and what the project was budgeted at. We began the 
project, which would be a four-year program, in 1997 and it 
started with the foundation stabilization part of the program. 
 
Phase one included stabilizing the building’s foundation and 
upgrading the underground mechanical work and encasing the 
perimeter walls in concrete. And so there’s approximately 1,800 
precast concrete piles installed to support the foundation. I 
know some members took an opportunity to go down under 
with their hard hats. 
 
And now we can say that, including the filling of the 
underground entrance that was completed about October 1 of 
1999, we were allocated for that part of the program $10 
million. And we expended about $9.6 million and pretty close 
to the time frame that was allocated to us to complete that part 
of the work. 
 
You’ve seen the results of phase two. It’s interesting in historic 
buildings to try to live up to fire code and accessibility 
standards. And we’re trying to do that and managed that very 
well. We began that in the fall of 1999 and it was tendered out 
for about $3.5 million. We’re hoping that within this current 
year we’ll be complete. 
 
So with that we believe that . . . the original budget schedule for 
us was $20 million, including both phase one and two, as well 
as the consulting, the design work, and any of the other costs 
associated with rehabilitation of the building. We’re very 
hopeful that we’ll be within the allocated amount to us. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Going to a 
different line of thinking, how many cars, or how many vehicles 
are in the government fleet? And what is the life — making it 
even more difficult — what is the life expectancy of a vehicle? 
And how many do you plan to replace in this one year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Okay. Our fleet grand total would be 
4,257 vehicles. Generally the standard is about eight years or 
160,000 kilometres. Usually those standards are developed to 
provide for the optimum efficiency, but also your concern is 
you have people who drive all over the province to provide 
programs and services. So I’m very mindful of safety as well, 
although we have been getting over 200,000 kilometres out of 
many, many of our vehicles. 
 
And this year, or the past year to date, we’re going to be 
purchasing about 239 vehicles and we’ll be leasing about 298 
vehicles for a total cost of about, oh, around $6 million. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, can you tell me what the maintenance cost for 
that fleet would be for one year? I mean just take an average 
year of what that might be. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — We’re trying to look for that 
information. If we get it before the end of our session, we’d 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

certainly provide it, or we’ll endeavour to get it to you as 
quickly as we can. 
 
Certainly a fleet that size, if you know what your own family 
vehicles are like, and if you’ve got teenagers, that adds to your 
own personal fleet — there’s an expense to that. And we’ll try 
and get that number to you as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, and 
Madam Minister, does your department manage the Liquor 
Board properties in Saskatchewan? And if you do, can you tell 
me what the cost of the new building in North Battleford might 
be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, for the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority, what we predominantly provide for 
them is security, so we don’t have that. And with my other hat 
on, I don’t have that information available this afternoon. But I 
could get that information to you. 
 
We, again through the space coordination, would try and look at 
alternate uses, or if there’s something coming up that someone 
else would be able to utilize, we would try and accommodate 
that. But I don’t have the price of that particular building, and I 
can get that for you. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Chair, the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy is going to ask a number of questions at this time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I would like to ask you a few 
questions about Souris Valley Extended Care hospital building 
in Weyburn. First of all, what are your plans for the building 
now housing Souris Valley Extended Care hospital? And does 
the health board lease the whole building and grounds from 
SPMC or just the portion that they use, and what do they pay? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a few 
responses. I guess I’ll try and cover what you’re asking. 
 
The first one is that the health district then would pay for the 
amount of buildings that they utilize. So they have an 
agreement with the amount of space they would need and they 
would pay for the space that they’re in. And we don’t allocate 
to them costs for other parts of the building that are occupied by 
other people. 
 
We are not responsible, SPMC, for the building or the operation 
of the building, but we are responsible for the maintenance. 
 
And since I’ve taken this portfolio on, we have had some 
interest by outside investors and some foreign investors in the 
adaptive reuse of some of the building or perhaps all of it. We 
try to follow those up with great enthusiasm and zeal. As you 
know, it would be quite a benefit to your community and to a 
very historic location. 
 
I think the most recent one is a foreign investor and we’re, with 
as much expediency and diligence as we can, following up on 
that show of interest. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So my 

understanding then is that I have also been contacted by this 
same company, and so you are entertaining them being allowed 
to buy the building and the grounds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — To the member opposite, through 
yourself, Mr. Chair. We had an initial inquiry — I think we’re 
talking the same individuals. And when we have an expression 
of interest, we have quite an information package available to 
the group or the individual. 
 
And there’s documentation there that would show the condition 
of the building; what’s available in the building; the square 
footage; what state some of the building is in; and the other, you 
know, is occupied by whom; and what would be the, I guess, 
program area — those kinds of things. So we’ve got quite an 
extensive package we provide. 
 
We have done that for this individual and haven’t heard a 
response, I think, to date. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, so you are waiting for them 
to now respond back to you, if I understand it correctly. 
 
I guess, Madam Minister, there has been a lot of concern in our 
constituency that Souris Valley could be demolished. Is there 
any intent by your department to do so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member’s 
question. We have no formal plans for demolition of the 
building. There are areas, as she would know, that are not used 
and we would have to have plans in place to decommission 
those areas and to provide safety and to meet those 
requirements. 
 
We try to look at all possible options within government for the 
use, and the last tour I had there, had some regional college 
space I believe. There was a wonderful centre providing 
programs for parents and children, and those kinds of activities. 
They spread a little bit when they get in there because the space 
is so nice for children to go racing down the halls. So that’s a 
hard one — to keep them within the space allocated. 
 
But that’s the way we like to do that, is to look at all of the 
internal uses within government, if there’s something we can 
accommodate. We’ll go to external people through again the 
coordination of space such as the Crowns and see if there’s 
anybody who needs space. 
 
And we will then . . . as I’ve mentioned earlier, if there’s 
opportunities or we get wind of anyone who would invest or 
want to have that building, we go after that with much vigour 
and great zeal. But at this time you would know in advance if 
there is any way we would want to dispose of parts of the 
building and it goes through a formal process. 
 
I guess that’s all I can report at this time on the building. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, if a local group was 
interested in using part of Souris Valley building, would they 
have to . . . would they work through your department or would 
they have to work through the local health board — part of the 
unused portion of the building? 
 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, to the question as posed — 
they would deal with us. They would deal with SPMC. We 
would look at the requirements that they have, if it’s impacting 
on any of the other clients, for example, that are utilizing the 
building. And as you know, the health facility would have 
people who would need to know their program’s not disrupted. 
 
If it were subleasing of some of the health district space, they 
would work with the health unit there. But most of the time it 
would be with us. And then we would look at entering into 
agreement with them on a cost recovery basis. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I just have one more 
question. What is the selling price for Souris Valley and 
grounds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, to anyone listening, have 
we got a deal for you. 
 
This is under negotiation at any time. We’d certainly look at 
what we could accommodate, and we’d be delighted to do so. 
So I think this, as the member opposite would know, could be 
entertained in a very positive way. And if anyone were willing 
to look at making a deal with us, we’d be glad to look at what 
they had to offer. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Madam Minister, I just have a couple of questions. One of them 
— when you rent or lease property in a community and then 
lease it back to a department or to an office, do you have a set 
amount of markup that you make between those two prices? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. With this terminology, if 
it’s an all-in lease it’s a pass through the departments. There’s 
no additional charges. There would be a very small 
administrative cost to manage the lease or whatever, but it’s 
very, very small. So we usually just say it’s on the cost . . . 
straight cost-recovery basis. There’s no markup. 
 
There may be times where it’s not an all-in lease and so we 
would lease the space and SPMC might provide for example the 
security, some of the maintenance, whatever the requirement of 
the space, they would come to us. And again, that would be a 
cost-recovery charge back to the program area that would 
request that of us. 
 
But I think for most instances, if it’s a all-in lease, it’s cost 
recovery. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
just a couple of very quick questions. How many leases are held 
on buildings that formerly housed rural service centres? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member 
opposite, if he doesn’t mind, could I ask for clarification? Are 
you saying how many leases do we hold on rural service centres 
now or how many we did hold and we’re now not holding any 
longer? Could you clarify it for me? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — I was curious, Madam Minister, as to 
how many leases are held on buildings that formerly housed 
rural service centres. How many leases are held on buildings 
where the rural service centres no longer exist? 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, there’s many pieces of 
information my very qualified, talented people have in their 
mind, this is not one of them. But we’re going to research that 
and get to you as quickly as we can. 
 
We do have numbers on the leases that we hold, and then some 
of the centres we were into leases and no longer into them, and 
some we may hold the lease because it was long-term, that kind 
of thing. So we’ll break that detail out for you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam 
Minister. I would very, very much appreciate that. And if as 
well, you could indicate the length of lease remaining on some 
of these buildings that housed the rural service centres, as I say, 
until they were closed down. 
 
And the other piece of information that might be interesting as 
well, is how many of those are now vacant. And after the rural 
service centres were closed, how many of those with leases in 
effect remain vacant to this day? I would appreciate that. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, what I can respond as far as 
we know right now is we don’t have any vacant spaces that 
were leased before, so there are no vacancies. 
 
And I just know that the member opposite doesn’t want me to 
start in on what kind of leases and what kind of arrangements 
were made from the past that were either very difficult to get 
out of or were not a standard kind of an arrangement, so I won’t 
go there. 
 
We will get the information he asks. 
 
Mr. Peters: — We thank you. This is all the questions we have, 
and we thank you, Madam Minister. We thank the group that 
came with you. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (SP01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Vote 53 

 
Subvote (SP01) agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the 
members opposite for their questions. I think, as we noted by 
the number of people who rotated through the question chair, 
that we do provide services throughout the province. And we 
thank you for the interest in the portfolio. 
 
I’d like to thank my officials that came to help me and support 
me through the estimates today. Thank you very much. 
 
The Chair: — That’s fair enough, Minister, but we’re not quite 
done. We’re not quite done unless you would like to give up the 
supplementary amounts. 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

Vote 53 agreed to. 
 
(1615) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Finance 
to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 
with me today, to my immediate left, Dr. Paul Boothe, who is 
the deputy minister of Finance; and to his left is Mr. Terry 
Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller; and to my right is Mr. 
Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister of the revenue 
division in the Department of Finance. 
 
Behind Mr. Rog is Mr. David Pratt, who is the senior analyst in 
the taxation and intergovernmental affairs branch of the 
department. Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle who is the assistant 
deputy minister of the treasury board branch. Behind Dr. 
Boothe is Mr. Bill Van Sickle who is the executive director of 
the corporate services division; and behind Mr. Paton is Mr. 
Kevin Banman, who is the senior analyst with the economic and 
fiscal policy branch of Finance. 
 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
may I welcome you again and your officials here. I have just a 
few questions that I’d like to go through. 
 
First of all, I’m going to be looking at some of the material that 
was presented in your budget statement under the quoted vote. 
 
When I look at the summary of expenditures for your 
department, Mr. Minister, I notice that there’s been some 
changes from the estimated ’99-2000, up to the estimated 
2000-2001 which we are presently looking at. And if I could I’d 
like to just get a bit of an overview as to why these particular 
changes. 
 
Now the first one that I had marked in my view . . . or in my 
book rather, is the increase in the administration budget. It 
looks to me like that increase, by my calculation, is about 18 or 
19 per cent. And I wondered if you could give me a reason for 
that kind of increase, and why it might be justified in this 
particular budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, there is an increase in administrative 
expenditures in the Department of Finance. 
 
The first reason is . . . the member may recall, Mr. Chair, when 
we had Dr. Al Johnson here in the Legislative Chamber and he 
was introduced and I announced the establishment of the Al 
Johnson Chair in Public Policy which is . . . the first occupant 
of which is Dr. Hartley Furtan. 
 
And that is an administrative expense that has been added to the 
budget of the Department of Finance, which we’re happy to do 
because we think we can get some good research and work 
done in how to deal with the issue of subsidies in agricultural 

commodities and the problems we’re having with the World 
Trade Organization and so on. So that’s one reason. 
 
A second reason is we are required as government to improve 
public information technology to meet the public’s desire to see 
more government access and services on-line. And what we 
mean by that is that the business community for example, 
instead of communicating with the government by ordinary 
mail and having us communicate with them by ordinary mail, 
more and more expects government, and I think rightly so, to 
set up a system whereby they can communicate electronically. 
And that of course comes with a cost because we have to set 
that up. 
 
And I suppose the answer there would be that we are going to 
be providing better service but there’s a cost to providing the 
better service and we have to develop the infrastructure to do 
that. 
 
Thirdly, we are enhancing accountability by voluntarily tabling 
an annual report, which we didn’t previously do, but which is 
consistent with the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor 
and the accountability project that is going on throughout 
government. 
 
So the brief answer is: costs up because of more research to 
support the agricultural community, better service to our 
customers, and better accountability to the legislature and the 
people of the province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
just to follow up on that a little bit. The new Chair that was 
established, currently occupied by Dr. Furtan, I agree that is 
probably going to — at least I would hope that that’s going to 
— provide us with some insight because it allows Dr. Furtan to 
focus specifically on some topics. And I’ve already had the 
opportunity to chat with him and I’m looking forward to some 
of his reports that I’m sure will be coming. 
 
Refresh my memory if you could, Mr. Minister. Is that a . . . 
How long a term is that? 
 
And following that, if I could ask another question based on 
your response: the annual report that you’re talking about, is 
that a report that we might be able to construe as a business plan 
for your department? 
 
And the third question would be that the new infrastructure that 
you’re putting in place for electronic transfer of information, is 
that anticipated to be a one-year expenditure so that we should 
be able to expect the administration budget to be reduced from 
this year in ongoing years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The term of the Chair is one year for Dr. 
Furtan, although the Chair has been established on a permanent 
basis so that when his tenure is up, which would coincide with 
the end of the fiscal year, then somebody else would occupy 
that Chair. So it’s an ongoing expenditure. 
 
The plan of the annual report of the department, certainly that 
will attempt to increase and improve accountability in the 
future. But that very much is a work in progress. We’re still in 
the process of trying to come up with a system whereby we will 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

be putting forward goals and ways in which to measure the 
performance of government so that we can better judge. And 
that will be evolving over time. 
 
With respect to the question about the information technology, 
that will really be an ongoing expense. There will be some 
set-up costs, but there will be ongoing operational costs in order 
to bring government on line for the business community and 
others that need to communicate with us in a timely way. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, the annual report stating goals, I’m a very big 
supporter of establishing goals and establishing visions. And so 
I think that’s going to be a very valuable tool. And I’m hoping 
that it will contain the vision that you foresee coming in the 
next little while in your particular department. 
 
If I could I’d like to just quickly look at some of these other 
items. Again in the summary of expenditures, there’s one item 
that I flagged under budget analysis that has increased rather 
significantly. That’s a 12 per cent increase from your estimated 
1999-2000. And I’m wondering why in this particular year 
there was such an increase needed for your budget analysis as 
opposed to in previous years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is primarily the new accountability unit, 
which is housed within the budget division. And the 
accountability unit will, as the member said we should, and I 
agree, be telling us how to set out goals for government and 
government departments, and how to measure them. 
 
And in the next year’s annual report of the Department of 
Finance, for example, we will set out goals for the department 
that we wish to meet and which we want the public to judge us 
by so that they can see if we’ve done what we said we were 
going to do. 
 
But beyond that, we also have people in this division who are 
developing a way to bring that kind of accountability to the 
government as a whole. And the increased expense is the 
expenditure of developing the accountability process in 
government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to follow 
up a little bit on that accountability unit that you referred to. 
 
How many people are involved in that? And would I be correct 
in assuming that that will be a continuing . . . you’ll be utilizing 
that unit continually and therefore that particular budget 
analysis item will be increased over a longer period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is for individuals working in the 
accountability unit. And we anticipate that for the time being 
they will continue to work until we have all of the departments 
on line, so to speak, with respect to better strategic planning, 
goal setting, and performance-based management. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there’s another 
item that I would ask if you would clarify a little bit in terms of 
its role, and that’s the personnel policy secretariat that is 
showing about a 30 per cent increase in its numbers over the 

last estimate. 
 
Would I be correct in assuming that some of those people are 
contributing to the overall policy development, or budget 
analysis, or the annual report? It almost appears to me that 
there’s a redundancy here that maybe I’m not aware of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, it would not be correct, Mr. Chair, to 
assume there’s a redundancy. 
 
The role of the personnel policy secretariat is to advise 
government — not just the Department of Finance — but 
government as a whole with respect to labour relations matters. 
And this is an ongoing function. It is not related to the 
accountability aspect of the work going on in the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
clarification. Mr. Chairman, could you give me the reason why 
that increase is so significant at 31 per cent. And I know 
percentages are maybe not a good indicator but it’s certainly an 
item that draws a red flag. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is because an additional employee has 
been added to that secretariat. And it’s such a small secretariat 
that, you know, when you add one person, you’re going to have 
a large increase. But the amount of money being spent — 
$359,000 — well I mean it is a large amount of money but in 
the overall scheme of things and across the government it isn’t. 
But the addition of one employee is the reason for the increase 
in the expenditure. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I agree that these, as I 
mentioned, that these percentages can kind of throw us away 
from reality. 
 
Talking about the staffing component, I see an increase there of 
about 6.4 per cent. Now you’ve covered some of the items that 
have . . . you’ve talked about an increase in personnel, the 
accountability unit as an example, and based on your last 
question, 6.4 per cent increase in personnel or in staffing — or 
FTE (full-time equivalents) staffing — is significant, and I 
would ask if you would comment on that particular number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure about the 6 per cent 
increase the member’s referring to. The number of full-time 
equivalent positions in the Department of Finance is going from 
394 individuals . . . or full-time positions to 419 which would 
be an increase of 25 people. 
 
But I should point out that 11 of those would be in the 
Department of Finance and the rest would be at the Public 
Employees Benefit Agency, and the costs of those would be 
paid by the members of various pension plans as opposed to the 
General Revenue Fund funded by the taxpayers. 
 
Of the 11, there really is an increase of 11 in the department. 
They are as follows. One is the research Chair that we’ve 
already discussed. One is working in the area of electronic 
commerce; four in the farm fuel program. We’re beefing that up 
because, as the member knows, in the last budget we also 
removed the cap on the rebate so there will be some more work 
to be done there. I might add that there is some other 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

improvements we’d like to make there, such as point-of-sale 
changes as opposed to a rebate system, as we’ve discussed here 
before. Five more in the accountability unit. 
 
So that’s the sort of increase that we have and the reasons for 
the increase, which all are providing services or programs that 
were not provided before, or were not provided in the same way 
before. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, on 
that last point, your point about trying to make further 
amendments to include the possibility of point-of-sale record 
for fuel exemption, I think is an excellent direction and I would 
certainly encourage you to keep moving in that direction. 
 
I would like to briefly talk a little bit about the miscellaneous 
payment section, and I’m referring to page 61 or (FI08). When 
I’m looking down those programs, the large difference from the 
estimated 1999-2000 to the current one that we’re looking at is 
rather a significant decrease. And when I was looking at that 
number I was trying to understand what that meant under the 
heading, allowance for doubtful accounts. 
 
Can you tell me what the doubtful accounts means in that 
particular line entry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well an allowance for doubtful accounts of 
course is simply a description of the amount of bad debts that 
we think we might have — that is, people that don’t pay their 
bills. It may be somebody that owes money from education and 
health tax and they don’t remit it and they go bankrupt, and you 
can’t collect it from them because they’ve gone bankrupt — 
something like that. 
 
And it’s going down simply because the number and amount of 
bad debts that we have has been going down. I’m told that some 
time ago it was up to 1.9 million, and this year it will be 1.6 
million. 
 
Nothing very remarkable about it. It’s a large sum of money. I 
suppose in the scheme of things, when you have government 
revenues of about 5.7 billion, it’s a relatively small percentage 
of our accounts. But you always have to allow for the 
possibility that there may be individuals, perhaps through no 
fault of their own, who have a business go under, may owe the 
government and other creditors some money, can’t pay it. 
We’re in the same boat as other people. Sometimes we don’t 
get it — get the money. 
 
The allowance for doubtfuls, we’re thinking this year about 1.6 
million. I see a few years ago it was 1.9 million, so we’re going in 
the right direction. And that’s the answer. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, the 
reason that I referred to that is I was wondering if there is in fact 
any taxpayer money at risk, or anticipating money at risk. 
 
I asked a similar question to your colleague, the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development, and it was explained to 
me that in terms of investment funding, there is a percentage set 
aside which is a recognized or required percentage set aside for 
accounts that may become questionable. 
 

Is there a particular policy with regards to the doubtful account 
section? And again, would that imply that there’s any taxpayers’ 
money at risk? And if you’re not going to use the 1.6, what will 
happen to that particular fund? It will be unspent, or absorbed 
somewhere else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well if we didn’t have bad accounts to the 
extent estimated, then the funding would simply lapse at the end 
of the fiscal year. 
 
I might add that, generally speaking, when your allowance for 
doubtfuls is going down, that’s a sign of a more buoyant economy, 
that the economy is doing better. 
 
In terms of taxpayers’ money being at risk — no, I don’t think I’d 
describe it that way. It simply really is a . . . there’s an account 
receivable of government to all the people that may owe 
government money. Some of them may not be able to pay and 
you have to allow for the fact that you may have some bad 
debts. 
 
And those of us who have been in any kind of business or 
profession know that that’s just part of business life, that there’s 
always some accounts that you’re not going to collect. 
Government is in no different position, but actually the amount 
that we don’t collect is really very, very small compared to the 
size of government overall. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to move to a different area if I could now. And I’d like to 
move to a comment that was made in the auditor’s report and 
I’d like to go back to the spring of 1999 auditor’s report. 
 
And if I could just quickly, Mr. Minister, one of the 
recommendations that was given — and I’ll just quote that if 
you wish — one of his recommendations under the section, 
pensions, was, and I quote: 
 

We recommend the Government calculate its pension 
liability for each of its defined benefit pension plans using 
a consistent estimate for inflation. 
 

Was that calculation done for its liability for each of those 
defined pension plans? That’s of course over a year ago, and 
I’m just following up to see if that work had been done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, there are several parties who are 
involved in coming up with assumptions that they’re using in 
order to estimate, you know, pension liabilities and so on. We 
encourage them to use a common set of assumptions, but not all 
of these people are actually under the direction and control of 
the Department of Finance. 
 
So they will use the assumptions that are based upon the advice 
they get from professionals that they may be employing to give 
them advice. And that may vary from individual to individual, 
which isn’t surprising because you’ll see, for example, The 
Conference Board of Canada may estimate a certain rate of 
inflation that may be different from what the Royal Bank may 
say, which may be different from what Saskatchewan Finance 
will say. 
 
And so generally speaking we encourage them to use common 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

assumptions. But they are not under our direct control, and so 
they will come up with assumptions which will vary according 
to the opinions of the expert advisers that they themselves 
employ in the teachers’ pension plan, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and so on. 
 
And so while we understand the recommendation of the 
Provincial Auditor and have some sympathy for it — although 
we don’t consider it to be a major problem — you will get some 
variations. 
 
I think I could also add though, that another way to look at it 
would be you’d probably have a problem if the variations were 
very large. But most of the assumptions, if not all of them, tend 
to be within a certain reasonable range that most people would 
say well, they’re all within a reasonable range and perhaps 
that’s the best way to look at it. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
guess you realize I’m trying to get to the area of pensions 
generally, and maybe unfunded pensions. 
 
But first of all I noticed that there was another recommendation 
in that report of 1999. And let me quote again: 
 

We continue to recommend that the Government should 
establish a task force to study the many issues related to 
pension plans. 
 

And now I notice in the year 2000, the spring report of 2000, a 
further note from the auditor saying that: 
 

The Government has not yet established a pension plan 
task force. 
 

And even though it’s been recommended before, these issues 
may still be outstanding. 
 
Is there an indication from yourself, Mr. Minister, that maybe 
that kind of a task force might be forthcoming to look at the 
very significant problem with these pension plans, particularly 
the unfunded portion of the pension plans? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I had indicated, actually at the time 
the Provincial Auditor’s report was released, I had publicly 
indicated that in fact we are undertaking a review with respect 
to the public sector pension plans. And we intend to return to 
the Public Accounts Committee with a report as to the review, 
and certainly follow up with a report back to the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll be looking 
forward to that. As you may know, I sit on that committee so 
we’ll be looking forward to that. 
 
And with regards to the unfunded pension plan, the question 
that was posed by the auditor in 1999, and it’s, I think, a 
continuing question: how and when the government will fund 
the unfunded pension liability of 2.9 billion? 
 
And I noticed in the 2000 spring report there is an item showing 

a graph that indicates the government would require about 200 
million each year by the year 2003 to pay these pension plans. 
The numbers are becoming hugely significant. And I’m 
wondering what kind of control that you may want to put in 
place or is some kind of a guarantee or discussion paper that 
people that are depending upon these pensions are in fact 
confident that there is money there for them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is some confusion that surrounds the 
issue in the sense that . . . and I’m sure the Provincial Auditor’s 
office would agree. This is not a new issue. The issue of the 
unfunded pension liabilities in the province of Saskatchewan 
has been ongoing since actually about the 1930s. The unfunded 
liability has been accumulating since the 1930s. 
 
And the reason I point that out is, when somebody says to me, 
what are you going to do to meet the unfunded pension 
obligations, you know, in the future; I say, well don’t ask me 
what we’re going to do, we are doing it. The province of 
Saskatchewan has been meeting the unfunded pension liability 
obligations each and every year going back many decades. And 
the Provincial Auditor is really pointing out that we’re going to 
have to continue meeting the unfunded pension obligations as 
we have been doing and there’s an expense to the taxpayers 
when you do that. 
 
Having said that, I think it’s important to say this: that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has always met its obligations to 
the people that have retired from the public service by meeting 
the pension obligation to them in the defined benefit plans that 
they have been a part of. And the Government of Saskatchewan 
will continue to meet its obligations so that they can rest 
assured that the pension they’ve been guaranteed continues to 
be paid. 
 
Having said that, the question then is, well is there a plan to 
deal with the unfunded pension liabilities? And one thing that I 
had pointed out is that there is not only a plan, but that plan was 
actually implemented beginning in the mid-’70s. 
 
Because in the mid-’70s, Mr. Blakeney as premier and Mr. 
Robbins as the minister of Finance — and we all owe them a 
great deal of gratitude — said, you know we have a continuing 
problem with unfunded liabilities, let’s do something about it. 
 
And what they did at that time was to say that every employee 
that entered the public service after a certain time — it might 
have been 1979 or 1980, I can’t remember — went into a fully 
funded plan so that their contributions and the employer 
contributions would be matched. It would become a defined 
contribution plan rather than a guaranteed benefit plan, and 
there wouldn’t be any unfunded liability for the taxpayers to 
worry about. 
 
Had they not done that, the unfunded liability that we have 
would be even more astronomical than it is, and perhaps even 
unmanageable, and could have very disastrous consequences 
for the province and the taxpayers, not to mention people that 
need their pensions. 
 
My point is, as a result of what was done in the 1970s, the 
problem of unfunded liabilities of pensions will eventually go 
away. It will go away in approximately the year 2060. That’s a 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2000 

long time, but it won’t last forever as it otherwise would have. 
And it won’t be nearly as big as it otherwise would have. 
 
And I think after about the year . . . about 2015, it starts to 
decline. So instead of getting bigger, it gets smaller. So we’ve 
got 15 years of increase and then we’ve got 45 years of 
decrease, at which point it will eventually dwindle because the 
last person, who probably will be over 100 years old, will die. 
But so my point is that we have done a great deal actually to 
deal with this problem over the last few decades. There’s some 
good planning that has gone on. The plan is that although the 
problem grows to 2015, it then becomes less and eventually it 
disappears. 
 
Having said that, that doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t look at 
whether we can do better. And if we could do better, it would 
not involve I think getting rid of the problem all together; it 
would involve having some extra contributions today, say, to 
decrease the amount of contribution you might need to make in 
the year 2010 — something like that. 
 
And I think we need to look at that, and I think also that we 
need to report back as part of the review that will go to the 
Public Accounts Committee whether there might be some way 
that we could smooth the bump. So let’s have a look at that, and 
the department is currently examining that and studying it. We 
want to discuss that with the Public Accounts Committee and, 
Mr. Chair, the member, who is a member of that committee. 
 
But I just repeat that this is not a new problem. It’s a problem 
that is very much in hand, has been going on for many decades, 
and the real resolution was in the 1970s, because of the very 
good work that Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Robbins, and the Department 
of Finance did at that time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, the way you describe it, it 
sounds that the news is rather good. And so I’m anxious to, as 
part of the Public Accounts Committee, get a . . . And I think 
it’s in compliance with one of the recommendations that the 
Department of Finance provide a report to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts showing how the government 
plans to address its future cash requirements for the pensions 
promised. So I’m looking forward to that. 
 
The way you describe the problem as being addressed and will 
dissipate over time seems to be somewhat different than the 
alert that the Provincial Auditor is stating: that by the year 2011 
for instance, the promised pensions, as he terms it, will grow to 
400 million by that particular year and 500 million in fact by 
the year 2020. 
 
That seems to be a little bit different than what you were 
describing to me a moment ago. Would you comment on that 
please, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well I want to make it clear, Mr. 
Chair, to the member, I wouldn’t want to suggest that I don’t 
consider this to be a problem. I think it is a problem and we 
have to be concerned about it. And I think it’s good that we’re 
going to report to the Public Accounts Committee about it. 
 
My point was simply to say that this is a problem that we’ve 
actually had for the last 70 years and to say that . . . when 

people say, well can we deal with it? Well we’ve all been 
dealing with it for years and years. And I think it’s important to 
realize that there also has been a plan in place to eliminate the 
problem over time and most of the problem in fact, let’s say 
would be eliminated over the next 15 or 20 years. 
 
Having said that, yes the Provincial Auditor is right that there 
are big sums of money that are required to meet the unfunded 
pension liabilities. But I would just remind the member, without 
minimizing the problem, that when you look at the problem in 
terms of constant dollars instead of, you know, just gross dollar 
figures, we’re now paying $220 million a year. Yes, it may 
grow to $500 million by 2011, eleven years from now. But 
$500 million in 2011 is a sum less than that today. I don’t know 
what the sum is, but I think the member gets my point. 
 
It will amount to, I’m advised, in real dollar terms about . . . in 
2014 for example, $282 million compared to, in real dollar 
terms, $219 million today. So that although the payment may 
go from 219 million to 500 million, in constant dollar terms it 
really will go up from 219 to 282 — that doesn’t mean it isn’t a 
lot of money — and after that it will decline. 
 
Revenues also tend to grow as the economy grows, so that it 
may become a smaller percentage of the provincial budget. And 
I don’t say any of this to say that it’s a problem that we should 
ignore or anything like that. I only say this, that it’s a problem 
that we have a responsibility to manage. 
 
And there’s a plan in place which has analysed the problem. 
There’s a plan in place to manage the problem to ensure that the 
public treasury has the funds available to meet the pension 
liabilities, as we have been doing, as I say, for the last 70 years 
and as we’ll continue to do. There’s a solid plan in place to 
make sure that we can meet that liability, and that certainly is 
what we will do. 
 
At the same time, I believe that we need to examine whether we 
can maybe set a little bit of money aside to cushion the increase 
from the 220 to 280 essentially, in real dollar terms. If we 
could, for example, maybe the 220 today should be 230 and 
maybe if it was, then 10 years from now it would also be 230, 
something like that. And we need to have a serious look at that. 
 
But in my opinion, given what has been done in the last 22 
years and more, the problem actually is being very well 
managed. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Using the terms 
20 years from now and so on, is a little more important to some 
of us than younger people. So those years go by pretty quickly 
for people like myself. 
 
I’d like to, if I could, just quickly change to maybe one of my 
last areas of concern and that is the fact that . . . and I wanted to 
talk about the Vicq commission if I could for a moment. One of 
the questions that seems to me quite obvious, because the name 
of the Vicq commission, as we call it, is called the Personal 
Income Tax Review Committee, which I think was the original 
mandate, somehow got expanded to include other things like 
the PST (provincial sales tax). 
 
Can you tell me was this committee mandated to expand their 



June 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

review from the income tax? And at what stage of the process 
did that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, their mandate was expanded and it 
was expanded at their request. 
 
The member is correct. The name of the committee is the 
Personal Income Tax Review Committee. And I announced in 
the budget on March 26, 1999 that we would appoint a Personal 
Income Tax Review Committee to review personal income 
taxation in Saskatchewan. Then, I believe approximately May, 
the committee was appointed — which was Dr. Vicq, Shelley 
Brown, and Charlie Baldock. 
 
And in the summer of 1999 after they began their work, the 
committee said to me — at their instigation, not mine — that 
they were forming the opinion that it was necessary to reduce 
income taxes in Saskatchewan by a larger sum than had been 
anticipated by us or by them, but that they felt that in order to 
maintain public services, there was a re-balancing necessary 
because our sales tax is much less here than it is in other 
provinces. 
 
(1700) 
 
And they asked for permission to examine the possibility of 
reducing incomes taxes more than they though we could afford, 
but getting some new additional revenue from sales tax. And I 
said to them that we wanted to have their best opinion as to 
what we should do and that they should consider themselves 
free as an independent committee with no interference from 
government to give us, and indeed all members of the 
legislature and the public, their opinion as to what should be 
done and that they should feel free to say what they thought was 
right and correct and fair. 
 
And so I gave them permission to do that. They then continued 
on with their work, ultimately produced their report which was 
made public on November 17, 1999. And the rest is history, as 
they say, and well-known to all of us. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one 
more question, if I could, for now. Was other tax forms 
considered in a direction to that committee? For instance, the 
corporate income tax or property tax? And was an analysis done 
by anybody in your department based on the PST expansion? 
 
And if any of those analyses were done, can they be made . . . 
can we table it so that we can all have benefit of those particular 
tables? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Chair, no, 
we did not refer to them the question of corporate taxes and the 
like. It was designed to be a committee that would look at 
personal income taxation, and that was their mandate. And then 
as they expanded, to look at the sales tax as well, at their 
request as I described. 
 
In terms of the question: does the department consider the 
impact that the PST expansion will have on the economy, the 
answer would be yes, in the same way that they would consider 
the impact on the economy that the reduced income taxes will 
have. 

And what they try to do — and this isn’t something where they 
publish a study that I can produce for the member — but we 
have a taxation and intergovernmental affairs division of the 
department and we have an economic policy branch of the 
department. And it’s the job of those individuals on an ongoing 
basis — day after day, week after week, year after year — to 
take all of these things into account and then to present to the 
government, but also the opposition, along with the budget, 
their estimates of the rate of economic growth and inflation and 
so on. 
 
And they will estimate that well, if you cut the income taxes as 
we’re being told we should, it will have this effect on the 
economy. If you increase the sales tax, it will have this effect. 
The net impact will be this. 
 
Obviously they think it’s positive, and that’s what they tell us 
and that we’re going to have economic growth. And that seems 
to be the experience thus far as well, because we’ve seen the job 
numbers up considerably. And not just because of the budget, 
but they try to analyze the impact. 
 
And so yes, they do that on an ongoing basis. There’s no study 
that I have to produce to the member. What I get is advice from 
the officials to me which is budgetary advice that goes into the 
preparation of the budget and the presentation of information to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, if 
I could, I’d like to thank the minister for his response, and 
certainly thank the officials that have come to help discuss these 
particular questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I want to thank the hon. member for 
Lloydminster and the minister and his officials. 
 
Would someone like to move that we report progress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If I may, I just want to add to the member 
that we do, it’s been pointed out to me, present a document 
called A Plan for Growth and Opportunity: A Personal Tax 
Reform in Saskatchewan, which is in fact the . . . some analysis 
from the Department of Finance, and that’s presented to the 
legislature with the budget. 
 
And I’d like to thank the hon. member for his assistance today 
and also the officials from the Department of Finance. 
 
And with that, I’d like to move that we rise and report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 
 
 


