





























































Hansard: June 19, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1935 
 June 19, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies Act 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before we formally start the Bill, I’m 
going to invite the Minister of Post-Secondary Education to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To assist 
me on deliberation in committee, to my immediate left is the 
deputy minister of the department, Neil Yeates. Directly behind 
him is Shelley Hoover, the executive director of the institutions 
branch. And behind me is the assistant deputy minister, Lily 
Stonehouse. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, we have a 
few questions with regards to this Bill. And I might start by 
looking at clause 5. It says SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute 
of Technologies) is not an agent of the Crown in right of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder if the minister could explain how . . . the relationship 
SIIT will have with the province and give some examples of 
other existing agencies and so on that might have a similar 
relationship as SIIT would have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member, to 
differentiate between a body which is an agent of the Crown in 
right of Saskatchewan being SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) — if I can just use those two 
by way of comparison — at SIAST the board is appointed by 
the province; Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, 
the province will not be appointing the board. At SIAST there is 
a financial relationship and there is an operating grant that 
comes from the province. In SIIT there is no financial 
relationship or operating grant that exists by virtue of this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, one of our concerns deals 
with the area of curriculum and credit transfer and that whole area 
with we’re somewhat concerned that perhaps there may be a lower 
level of requirements, and therefore their certificates and diplomas 
coming from SIIT may not be . . . stand up to scrutiny as do the 
diplomas and certificates coming from SIAST and that sort of 
thing. 
 
Has there been . . . is there an agreement between SIAST and SIIT 
dealing with credit transfers and that and curricula in that whole 
area? I wonder if the minister could comment on that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the member puts his finger on an 
important element of this Bill. Currently there is not a block 
transfer of credits from SIIT to SIAST. There can be transfer of 
credits, but it’s for individual students on an individual course 
basis. The significance of the legislation is that it will facilitate the 
potential for there to be block transfers so that it can be 
automatically assumed that someone who takes a program that is 

similar or identical to SIAST can get block transfer of credit, but 
that doesn’t exist at this point in time. 
 
With SIIT taking on the status of a credit-granting body, it will 
facilitate that block transfer, and I would see that potentially as 
helpful to SIIT in terms of maximizing the recognition for credit 
transfer not only with SIAST but with other similar educational 
institutions in the nation. I see this whole matter of credit transfer 
as we look down the road into the future as being increasingly 
important not only for, say, a SIIT with SIAST, but just between 
institutions generally. And this status for the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies will facilitate the achievement of that for 
their students. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. Dealing with that general area of credit transfers between 
particularly SIIT and SIAST, you see that they will both be 
operating in the same area of skills training and that sort of thing. 
Will there be any ties or liaison between the two boards, the 
SIAST board and the SIIT board, once it’s established, to facilitate 
these agreements and dealing with credit transfers and programs 
and all those sorts of things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there isn’t anything in 
the legislation that causes that to formally happen. But I think 
that’s a reasonable expectation, in terms of the working 
operations, that SIIT and SIAST will see it as mutually 
advantageous for learners in Saskatchewan in order to have that 
kind of working relationship. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, just one further question with regards to 
standards. Did I understand the minister correctly when he 
answered an earlier question that the standards in both institutions 
will be at the same level — incomparable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member. The 
concern for standards and, therefore I think what you’re reaching 
towards, is the strength of the credibility of the credential that the 
student has. That isn’t something that’s found within the 
legislation but becomes earned by the institution over a period of 
time. And I think it’s useful to note that what is one of the great 
strengths of SIAST, for example, is their credibility as it is 
recognized by employers. 
 
Just to give you a small example of that — released just on 
Friday of last week, I believe, were the results of the 1999 
graduate survey from SIAST programs which indicated that, if I 
remember correctly, 91 per cent of the 1999 graduates were 
employed and 95 per cent of them employed in Saskatchewan. 
And so it is, in that case, the track record over a period of time 
of the institution that gives it its credential. 
 
Now SIIT, we have to keep in mind, has been an institution 
which has its own track record, has been operating for 25 years 
now, and it will be SIIT’s objective to similarly achieve a high 
level of credibility by employers. 
 
And in the case of certificate- or diploma-granting bodies, it is 
really the test of time that causes the reputation of that 
credential to take on a worth. And it will clearly be then SIIT’s 
intention to achieve that in its own right as quickly as possible, 
building on its reputation that it has now. 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

There won’t be anything in the legislation that will stipulate that 
because, as with any educational institution, it will be its track 
record of its graduates and their attractiveness to employers that 
will ultimately determine that. It will be, I expect as well, over a 
period of time that we would see that there would be some 
programs that may be common to both SIIT and SIAST. But I 
think also what we’ll see over a period of time is SIIT 
establishing its credential and its reputation in some program 
areas that simply are not being delivered by SIAST, and that 
they’ll be working hard to achieve that industry of recognition 
on their own right. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m happy to hear that the 
minister has explained that the institute will be working towards 
ensuring that the quality of graduates and the skills training that 
they have upon completion of their courses are at a level that 
will be, we would hope, somewhat comparable to those coming 
out of SIAST. Because I feel that it would be a great disservice 
to those young people who would . . . or to those people who 
are taking the training to receive somewhat less as far as 
training is concerned, going into the workplace, and finding that 
they aren’t successful in gaining gainful employment. 
 
We have a few questions with regards to the makeup of the 
board, the structure of the board, and those sorts of things. And 
for those questions I’ll defer to my colleague from Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Minister, 
and good evening to your officials. Mr. Minister, I’d just like to 
put forward a couple of questions. Will the board established 
for SIIT by the passing of this Bill be consistent with the 
provisions of The Regional Colleges Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — There will be a significant difference, as 
the hon. member will know, Mr. Chair. The regional colleges’ 
board members are appointed by the province. With SIIT the 
board will be appointed by the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what I was 
wondering about is some more particular detail on just what the 
board will . . . what the composition of the board will be, what 
the structure of the board will be. Can you just elaborate a little 
bit more for me on the structure of the board in its entirety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, the legislation stipulates 
that the first board of SIIT will be its current board and that is 
the one as approved by the province. It is made up of 10 
representatives of the tribal councils and it will be important, I 
believe to SIIT, that their board will continue to have a makeup 
that reflects its importance by the tribal councils in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
However at this point I’m unable to comment further regarding 
their structure because that will be developed by regulations 
that would flow after the Act is passed and will be determined 
by the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was going to just go 
with a follow-up question to that, but before I do that I’m just 
wondering in reference to something that you just mentioned. 

The province will be appointing the board members after 
they’re nominated by the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) I take it, and the province will be appointing the 
board members or be responsible for the appointment. No? That 
is incorrect? Okay, then I’ll just leave that aside. I 
misunderstood that then. 
 
Section 2 . . . clause (2) mentions: 
 

(2) The bylaws mentioned in subclause (1)(b)(i) must be 
consistent with any directions received from the Chiefs’ 
Legislative Assembly of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. 

 
Now the reason that I’m bringing that up as it may be a 
problematic area . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
Okay section 2, or section 11, I’m sorry. I’m sorry, section 11. 
Okay. And if you go down to (2), okay, mentions that bylaws 
that are mentioned in section 11(1) and then reference (b)(i), 
that the bylaws: 
 

. . . must be consistent with any directions received from 
the Chiefs’ Legislative Assembly of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 
Mr. Minister, there have been problems in the past where there 
have been as many as 12 people attending the SIIT board 
meetings, and each of them having a vote. There have been 
instances where non-board members have walked into SIIT 
board meetings and have proceeded to partake in discussions 
and so on and then to vote on issues when they shouldn’t have 
been. 
 
Mr. Minister, whenever a tribal council splits or breaks apart 
into two tribal councils, the political protocol kicks in, and each 
new entity then wants a seat on all the boards and commissions. 
Now while the FSIN has legislative protocol for board and 
commission composition, this tends to be ignored at times and 
then the result is to add members to a board without following 
protocol as it is written. 
 
So with that in mind, that the FSIN has legislative protocol with 
respect to board commission and composition that represents 
representation from tribal councils and independent First 
Nations, we also understand that tribal councils may from time 
to time break apart, as I’ve mentioned, creating two new 
entities. 
 
What assurance have we got that we will not have a board that 
exceeds the recommended number of board members that 
would be reflected, as I had the indication from the Bill here 
that board members would be reflected in the provisions of The 
Regional Colleges Act? And so if that is so, then this creates a 
problem where you may have tribal councils splitting and 
wanting to have say on that board as they split. They want to 
have representation. 
 
So I guess the question is: what assurances do we have that the 
quorum will be consistent and not subject to some change by 
political whim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all, just for clarification. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

In my previous answer, I referred to regulation; I meant bylaw, 
which is exactly what the hon. member is talking about. 
 
The Act establishes that the board is appointed by the FSIN as 
the governing body and that the bylaws are established by the 
FSIN, and therefore the board is accountable to the FSIN. The 
FSIN will receive . . . sorry, the SIIT, I should say, will receive 
about two-thirds of its funding from the tribal councils, and it’ll 
be through that structure to the FSIN and the tribal councils that 
SIIT will be held accountable. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 
refer to your opening speech when you were introducing the 
Bill, in second reading speech I guess it was. You referred to 
clause 5, and in your statements you mentioned the Bill 
contains the requirement that SIIT is to provide information 
about its plans, activities, and students to the provincial 
government. So I take it then that this board has a measure of 
accountability as far as reporting to your government on plans, 
activities, and students to the provincial council. 
 
Is the provincial government also going to take on the 
responsibility to ensure that there are financial and performance 
reporting requirements on a timely basis so that there is a 
constant monitoring of how things unfold with this new 
authority being given to SIIT? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think there’s a useful and 
important distinction to make here that the SIIT is accountable 
to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. That’s the 
governing body which outlines its bylaws and requires its 
reports. 
 
However, in preparing the legislation, SIIT is certainly 
conscious of the fact that what educational activities take place 
through their jurisdiction is also within the province of 
Saskatchewan of course. And what they in fact asked to have 
included is that they would be required to provide information 
to the department to assist the department in its ongoing 
planning and assessment of educational activities in the 
province. 
 
So there will be those informations provided, as it lists in the 
legislation, to the minister, but they’re provided by way of 
information as opposed to as a measure of accountability. The 
accountability measure is to the governing body which is the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, in your speech you also indicated that 
clause 15 requires SIIT to provide government – I take it you 
mean provincial government – information pertaining to its 
head office and its board members. So what kind of information 
would that requirement pertain to? What kind of information 
about its head office and its board members would the 
government have access to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — As the hon. member will note in section 
15(1), it would be the location of the head office and the names of 
the board members. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that’s quite interesting. It’s 
not a whole lot of information, I guess. But anyway that is fine, 

that seems to be good. 
 
In your next statement here on the same paper, you indicate clause 
15(3) requires SIIT to provide to government information 
concerning its plans for the future and the annual report including 
audited financial statements and outcomes of its activities in terms 
of its graduates. You further indicate in your speech that . . . and 
the next paragraph is: 
 

This desire and the information in clause 15 demonstrates 
that SIIT is committed to being accountable, not just to 
First Nations and its students but to the whole province. 
 

If it’s going to be, Mr. Minister, accountable to the whole 
province, does that follow that the Provincial Auditor would be 
able to scrutinize the whole financial statement — the 
expenditures, the income, and so on — a line-by-line report of 
SIIT? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the 
financial reports are provided to the province by way of 
information, and they are required to have an auditor, which is 
KPMG. And then their accountability is through the audited 
reports which are held accountable by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
I remind the hon. member there isn’t any provincial core 
funding that is going to SIIT, and so that will be a significant 
factor in terms of the relationship. However, as I said before, 
SIIT wishes to provide that information, as other institutions do, 
to the province to assist the province in dealing with its 
planning for its educational needs and plans for the future. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, this statement here clearly indicates that 
SIIT wanted to report its plan, finances, and outcomes to the 
provincial government so that the people of Saskatchewan 
would recognize that they are committed to being accountable. 
 
If that is so and they report their finances to the province, is 
there then an assuredness that we can have from you as minister 
that you will refer these financial statements to the federal 
government — because they are in fact contributing some 
funding I believe for this — and make sure that that financial 
statement is forwarded to the federal government? Because it 
stands to reason that they should have a role of responsibility to 
play to ensure that expenditures are being used properly and to 
monitor just like any other agency would be monitored to make 
sure that the best use of this money is being made. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the SIIT is 
required to provide an annual report, including a financial 
audited statement, and they would make that public. I would 
expect that the federal government would require of SIIT the 
audited financial statement. That would be part of their 
relationship with SIIT. 
 
And as I would think it’s quite likely that the tribal councils 
who are also providing funding to SIIT would require to be 
presented to them the availability of the audited financial 
statement. 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, will the 
provincial government and the minister responsible be getting a 
copy of the financial audited statements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Can we have the assuredness, Mr. 
Minister, that you will scrutinize those and have some 
communication with the federal government on our behalf? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the 
province would receive the audited financial statement by way 
of information. The relationship with the federal government 
would . . . again is the responsibility of SIIT, together with the 
federal government, and I quite expect that the federal 
government will require that as part of their funding 
relationship. 
 
Because that money doesn’t . . . none of that money flows. The 
money from the federal government and the money from tribal 
councils to SIIT does not flow through the province, and so 
those fiduciary kinds of relationships then will be stipulated by 
requirements by the funding sources. And I really quite expect 
that the federal government will do that correctly. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, we have a minister responsible for 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs in this province, and 
it would seem to me that he would take his responsibility 
seriously and would be having access to the financial 
statements. 
 
And it may not be the province’s responsibility, but the very 
fact that that minister has a portfolio in this area tells me, and I 
think the people of Saskatchewan — including the Indian 
people of Saskatchewan, the Metis people of Saskatchewan — 
that that minister is in place to ensure that there is monitoring 
on their behalf, and that that minister may be the liaison with 
the federal government in these kind of matters. 
 
So I’ll just, after making that comment, I have one other 
question. Mr. Minister, do you know if the intention, when 
there is program development, course development taking 
place, whether the intention is to continue working with the 
business community and a corporate community in order to 
ensure that we have got appropriate courses taking place that 
will reflect the needs of the labour force in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, that has been the practice of 
SIIT thus far, and it is strongly, strongly in the interest of SIIT 
to be doing precisely that, along the lines of the question the 
hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood was asking. 
 
Ms. Julé: — One more question, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to 
the minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s my final answer. 
 
Ms. Julé: — One final one. Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why 
this issue was brought forward in the first place, as far as SIIT 
having the authority and the responsibility to make sure that the 
credits and credentials and certificates that would flow from 
different course developments and programs be placed in the 

hands of First Nations people, to the degree it has. 
 
I know that there have been First Nations and Metis people 
taking different courses in this province through SIAST and 
other technical institutes, and I’m just kind of wondering what it 
was that precipitated the development of this new authority for 
FSIN? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. The 
discussion in regarding the SIIT Act is nothing recent. This has 
being going on actually for several years that there’s been a 
request to eventually come to this point where SIIT has its own 
Act. This is certainly something that the province sees as a part 
of an evolution. 
 
As you will know, the SIIT institution started out as a regional 
college or a community college just initially, and that really 
wasn’t a structure over a period of time that fit their needs. We 
will all recognize the very, very important place in our province 
of successful training for our First Nations people, and the 
successful participation flowing from that in our economy and 
our labour market. 
 
And this is an initiative that’s been requested by the FSIN, by 
SIIT, for some time, that is supported by the province because 
we see it as contributing to the ever-growing importance of that 
successful post-secondary training that this province badly 
needs in order to achieve our potential as a province with the 
full participation of our people in the economy. And SIIT has 
proven over a period of a quarter of a century that it is a 
comfortable place to train and does some good quality training. 
And it by no means will be the only place, by any stretch of the 
imagination, that First Nations people would be involved in 
technical training, but it provides an option and something that I 
think is supportive of those needs in this decade to significantly 
improve the successful numbers of completions of First Nations 
people in post-secondary education. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would certainly commend First Nations people on their 
recognition that there is a certain comfort level that many First 
Nations people thrive much more wholesomely in when in fact 
their educational institutions and so on are culturally sensitive, 
and also have professors and teachers that are of their own 
people. And so I understand that and I do wish SIIT and FSIN 
all the very best of luck with their new authority. 
 
And I just wanted to make mention that I think it was from your 
office that we got a little bit of information on other technical 
institutes that are similar to this in Canada. There are only two 
other ones, I guess, First Nations technical institutes in Canada, 
and one is located in Ontario, but it is not recognized by the 
province and does not grant diplomas and certificates, but it 
does broker from four surrounding Ontario colleges. So that’s 
interesting. And the second one is Nicola Valley Institute of 
Technology. It’s located in British Columbia. It is recognized 
and funded by the province under the BC (British Columbia) 
College and Institute Act, and it does grant certificates and 
diplomas and is affiliated with the University College of the 
Caribou. But that one is very small, with a total enrolment of 
about 221 full- and part-time students. 
 
So I agree with you that we have a unique situation in 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

Saskatchewan in that our First Nations population is much more 
expansive than any other provinces, and it kind of excites me to 
know that there are many more First Nations people . . . And I 
must say I’m a little biased, particularly woman that I wish the 
very best to. I just find it so very exciting that there will be 
educational opportunities where people feel at home, gaining 
their education. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Minister, to your officials and to yourself for 
answering our questions tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member and I 
appreciate her sentiments, and I think all of us can feel a sense 
of pride in our province, the First Nations people in our 
province. 
 
It should be a surprise to no one that leadership and the quality 
post-secondary education in a national context is coming from 
Saskatchewan. I think we all wish SIIT nothing but success in 
the years ahead. Thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 39 - The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, there is one change in the 
officials. You’ll see that behind the deputy minister in this case is 
Karen Lautsch, executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, first I would 
like to . . . I neglected to welcome the officials earlier and I’d like 
to extend a welcome and thank them for being here this evening. 
 
As the minister indicated in the second reading . . . during the 
second reading introduction of . . . the second reading of this Bill 
that this Bill is the Bill that, I guess to summarize it, puts all the 
powers that the minister operates under, you know, under an 
umbrella of one Bill. I wonder, Mr. Chair, if the minister, if he 
could give us an overview of what the new responsibilities of this 
new department will be upon its creation, particularly in the skills 
training area. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the legislation doesn’t introduce 
new authorities that the minister doesn’t currently hold. What it 
does, as you correctly point out, is it brings them from a series 
of different Acts under a single Act. 
 
But you’re also I think correct in understanding that one of the 
things that brings us forward is the involvement in the skills 
training area that much of which would have been inherited as a 
result of signing the Labour Market Development Agreement 
with the federal government, and through post-secondary 

education skills training then, are involved. All of those things, 
in a nutshell, that would be involved in preparing Saskatchewan 
citizens to assume their career involvements. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, do I understand the 
situation correctly in that now the province has assumed all 
responsibility for skills training within the province; that the 
federal government, the arrangement that you have with the 
federal government has removed itself from the skills training 
area, other than perhaps funding some of the activities? Is that a 
correct assessment of the environment that we are operating in 
this province today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is essentially yes. 
We will just have finished our discussion of course about the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, which receives 
federal funds that flow to First Nations people, for example. 
And the federal government still retains some amount of 
involvement in youth skill training. But with those two 
exceptions, in essence the province now assumes the 
responsibilities for skill training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Further to that — I don’t think it’s stipulated in 
the Bill — but does the minister envision creating within the 
department, this new department, will there be two areas of 
responsibility? One being the post-secondary education, which 
would deal more with the universities, with SIAST, and the 
other one dealing with regional colleges and I guess SIAST . . . 
those programs in SIAST which deal more with skills rather 
than education and those sorts of things. Will there be a division 
within the department, or will the department operate the entire 
area of post-secondary education and skills training as one unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the answer is kind of a yes and 
no; that they all are under the one common department of 
course. But there will be within the department four main 
branches: one that will deal with the universities; one that will 
deal with SIAST and regional colleges; one that will deal with 
student financial assistance; and then one that will deal with 
career and employment services. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, some of the skills . . . 
particularly skills training programs are in partnership with 
employers and community groups and those sorts of things. I 
wonder could the minister elaborate some of the activities in 
that general area, and perhaps are there any new initiatives that 
would come into play upon passage of this Bill in that particular 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, there won’t be anything that is 
specifically new pursuant to this Act. You’re quite correct in 
that partnerships are often increasingly common as part of the 
provision of education as it relates to workplaces. And just by 
way of a couple of examples, the career and employment 
services centres can arrive at specific contracts, as may, for 
example, a regional college with a particular employer for 
provision of skill training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Section 8(1) deals or 
section 8 deals with advisory committees; 8(1) there’s . . . about 
half-way or near the end it says: 
 

. . . the minister may appoint one or more advisory 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

committees for a specific period and for a specific purpose. 
 

I wonder, could the minister explain what that section of the Bill 
means and perhaps give us an example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, an example of this would be 
the Scholarship, Bursaries and Loans Committee which is an 
ongoing committee and provides ongoing assistance related to the 
matter of student financial assistance. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, section 15 dealing with 
the powers of the minister, subsection (2)(f). The minister may: 
 

encourage and stimulate job creation and job development 
efforts by the departments and agencies of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the private sector; 
 

This seems to be a fairly broad and encompassing section. I 
wonder if the minister could give us an idea of how those powers 
would be used in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member I think is quite 
correct in referring to this section as an important element of the 
department’s focus and responsibilities. I’ll give you a couple 
of quick examples. The JobStart Future Skills program would 
be an example of this. 
 
And another one that the hon. member may recognize as more 
recent was the announcement of the commitment to funding for 
the forestry industry, which is intended to follow the 
multi-party training program approach that was very successful 
in the mining industry training; and bringing together in 
partnership then industry as well as educational and other 
related interests. And all of this intended then to support the 
development of employment and sometimes then related to a 
particular area or sometimes related to a particular industry. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I believe the . . . I’m 
sure the minister’s aware of people who are on social assistance 
wanting to take further training and skills training, education, 
and that sorts of things. And I know that during discussion, or 
during estimates with the Minister of Social Services, my 
colleague discussed this area, of those people who don’t feel 
confident for whatever reason — perhaps family commitments, 
being out of the education system for quite some time — and 
are reluctant to become a full-time student. 
 
And there seems to be a crack that a number of people are 
falling through and that sort of thing. Is there anything in this 
Bill that would deal with those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, if I can refer the hon. 
member . . . he was very close to a relevant section in his earlier 
question. If one would look, for example, at section 15(2)(d) 
then you would see there that: 
 

The minister may: 
 

. . . take measures to provide the people of Saskatchewan, 
or classes of people within Saskatchewan, with the 
opportunity to participate in programs and services related 
to post-secondary education, training, career and 
employment services and student financial assistance. 

And one way that he will be familiar with, where that’s been 
enacted, has been with the provision of the provincial training 
allowance, intended to be supportive for people who would be 
in a category the member just was referring to in his question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Okay, Mr. Chair, that pretty well concludes any 
questions and concerns that we may have with this Bill at this 
time. And I would like to thank the minister and his officials for 
their information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member 
for his questions and comments. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Student Assistance and Student 
Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Are there any staff that you’d like to 
introduce, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just one change in the rotating 
chair here — oh two changes. In the rotating chair behind the 
deputy minister is Brady Salloum, who is the executive director 
of student financial services, and to my right and behind is 
Edith Hazen, who is associate executive director. 
 
Clause 1 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister’s additional officials that joined in for the discussion 
on this Bill. In the second reading presentation by the minister 
he indicated that on most of this Bill, or a portion of this Bill, 
deals with merely updating the language and those sorts of 
things, but there was some changes with regards to the authority 
given to the trustees of the Student Aid Fund if I understand it 
correctly. 
 
I wonder . . . The minister explained that the trustees have the 
authority to hold trust money and invest them and those sorts of 
things. Could the minister explain why these changes were 
brought forward in this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, because the Student Aid Fund is 
a separate fund outside the General Revenue Fund. It is to 
enable the fund to receive monies from the federal government 
on the one hand and then to disperse them. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, in the explanatory notes that 
were distributed along with the Bill makes reference to the 
Student Aid Fund, section 5(2), it says the fund consists of a 
million dollars in cash . . . securities or cash and so on, and it 
makes reference to the education fund, and that’s in the (a) 
section. 
 
In the (b) section there’s a sum of $2 million transferred from 
the fund known as the school lands fund to the trustees. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

I wonder could the minister explain the education fund and the 
school lands fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, both the education fund and the 
school lands fund are there historically. They were set up that 
way and the Act just simply carries them forward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I wonder could the 
minister give us a description of the trustees that administer the 
Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund — how many people make up 
this board of trustees, how are they appointed, and so on? You 
could just briefly give us a brief description of the makeup of 
those trustees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, and to the hon. member, they’re 
appointed through order in council. And to give you a 
description of them, one is a rather slender fellow with dark hair 
and another is a good-looking woman who is seated behind me 
on camera. But the three people who make up the trustees, Mr. 
Chair, are the deputy minister for Post-Secondary Education, 
the assistant deputy minister, and the deputy minister of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I have perhaps one or two more 
questions to the minister before we move on in this Bill. Could 
the minister explain or bring us up to date as far as the 
administration of the student loans? The financial institutions, 
the banks, I believe, are backing away; the federal government 
hasn’t been able to, at least I’m not aware, whether the federal 
government has been able to negotiate a new agreement to 
administer student loans. Could you just bring us up to date in 
that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the up-to-the-minute description 
where the federal government is at at this point is that nothing 
has changed at this point. There may be some announcement in 
the not too distant future, but as we speak the process for 
student loans and for students is exactly the same as it has 
existed for the past period of time where students will take their 
loan applications to the banks as previously negotiated. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I understand then from the minister 
that students will not have any problems in as far as the 
administration of student loans for the upcoming academic year 
and that business will go on as usual. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, yes, the hon. member is correct; 
it’s business as usual. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials for the information provided with regards to this Bill. 
That concludes any questions that we might have at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, if I could ask a page to provide 
a copy of an amendment to Clause 1. No, I think the Chair has a 
copy of that. If I could provide it to the hon. member, to the 
critic. 
 
Mr. Chair, because the Bill was introduced in the calendar year 
1999, but will now be carried in calendar year 2000, there is a 
need to amend the short title of the Bill. And so therefore, Mr. 
Chair, I would move: 
 

Amend clause 1 of the printed bill by striking out The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 
1999, and substituting The Student Assistance and Student 
Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2000. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I would like to move that the 
committee report the Bill with amendment. And before taking 
my place, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the hon. member . . . the 
members opposite, but particularly the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, for their scrutiny and their questions 
related to this Bill and the others. And at the same time, to 
express my appreciation for the officials of the department in 
the development of the legislation as well as helping me to 
provide sensible answers to the questions posed by the hon. 
members opposite. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 35 – The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
The Chair: — I’d like to invite the minister responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me tonight, Larry Fogg, the president of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance); Bernadette McIntyre, 
who is the assistant vice-president, driver and vehicle safety 
services; Anna Lapierre, assistant vice-president, licensing and 
insurance services; and Elizabeth Flynn, who is the legislation 
advisor. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials as well. When we spoke on this 
Bill No. 35 a number of days ago, I think we went through a lot 
of the details and the philosophical comments that we need to 
make. So today I’d just like to ask a number of questions that 
are fairly specific. 
 
This Bill does allow SGI to go after thieves of vehicles for 
recovery of damages. And my two questions related to that: 
how much does SGI realistically hope that they’re going to be 
able to recover through the courts; and what are you going to do 
with minors who steal vehicles? Are you going to go after their 
parents for some of that costs and damages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular change will allow for 
recouping about $1.9 million in fees that cannot be recouped 
now, but it will not allow SGI to go after parents. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There’s probably a sigh of relief from all the 
minors who want to drive Oldsmobiles in Regina right now – 
and their parents. In view of the fact that we ask these questions 
in Saskatchewan, we’re quite aware of this government’s 
penchant for not allowing private property. And I’m wondering 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

how that relates to the fact that radar detectors are being 
de-insured. Why is that? Is this the first step in government 
confiscation of private property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — SGI as an organization is very concerned 
about safety. And basically the plan is not to insure the radar 
detectors but there is no plan to go any further than that. 
Basically it’s just discouraging their use in Saskatchewan 
because of the question of speed. Speed ends up increasing the 
severity of damages in accidents, increases the number of 
deaths, and part of SGI policy is to discourage speed. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well the question I hadn’t planned on asking, 
Mr. Minister, but it’s . . . I think it follows directly out of that. If 
you’re concerned about safety, then why would you try to 
de-insure radar detectors and not cell phones in vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this point it appears that there is no 
study that directly links cell phones to traffic accidents; but 
there are some studies, and specifically one that we know that is 
taking place in Quebec. As that information comes forward, the 
information from the study will be reviewed and the question of 
cell phones and traffic safety would be examined at that time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. The 
new chairman of your PIPP (personal injury protection plan) 
review committee has in the past made some strong statements 
in favour of no-fault, as I’m sure you’re aware, and a number of 
members linked to the College of Physicians, which has also 
endorsed no-fault. And other of the members of that committee 
is connected to a head injury organization which received 
funding from SGI. 
 
So when you put those things in a place, I think you can 
understand why the public has some very strong suspicions 
about the fairness and openness of your review panel. So, Mr. 
Minister, what is your opinion? Are the victims of no-fault and 
the law society simply 100 per cent wrong and you’re 100 per 
cent right? And if you don’t go with the 100 per cents, then why 
didn’t you create a committee that would have created the 
confidence that was needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the legislation sets out a plan to 
review the personal injury protection plan, and in that process 
there are people from many varied aspects who are providing 
their advice and their assistance. The victims of no-fault have 
forwarded some of the information that they have received. 
We’re also hoping that before the process is completed, that the 
various lawyers groups along with the victims groups, will 
forward the information to the committee so that it can be 
included in the overall review. 
 
We’re hoping that by next spring when we’re looking at 
legislation we will have the knowledge that they have provided 
so that we can improve the plan that we do have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. You’ve given quite an eloquent 
rundown of how the process is going to work but you haven’t 
answered the question about public confidence in that particular 
committee when you’ve appointed people that have already 

prior positions on this particular issue. And if you expect to get 
an unbiased report from them it’s pretty hard to do. If you want 
to comment on that one that would be the last question that I 
would have on this particular Bill, Bill No. 35. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Chair. We have a proposed 
house amendment to clause 10 which basically will delete a 
couple of items and that’s been given to the opposition and to 
the Clerk. And so I would propose that we amend clause 10 as 
set out in this House amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’m going to read the House amendment 
so that it’s clear to all. It says: 
 

Amend Clause 10 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by renumbering it as subsection (1) of Clause 10; 
 

(b) by striking out clause (1)(b) and substituting the 
following: 

 
“(b) by repealing clause (e) and substituting the 
following: 

 
‘(e) to sound equipment or communications 
equipment located within or attached to the vehicle, 
other than equipment prescribed in the regulations; 

 
‘(e.1) to radar warning devices’”; and 

 
(c) by adding the following subsection after subsection 
(1) of Clause 10: 

 
“(2) The following subsection is added after 
subsection 38(3): 

 
‘(3.1) In clause (3)(e.1), ‘radar warning device’ 
means any device designed or intended for use in a 
motor vehicle to warn the driver of the presence of 
radar or laser speed measuring equipment in the 
vicinity, and includes any device designed or intended 
for use in a motor vehicle to interfere with the 
effective operation of radar or laser speeding 
measuring equipment’”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Deputy Chair: — First I’d like to invite the Minister of 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) to 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

indicate whether there’s any change in officials. I take it there is 
no change. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this 
particular Bill, Bill No. 36, deals with the trucking industry to a 
large extent. And I guess I have a bit of a philosophical 
question. You put a fair bit of emphasis on this one dealing with 
safety — that’s your I think underlying thought behind The 
Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
How do you feel that agrees with the stance on this government 
when you have throughout this province literally thousands of 
miles of roads that are totally unsafe — so unsafe that the 
school buses actually take country and grid roads to avoid your 
highways because of a matter of safety — and you’re doing 
this? Do you not find that somewhat hypocritical to have the 
trucks safe and then turn them loose onto thousands of miles of 
unsafe roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the purpose of this legislation 
is to deal with the deregulation of the trucking industry in 
Canada. And I think it’s important that we get the rules 
coordinated right across the country so that issues around the 
safety of trucking are appropriate. And that’s what the purpose 
of this is. 
 
And we’re pleased to present the legislation for that purpose. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I take it you 
didn’t want to answer the question about the condition and the 
safety of the roads which is rather unfortunate because when 
we’re dealing with safety those are two aspects. 
 
You have vehicles, you have drivers, and you have roads. If all 
three of those are safe, you have some very safe conditions. 
Any one of those gets out of sync and you have a major 
problem. 
 
In this particular province your government has created a road 
situation that is totally unsafe, so it really matters not that much 
in the long run about your drivers and your vehicles when the 
roads are blatantly unsafe, and in fact some of your other safety 
organizations ought to ban people from driving on them. 
 
The question I have: how much consultation was done with the 
trucking industry in Saskatchewan prior to these amendments? 
Or did you just take that and say we’re now going to be in line 
with the National Safety Code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation is the result of extensive 
consultation both on a national level and on a provincial level. 
The Saskatchewan Trucking Association has been involved 
provincially in consultation with officials here but they’ve also 
participated in the national consultations. And this legislation, 
as I said before, comes out of the deregulation of the trucking 
industry and then the subsequent arrangements to make sure 
that there are appropriate rules for truckers right across the 
country. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I think in a 
previous address I did on Bill 36, I said the idea of having a 
National Safety Code is a good thing to have so that our safety 
codes are similar in all the provinces and you don’t suddenly 

say, now I’m in a different province; codes have changed. How 
many provinces at present, after we’ve completed Bill 36, will 
have adopted and be following the National Safety Code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that is, if you start on the 
west coast, British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario 
have already implemented this. The provinces to the east — 
Quebec and the Maritimes — have a commitment to be fully 
legislated in this area by the end of next year. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think that answer is somewhat 
reassuring. So at least you have the stretch from the Pacific 
coast down to Ontario where people don’t have to change rules 
as they switch from province to province and that’s good. 
 
In bringing us up to speed with the National Safety Code — no 
pun intended there — did we find ourselves in a situation where 
we had to make our safety standards much more stringent than 
they had been? Did we have to relax some safety codes in order 
to comply with the National Safety Code? Were we behind or 
were we basically a province that was tougher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that question 
is that we were pretty much on standard with the other 
jurisdictions that are across the West, and that there wasn’t 
much adjustment that was needed. It’s based on the individual 
carrier’s records. And that continues and the work has been 
done. 
 
But if you have more specific questions, I’ll be happy to try to 
answer them. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. 
You’re talking about different companies putting in safety 
programs and a number of safety programs to come up to 
National Safety Code standards. 
 
And I guess I have a question on who is going to be checking 
on this. How is that whole process going to be working? Along 
with knowing the trucking industry in our province, going from 
big carriers right down to single-owner carriers and that whole 
issue, is how is that all going to be orchestrated and worked 
through the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically, effective July 1, 1999, almost a 
year ago, Saskatchewan implemented the National Safety Code 
carrier profile and compliance review program, where they keep 
track of all of the various convictions and road inspections that 
happen to the carriers. And that’s a shared database and that’s 
used to ensure compliance with the rules that are there. And this 
is done on a national basis now so that they work together. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. So the way I 
understood it is when there’s convictions, that’s when they’re 
checked up and there’s nothing done prior as far as 
preventative. I mean, to me, when I think of a safety program, 
the safety program is to prevent situations like you’ve already 
just mentioned. Once they get to so many convictions then it 
kicks in. 
 
Now to me a safety program would be preventing these 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

infractions from happening. And so I question whether that’s a 
safety program as much as just an audit on their performance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to your question is that 
the carrier profile which is compiled is based on the carrier’s 
accident record which is like you say after the fact, the 
convictions which are after the fact, but also on roadside 
inspections. That information goes in. Plus there are spot checks 
now and again where that information is fed into the carrier 
profile. And so there are all of these aspects. 
 
As the demerit points are added up, when a particular carrier 
hits 40 per cent of the maximum, there’s a warning letter that 
goes out. It says, you know, you’ve ended up with a number of 
points here which lead us to believe that you need to examine 
your practices in your carrier. And that’s the first sort of initial 
contact with them based on their total carrier profile. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One other question that I had that I threw in 
the first question and it was too broad. How does the size of carrier 
factor into this whole process? You know if it’s a single operated 
. . . I know there’s piles of fellows farming around my area that 
commercial haul and they have the one truck and how does that all 
fit into this process? Will this affect them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The carrier profiles can be on a single . . . I 
mean a carrier can have just one vehicle and then they would be 
compared to other carriers with only one vehicle. Two vehicles 
compared to others with two vehicles. All the way up to many 
hundreds of vehicles, the very large carrier. So that the profiles are 
kept on all of the different levels, whether you start with just one 
vehicle or if you have many more. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, so this 
administration whether it’s one carrier or ten carriers or a huge 
carrier, who does the administration – I’m kind of foggy on this – 
but who does the administration? How much is it going to cost 
SGI to get into this program or does the National Safety Code . . . 
who organizes it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This program is completed by SGI and the 
Highway Traffic Board. And they also work in conjunction 
with Transport Canada and Transport Canada provides some of 
the funds but it also . . . some are provincial funds and some are 
SGI funds. So it’s costed that way. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So will there be an increase then in 
expenditure to SGI to implement this program or to follow up 
on this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Last year when this program was 
introduced there were four new auditors that had to be hired. 
And some of the cost of that was offset by the fact that there is I 
think a $50 fee for being part of this national carrier profile 
system that offsets some of the cost. But the effect was four 
new people at SGI. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, one other 
question and I’m kind of going from memory but the National 
Safety Code, it talks about hours of operation — correct? And 
so where our drivers or our companies in Saskatchewan have to 
follow along with the hours of operation — and I forget all the 
numbers and how all that worked, I knew it went on a sliding 

scale — but from my experience in dealing with a number of 
the trucking companies in our province and dealing with the 
northern trucking companies, NRT (Northern Resource 
Trucking Ltd. Partnership) for example, that some of their hauls 
it would be impossible for them to make those hauls in the 
hours that were allowed through the National Safety Code. 
 
And I’m just wondering is there going to be any sort of 
exceptions made for some of the geographical situations that we 
have in our province just because of the hours we’re not . . . 
didn’t suffice to get the job done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That particular question that you raise is 
actually under review right across Canada. And our Department 
of Highways and Transportation are part of the national 
consultation, the people who work in this area in that 
department to look at the hours and then also look at the places 
where there may need to be exemptions if necessary. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. 
I have one more question and at that point I am prepared to let 
this Bill move on. 
 
The question is probably particularly critical in holiday time 
when we have people from other provinces and also from the 
states coming to our province, and then from time to time it just 
works out in such a way that they want to use one of our 
vehicles. And the question I have is: what coverage is there for 
people from other provinces with valid licences in their 
provinces or states who have valid licences in their states, when 
they drive my vehicle, is there any loss of coverage that I incur 
by allowing them to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d just like to ask the minister 
responsible for CIC if there’s any change in officials? The 
officials remain the same. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a 
part of The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, Bill 54, 
deals with photo ID (identification). And on the issue of photo 
ID, what will be the cost to the drivers to get this done? And is 
there any period of time after which it will have to be renewed 
because from time to time we change our appearance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are two parts to your question. The 
first one is, how often do you have to have your picture taken. 
We anticipate that it would be every five years, would be the 
plan. Presently photo ID for a driver’s licence costs $12. The 
plan would be that it’s less than that but we haven’t completed 
all of the costing to know how much less. But it could be in the 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

10, $11 range or maybe even slightly less. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, from time to 
time people are asked to get medical checkups done in order to 
maintain their licences, probably for particular medical 
conditions and also in some cases for some of our senior 
drivers. And the question is, how many medical checkups are 
ordered by SGI in a given year, and do you pay for any of 
those, and about how many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time there are about 25,000 
medicals requested by the medical people at SGI, and none of 
those medicals are paid for. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. An issue that’s pretty critical in 
Bill 54 is the imposing of a zero tolerance policy for drivers 
drinking that are under 19. Now about four years ago, the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena proposed that particular 
legislation and it was voted against by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party). And I’m wondering what has changed in the 
thinking that at this point the NDP is in favour and four years 
ago they weren’t. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer is that there’s 
been more experience with the program, plus we’ve received 
information from other jurisdictions where they have this 
program and the co-operation and the results, I guess would be 
the best way to state it, have been very good. And so it’s now 
something that is recommended to deal with this particular 
problem. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. It 
would have been nice if Saskatchewan in this particular case 
could have taken the lead. And it’s unfortunate that just because 
a good idea happened to be presented to this government from 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena, and that was an 
opposition member, you chose not to accept it. Hopefully you’ll 
be a bit more open-minded in some of the other ideas and 
concepts that come from this side of the House. 
 
Dealing with restrictions for new drivers. Could you just tell us 
what these restrictions are and if there is any leeway to waive 
those if, for example, that particular person, new driver, is 
needed to work on a farm or just needs some special access for 
a vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The particular legislative provision that’s 
in this Bill is enabling legislation which would allow for the 
development of a program. The plan is to consult with the 
community as to which things should be included in this kind of 
restricted licence for new drivers. But it’s clearly contemplated 
that there would be exemptions for young people who had to 
get to work or take somebody to a babysitter or all of those 
kinds of things that are reasonable explanations about why you 
might operate outside the restrictions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a little bit 
more on the restrictions for new drivers. Four years ago we 
brought in the probationary driver’s licence system and now this 
seems like it’s going more towards a graduated driver’s licence 
system. Am I correct on that assumption? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So with a graduated licence, obviously there’s 
restrictions saying when they can’t drive, certain times when they 
can’t drive, whether it’s not with more than one or two. I just 
remember different restrictions in other provinces. And I believe at 
that time we went with a probationary driver’s license as a way of 
saying to the 16- and 17-year-olds that most of you are very good 
drivers. In fact 99 per cent of you are very good drivers. Why 
restrict what you can do as a good driver and punish you in a 
graduated system for what 1 or 2 per cent of the drivers do 
poorly and we punish all the rest of them? And I really question 
the rationale to going towards a graduated driver’s licence 
system when we have already implemented a probationary 
driver’s licence system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate your comments because it is 
an area where there are many opinions, especially among young 
people who are going to be affected by this the most. But the 
graduated licensing programs for new drivers have proven to be 
more effective in reducing accidents and injuries and deaths 
than Saskatchewan’s system. And so most Canadian provinces 
and many states in the United States have moved to a graduated 
licence program with some very good results. And so that’s the 
reason that we’re re-examining this. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, I think if you were to look at 
restrictions, you could put a number of restrictions on. 
Completely restrict them from driving and you’re going to 
have a lot less accidents. And that was the whole point. It’s 
not to restrict them from certain . . . expose them to it, but 
under strict scrutiny. And that was the whole point of it. 
 
And I think when you start comparing our experience in 
Saskatchewan with other provinces with the rural base and 
the agriculture base that we have in our province, and I 
realize there may be exceptions for younger drivers in rural 
areas if they’re helping on the farm. But I would really get 
into this very slowly because I think the probationary licence 
system, although maybe it hasn’t reached the results of 
perhaps in Ontario through a graduated licence system, or 
British Columbia, I don’t know if we’re comparing apples to 
apples there with our driving experience compared to their 
driving experience. 

 
And I think when you start going into that area, you’re going 
into an area with the amount of driving that’s done by 
younger people in rural Saskatchewan for jobs, for the farm 
help, that you could be really stepping on some toes out there. 
And so I’d really hesitate before I would go too far down that 
path. 

 
The one area I do look at is zero tolerance for alcohol 
consumption for newly licensed drivers. What is the 
penalties? What will the penalties be if they’re at .02 or .01? 
Zero tolerance is zero tolerance. What are the penalties going 
to be if you’re going to say zero tolerance for newly licensed 
drivers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The questions that you’ve asked are part 
of many sort of complicated facets of what may be proposed 
around the graduated licences, and were actually going to be 
part of the discussion about how we might set up a program that 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

specifically related to Saskatchewan. For example, I think in 
Ontario they have some restrictions as to which roads you can 
drive on when you have one of these kinds of licences. 
 
Well we have no plans of doing anything like that in 
Saskatchewan, but one of the concerns that we have is that in 
the last part of the ’90s decade we’ve ended up with a pretty 
poor record on some of the traffic safety. And we know that 
young drivers, under age 19, are over-represented in all 
collisions — the fatal collisions, injury collisions, and property 
damage ones — by as much as 3:1. 
 
And so we’re looking at some things which will emphasize the 
fact that driving is a privilege, it’s something that you need to 
take some responsibility for, and we’re going to work together 
with the community in Saskatchewan so we can balance that 
with clearly what has to happen in the rural areas, where it’s 
very important that all of the people who are part of a family 
operation have the ability to drive to serve the needs of the 
farming operation with as little restriction as possible. 
 
So the goal is to balance those things in a way that makes sense 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’d certainly agree with the minister in that, 
you know, our youth are way over-represented in the number of 
collisions and fatalities and things like that. I guess the question 
I did have, and it was at the back end of my previous question, 
was the zero tolerance policy. And what sort of fines and 
penalties are you looking at in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The penalties would be the same as 
what’s now available for the point zero four for all of the other 
drivers. So it would be the same kinds of penalties that are 
there, you know, driving suspensions and things like that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one other area that I wanted to touch on 
here, and I see that it’s an area that I am interested in. It says 
that SGI has the ability to revoke a driver training school 
licence if it sees fit. What are some of the areas that SGI would 
see fit to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Under the present rules that we have 
before we proceed with this legislation, we can basically 
discipline drivers schools or the driving school owners by 
revoking their licence, but it could be up to 11 months, after a 
whole series of complaints come in. All this legislation does is 
allow for the revoking of that at a time when there are a number 
of complaints primarily about the safety aspects of the driving 
school. So this is a . . . before you just had to wait until they 
applied again for a new licence and you would say no. Now 
we’re saying, look if there’s enough concern we better get that 
particular driver trainer or that driver training school off the 
road. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I believe a year or 
two ago, maybe it was three or four years ago, that SGI was 
looking at hiring someone to evaluate the driver training 
schools around the province, and I wonder how that’s gone and 
if that has something to do with this — him finding problems 
and then not being able to do much about it until a year down 
the road. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think your surmise is correct that this 
comes out of that program which was introduced. SGI funds 
one position in the Department of Education, a person who goes 
and works with all of the driver trainers and driver training 
schools in the province. And there have been a couple of 
situations at least where it would have been appropriate to have 
the ability to revoke a driver training school licence. And so 
that came out of the program that you were talking about. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one final statement more than a 
question, is I think I would like to applaud SGI for going down 
that path because I know from experience in dealing with a lot 
of different driver educators that there needed to be some check 
on the system. 
 
For 30 years people were out conducting driver education and 
there was absolutely no check on the system. For the 10 years 
that I was involved I had no one check on it, and I think it’s a 
shame. And I think this person or even two or three, there’s a 
number of driver trainers out there that . . . and every driver 
trainer should be evaluated and see what type of a job they’re 
doing because it’s an extremely important job. 
 
So I applaud SGI for going down that path, and if it means 
revoking a licence mid-term, I think that’s a real good idea. 
 
I think my colleague from Cannington has one question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would just like to take this opportunity 
to thank the member opposite on behalf of SGI for your 
applause and thanks because we don’t get a lot of that these 
days. So thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister and 
your staff, I’d like to welcome you here today. 
 
One question. I was interested in the comments that were being 
made about the possibilities of going to zero tolerance on 
alcohol. There was a committee of this legislature that was 
struck a while back, Special Committee on Safe Driving 
reported I believe about three years ago. At that time the 
recommendation from that committee was not to go to zero 
tolerance. 
 
I wonder what the rationale is for a possible change? And will 
there be public input if a change is being made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that there’s been further 
experience in this area. One of the factors that leads us to bring 
this legislation forward this particular session is the fact that 
most other jurisdictions in North America have gone towards 
zero tolerance for new drivers. 
 
And basically some of the information used to be that there 
wasn’t that big a problem below .04, but now it appears that 
there is some evidence that that’s not accurate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You never 
responded on public input into it. 
 
And my colleagues want me to ask you another question 
dealing with motorized medical chairs. In light of the current 
situations before the courts, will there be licensing provisions 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

provided for those vehicles? Will there be requirements put in 
place for medical certificates to be qualified to utilize one of 
these without the licensing? What kind of insurance rates would 
apply if these vehicles had a licence? And will there be a dual 
medichairs for the transportation of a driver trainer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m advised that none of these things have 
been contemplated. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1900) 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I just ask the minister, is there any 
change in your officials for this Bill? There’s no change in 
officials. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again I’d 
like to welcome the minister and his officials here today for Bill 
No. 78. 
 
I’d like to go through some of the issues that we have on this 
particular Bill that make some significant changes in the 
operations of our highway system and the regulations that 
people must adhere to. But I do have one clause here that is 
bothering me and it is section 81.9 or in this particular Bill it’s 
clause 17(1), (2), and (3). I wonder if you’d mind explaining 
what the purpose of these clauses are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — These are the provisions in 81.9? Okay, 
these provisions enable the Highway Traffic Board to make a 
safety order against an operator or group of operators. It also 
includes the power for the board to increase the fines that they 
can impose on a carrier or group of carriers who don’t comply 
with the board’s safety order. 
 
It also . . . there are clauses in there that prevent operators from 
transferring any company assets without the board’s approval 
when the operator is required to attend before the board to 
explain why he or she has failed to comply with the board’s 
safety order. 
 
So they’re basically enforcement clauses around enforcement of 
safety orders. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From your 
comments in your second reading speech, you talk about a 
proposed amendment to establish a consistent seven-day grace 
period for both registration and insurance. 
 
In what cases are you thinking about? Is this when somebody 
transfers a vehicle or if someone has failed to renew their 
insurance within that seven-day period, or just where does it 
quality? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This just relates to purchase of a new 
vehicle or transfer a vehicle at that point. There’s a seven-day 
grace period both for the insurance and for the registration. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So this 
has nothing to do with somebody who is late in renewing their 
licence, and between the date of renewal and the date they 
actually get in there — let’s say three days — if anything 
should happen then there is no insurance and no registration 
applicable. I see the minister’s staff shaking their head negative. 
 
Mr. Minister, it talks about Saskatchewan . . . you talk about 
Saskatchewan residents being able to operate vehicles that are 
properly registered in another jurisdiction. Has that been a . . . 
something new that people in Saskatchewan have not been able 
to operate an out-of-jurisdiction vehicle here because I think it 
certainly has been happening. I see a heck of a lot of 
Saskatchewan residents driving Alberta-licensed vehicles, 
particularly company vehicles, Mr. Minister. 
 
Have they been operating without proper jurisdictional 
considerations, without at the end of the day, without insurance 
and registration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the member is correct in observing 
that it’s common practice to do this. But the present legislation 
prohibits the Saskatchewan resident from driving an 
out-of-province plated vehicle. But it is common practice. 
 
We want to change it so that the rules include allowing a person 
to drive their uncle’s car, if their uncle is from British Columbia 
or wherever, when they’re actually in Saskatchewan. So this is 
basically fixing something that nobody has perceived as a 
problem but there is a problem in the legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well if there’s a problem in the 
legislation, I’m surprised that some enterprising insurance 
company like SGI hasn’t found a loophole in there to take 
advantage of and to avoid making settlements. Has any of that 
happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Not that any official here is aware of, no. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: —Thank you, Mr. Minister. Further on in 
your comments, it talks about learner drivers under the age of 
16 are exempt from the requirement to wear a seat belt. I’m 
surprised that that would be the case also, Mr. Minister. How 
was that missed and . . . or is it not a problem? Why are you 
changing it now? If it was missed, was it missed by accident or 
was it some different interpretation in the Act that didn’t require 
it before and does require it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple explanation here is that 
there was no intention to have this exemption for drivers under 
age 16 who were using learner’s licence not being required to 
use their seat belts. And so practically this is correcting an error 
that was made. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
things that you’re changing in this particular Act is dealing with 
funeral processions. And you’re changing this. It says here that 
the current legislation that funeral processions must obey all 
rules of the road and obey traffic control signals. This 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

amendment would clarify the right of way at controlled 
intersections. Wouldn’t people still have to obey the traffic 
laws? If the lights change in the middle of a funeral procession, 
people would have to stop. And if they turn and follow the 
procession, the procession will be split, obviously, but don’t 
they have to meet the requirements of the road the same as 
everybody else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically a funeral procession follows the 
rules of the road, so at a controlled intersection, an intersection 
with a light, they would have to stop for the light. But if it’s a 
situation where it’s a stop sign and the people who are at that 
intersection yield and allow the procession to go through, then 
they would be allowed to do that. But the answer is that for a 
controlled intersection then they have to obey the signals. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In section 2(c) 
dealing with red light cameras, what kind of restrictions, if any, 
will be placed on the locations that they might be placed and 
what would the typical location be? Would it be an intersection 
in a community? Would it be on a highway? What kind of 
locations and what kind of restrictions might be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The use and the location of the red light 
cameras would be set by the local municipality. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It also talks 
about obstructions on your licences so that the red light cameras 
might not be able to take a photograph of your licence. What 
kind of obstructions are you talking about? With the weather 
we’re currently having in Saskatchewan, mud may very well be 
one of those obstacles. Or if you happen to be from the 
northwest part of the province, that might be grasshoppers. 
What type of thing are you talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think part of it does include good, old 
Saskatchewan mud. But I think it also is referring to the fact 
that there are some covers that one can get for their licence plate 
which makes it impossible for a photograph to be taken of the 
licence plate. And that’s specifically referenced. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, the Bill also talks about 
loading lights and beacons. What’s the necessity for making 
changes there? Why are you making changes to that area? I 
haven’t heard of a single person raising a concern about it, but 
what’s the rationale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular provision relates to the 
loading lamps that are used often on trucks when you’re loading 
the truck and they’re quite bright floodlights. And the concern 
is that these would be kept on when they’re going down the 
highway and therefore blinding other drivers so that they 
couldn’t see. And this is just covering that particular situation. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Just a couple of questions on the 
red light cameras, and I think when we’re doing estimates I asked 
a couple of questions regarding that also. I’m just interested to 
hear what type of study is SGI going to do with the red light 
cameras and the reduction. I mean the whole point of this is to 
reduce collisions at intersections and some of our major 
intersections. 
 
I notice the one out on Vic or Number 1 and Fleet. There are some 

cameras sitting way up high when I drive in and see them way up 
there and I make sure I’m paying attention. So hopefully it’s going 
to reduce the number of collisions and incidents at intersections. 
 
Is SGI going to be monitoring that and to see what sort of an effect 
there has been prior to the implementation of the red light camera 
as opposed to after it’s been in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Just a little piece of information that might 
be of interest. Over 40 per cent of the accidents in Saskatchewan 
take place at intersections. So there is concern to focus on that. 
 
What’s happening now is that the municipalities that are using the 
red light cameras on an experimental basis are collecting data. 
They work together with the person and/or people at SGI that are 
also collecting the data. And we’re hoping then to basically 
monitor how well this works to reduce accidents. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. The question that I had asked 
before in estimates was regarding the costing and where the 
fines, because probably there’ll be an increase in tickets issued. 
 
I’d be very interested to find out, if there is such a reduction in 
collisions and the savings that will be incurred by that because 
of the reduced collision, those savings, where will those be 
returned to? Because it will be a savings to SGI by not paying 
out as many claims and injuries and everything else. I’d be 
interested to know if there’s any idea of where you’re going to 
be targeting that — hopefully — the savings. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Any savings that would accrue here 
would accrue to the benefit of the motorists, keeping our rates 
down. So it would be that. But I would assume also that the 
nature of your question is, are there going to be other programs 
that would be encouraging safety. And I think the answer to that 
is yes, that SGI is always keeping their eyes and ears open for 
suggestions around programs that will improve traffic safety. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think that covers off most of the questions 
I had. I’d like to thank the minister and his staff, the ones that I 
know especially, for having input and giving us as much insight 
to these Bills as possible. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to thank the members 
opposite for your questions and ideas and suggestions. And as 
you will note, there are some places where we’re going to 
continue with community dialogue. And I would encourage 
those of you who have specific interest in some of these issues 
to make sure that you participate in whatever way you can. 
Thanks. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I’d just like to take 
a moment to thank the officials who are here and who have 
provided the advice as this legislation was developed. I very 
much appreciated all of their assistance. And with that, Mr. 
Chair, I would like to move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) 

 
The Chair: — Before I call Clause 1, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Social Services to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant deputy minister of 
the department. And seated beside Ms. Durnford is Dorothea 
Warren, the associate executive director of family and youth 
services. And seated behind Ms. Durnford is Ken Cameron, the 
senior program consultant, children’s services, family and youth 
services of the Department of Social Services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
minister and his officials for being here this evening. Mr. Chair, I 
have just a few questions for the minister, and I understand that 
most of the amendments are housekeeping in nature. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, under section 56(2), will 
there be a timeline put on a person for completion of their 
education, and could you please enlighten me on what it would be 
if this is the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The proposed provision stipulates 
that after the person completes his or her education, if that occurs 
before the person attains 21 years of age or after the person attains 
21 years of age. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, who decides whether or not a person’s needs for 
transition to adulthood are legitimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, this’d be a matter of 
discussion between the youth involved and the social worker to 
agree upon a plan for furthering their education or employment 
prospects. That plan must result in an agreement and that’s how 
we propose to proceed. And if at some point the agreement is 
broken then we always have the option of discontinuing with that 
plan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. I understand that the agreement is made between the 
minister and the youth. Could you give me a brief description as to 
what the terms of this agreement would be? 
 
The Chair: — Now why is the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — By leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to introduce 
Tammy Heinemen, who is a day care operator from North 
Battleford. She sat on the day care committee and has come to 

Regina specially this evening in order to witness the debate of 
this Bill. So I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming 
her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 9 – The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member’s question, an agreement might contain elements such 
as which courses it is that the youth proposes to enrol in; what 
the various costs might be that are associated with that, such as 
tuition; what plans there are for residence or shelter; and any 
additional support that may be required that would also then be 
outlined in the agreement. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
have sent over a copy of the amendment. Could you just give 
me a brief explanation of this, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, Mr. Chair. Hopefully that 
will be the last of the Y2K (Year 2000) problems that we’ve 
seen. 
 
In brief, this particular Act was amended in the spring of 1999 
when the legislature sat; and then subsequent amendments for a 
different part of the Act were introduced in the fall session of 
1999. So that therefore those amendments then became The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act (No. 2) dated 1999. 
But because of the exigencies of legal or of the Legislative 
Assembly and the Law Clerk’s, because this Act is being 
proposed to be passed in the year 2000, it should be retitled The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2000, and not No. 
2 because this would be No. 1 of 2000. And in short I think 
that’s the explanation, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, 
finally I would just like to thank the minister and his officials 
for their help in answering my questions here tonight. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — If I might, Mr. Chair, I want to 
thank the member for her questions this evening. 
 
Mr. Chair, the amendments I have are to amend the long title of 
the printed Bill by striking out (No. 2). Now I don’t know if 
we’re at that point? 
 
I move that we: 
 

Amend the Long Title of the printed Bill by striking out 
“(No. 2)”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, for clause 1 then I 
would move that we: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2)” 
and substituting “The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2000”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would like to thank 
my officials for attending here late in the evening on a rainy 
night. And having said that, Mr. Chair, I would move that we 
report the Bill with amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if I might 
have leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to 
introduce members of the minister’s Advisory Board on Child 
Care, who are here this evening to observe the discussions on 
The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
And they are seated in your gallery, and they are — as was 
pointed out by my colleague, the member for North Battleford 
— they include Tammy Heinemen of North Battleford, who is 
an unlicensed child care provider; Nona Laird of Regina, a 
licensed child care provider; and Myrna Mossing of Gray, a 
group family child care provider. 
 
I hope they find the proceedings interesting and informative. 
And I would ask all members to join me in wishing them a 
warm welcome, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the Minister of Social Services to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me again is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant deputy 
minister. Seated beside Ms. Durnford is Deborah Bryck, who is 
the director of child day care branch. Seated behind Ms. 
Durnford is Brenda Dougherty, the assistant director of child 
day care branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
believe what the Bill is doing is expanding some of the services 
and the opportunities for child care in this province. And I 

think, as you indicated the other day, a number of concerns 
were raised regarding child care and the original Act. 
 
The fact that, especially for rural residents, there just seemed to 
be some constraints that made it difficult for young couples to 
have access to child or day care programs, specifically if they 
were both working, and in some cases especially for those who 
may have part-time employment and trying to find an 
opportunity or a place where their children could be well looked 
after, especially if they didn’t happen to have parents around 
who enjoyed having the children come over for a while, such as 
we’ve been privileged to have for a number of years. 
 
And of course our children are beyond that stage, but I know 
when they were growing up, if my wife . . . and my wife was a 
substitute teacher. So it was always . . . if she was called in, it 
was always nice to know that our parents, or my parents were 
handy and they just enjoyed having our grandchildren come 
over or their grandchildren come over and babysit for a while in 
the afternoon, but we realize that for many young couples that 
may not be possible. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, the optimum in child rearing in this 
province or anywhere would be for a family member or a 
spouse to provide that child care and I firmly believe that, 
especially, Mr. Minister up until school age. And I think it’s 
very important for couples if it’s at all possible, to take the time 
to provide the care because they’re the ones that will be able to 
really provide that child with the type of training and the 
outlook on life a lot better than a caregiver. You’re going to 
implement your values and give your child a real opportunity to 
inherit those values. 
 
And when a child is very young, they’re very susceptible to 
what’s being taught to them. And if you’re concerned about the 
child rearing, I think, every couple should give serious 
consideration to . . . if at all possible, providing the care at home 
— being that at-home parent. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, we do realize that there were 
some situations in the former Bill where it was very difficult for 
parents to find the care . . . or even if they did find care, I 
believe, or a group home, or a child care home that would look 
after their children, many times they were refused because of 
the fact that there were limitations as a result of the number of 
children that could be looked after in that care home. 
 
So as I understand it, what this Bill does is provides an 
opportunity if you can find a location that is more central to 
meet the needs of the children you’re providing care for. It 
opens up the door for that rather than forcing parents to come to 
the residential home which may be out of the way. 
 
And secondly it expands the ability to provide care for up to . . . 
if I understand it correctly, for up to 12 children if there are two 
adults available versus the 8. Those I think are the two specific 
areas you’re addressing and maybe you could comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct. 
Those are the two main provisions. There is one further 
provision which makes it clear that under no circumstances can 
we accept that families or that child care providers attempt to 
provide for more than eight children in their care at any time. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

Just to make that crystal clear because we have some concerns 
about safety. 
 
But as the member points out, the two major provisions that are 
proposed to be changed is: one, is to allow a family child care 
provider to provide care for children in a home other than their 
own home; and secondly, to provide for a model, that we have 
been testing on a pilot basis for a number of years in rural 
Saskatchewan in response to concerns that people in rural 
Saskatchewan had, that allows for a home to care for up to 12 
children provided that there are two caregivers when there are 
more than eight children in the home. So the member is correct, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: —Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying 
. . . you made a comment earlier that, about a limitation of 
eight. I take it that still applies if there’s only one caregiver — 
is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — That is correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, so what we actually have here is the 
ability, and in more of the rural setting — and I understand that 
that’s what you’re specifically looking at — and the question I 
would have is, who determines who would qualify to provide a 
care home or child care home? Is it your department? Is there a 
level of criteria that’s followed up on? And who would a family 
or an individual go to to ask for a licence, if you will, to operate 
a child care home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if people are interested 
in providing child care on a licensed basis, we’d certainly 
encourage them to contact the regional office of the Department 
of Social Services and a child care consultant would be 
available to meet with them to explain to them the regulations 
that we belabour under that . . . also the advantages of operating 
as a licensed child care provider, as opposed to an unlicensed 
child care provider, and would work with them to ensure the 
necessary licensing, provided that they met all the requirements, 
recognizing that the benefits of operating as a licensed child 
care provider are that parents who are subsidized by Social 
Services, because of income receive subsidies for child care, we 
will do that if they obtain child care in a licensed facility. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just one 
further question, and that’s how many licensed daycare centres 
do we have in the province and what percentage would be rural 
if you . . . when I say rural probably looking outside of say the 
Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, P.A. (Prince Albert), North 
Battleford catch area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I can’t provide an 
urban-rural split on this. I don’t have that information. But there 
are 318 family homes, 113 non-profit daycare centres, 17 teen 
infant-toddler centres, 3 private centres, for a total of 133. I 
know that with respect to rural Saskatchewan we set into place 
a series of demonstration grants, if you will, to assist rural 
communities and rural people to look for ways to respond to 
evolving child care needs in rural Saskatchewan, and as 
witnessed in the amendments before us tonight. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, of those numbers — and 
I take it those numbers you gave were the licensed, or the 

recognized licensed facilities — how many would be just run 
privately or non-licensed facilities, or do you have any idea of 
how many child care centres there might be in the province 
operating without a licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wouldn’t want to hazard a guess, 
Mr. Chair. There are many private care arrangements in 
Saskatchewan, as the member pointed out, within families, 
sometimes extended families, sometimes friends. We would not 
be able to provide an estimate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, as was indicated 
earlier on in a number of our second reading speeches and 
adjourned debates, certainly this piece of legislation is 
something that our caucus certainly doesn’t have a problem 
with. We recognize the need and are pleased to see that there 
has been a recognition of that need, and I understand there has 
been a fair bit of consultation before the amendments were 
brought forward. So I thank you, Mr. Minister, and as well to 
your staff. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, just before I move the 
motion to report the Bill, I would like to thank the member for 
Moosomin for his questions this evening. We appreciate his 
support for this evolvement in daycare, especially for rural 
areas, and I should also like to thank the officials who are with 
us here tonight. Having said that I would like to move the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2145) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Research Council Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, The 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll move that Bill No. 39, 
The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Act, 2000 be now read the third time and passed under 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Student Assistance and Student 
Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 7, The Student Assistance and Student Aid 
Fund Amendment Act, 2000 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 35, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2000 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 9, The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2000, be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
Hon. Minister of Social Services to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant deputy minister of 
the department. Seated behind me is Bob Wihlidal, the 
executive director of financial management. Seated beside him 
is Dorothea Warren, the associate executive director of family 
and youth. Seated beside her is Richard Hazel, the executive 
director of family and youth. And seated in the rear are Deborah 
Bryck, the director of child day care; Brenda Dougherty, the 
assistant director of child day care; Larry Moffatt, the executive 
director of community living; Gord Tweed, the income security 
programs manager; and Marilyn Hedlund, the associate 
executive director of income support. And that’s it. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister 
and his officials, welcome. And I have a few questions here. 
I’m not going to belabour a lot of points because a few of my 
colleagues would like to . . . have some questions as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the annual report you show the income support 
for the estimated 2000 as a decrease in the neighbourhood of 
$12,500, I think is what it is, a decrease in that level. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, why there’s a decrease in that income 
support level when we’ve been talking about income supports 
for people, low fixed-income families. I’ve got a question to 
follow this in regards to a letter I’ve just received and I’m 
wondering if you could give an explanation for that decrease. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, Mr. Chair. A few years ago, 
the provinces and the federal government entered into 
agreements by which the federal government would provide a 
national child benefit to all children, or the parents of children 
in Canada, provided that the family met certain income 
qualifications. This program is based on a computation of a 
family’s income as stated in their income tax forms and 
automatically calculated. 
 
When the federal government entered into this arrangement, 
they agreed that they would increase the amount available under 
this child benefit over a number of years to reach a maximum 
level of about $2,500 per child. This would, as we understood it 
at that time, take five, six, seven years to reach that level. 
 
(2200) 
 
We took the position that rather than wait for Saskatchewan 
families to get the full benefit of the child benefit, that 
Saskatchewan would institute its own Saskatchewan child 
benefit in addition to the national child benefit, although those 
who receive the child benefit won’t see any distinction that 
way. They just receive the one cheque. So that we would be 
able to go to the $2,500 maximum child benefit immediately, 
and then as the federal government increased its commitment to 
the child benefit, we would be in a position to decrease our 
commitment to the child benefit and make those funds available 
for other programming needs within the department and 
throughout government. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, my 
colleague from Weyburn has some questions specifically 
related to this area so I’ll just defer for a moment. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and to the minister, I have a question 
about the employment supplement for low-income families. Could 
you tell me how this works? Who is eligible for this and what is 
the cut-off line for income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement provides a monthly supplement for 
families who apply. And they must apply and there is a 1 800 
number. People can call 1 877 (6 working). So that’s 1 877 (6 
working). And depending on the eligible monthly gross income 
and the number of children, a supplement can be provided. 
 
For example, if the eligible monthly gross income is $750, the 
supplement can be $156.25 for one child. But if there are four 
children, then the supplement would be $250. If the monthly 
income were $1,250, the supplement would be $131.25 for a 
single child and $236.25 for four children. 
 
This is contained in the program brochure and I can certainly 
undertake to send a copy of the brochure over to the member’s 
office — tomorrow. This is the only copy we have with us 
tonight. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, in light of what you 
have just told me then, I would like you to explain to the 
Assembly why a farm family that has a negative income is not 
eligible for this benefit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the answer is because 

the calculation is based on gross income. In fact it’s based on 40 
per cent of gross income, so if there were specific problems and 
the net income were less, they might not qualify. But it’s based 
on gross income. 
 
I might also state that this is a program that is unique to Canada, 
it’s something with which we don’t have a great deal of 
experience. There were questions raised when we designed the 
program. I remember the member for Humboldt raising 
questions about whether it should be based on gross income or 
some other indices. 
 
And we did not have clear experience from other jurisdictions 
to help us assess as to what the appropriate figure might be. 
And so at this point we still have it set at 40 per cent of gross 
income and that’s after roughly about a year and a half of 
operation. This is something that can be reviewed at some 
future time. 
 
We also point out that we’re planning to do an enclosure with 
the next national child benefit cheque that is going out, about 
the program, so that more farm families, more families 
generally in Saskatchewan, will be knowledgeable about the 
employment supplement. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and to the minister. I guess this is 
the whole issue, Mr. Minister, is that farm families have already 
received these pamphlets indicating that they would be eligible. 
And when they fill the form out they find out that they are not 
eligible because it’s 40 per cent of their income, which 
absolutely doesn’t have any bearing on reality in the farm 
situation today. So we are penalizing the farm families by 
saying they can only qualify for 40 per cent of their income, 
whereas people on a fixed wage automatically qualify. 
 
I would like to ask the minister how you plan to change this and 
if you’re going to change it soon so people can benefit from it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would point out 
that this year the provincial and federal governments were able 
to negotiate an assistance package for farm families in 
Saskatchewan. There are a number of components to that 
package, including write-offs, or a rebate for property taxes. 
The fuel tax is gone. There is also the, I believe it’s $240 
million under the Canada-Saskatchewan assistance program. 
Plus generous — or perhaps not generous, but anyway 
substantial — cash advances, loans. And we feel that’s the best 
way to help farm families. 
 
Again, our experience with this type of program is very limited 
and we have no real experience from other jurisdictions to 
guide us in this particular area. And as we accrue greater 
experience we may be able to become more sensitive to various 
issues as they arise — whether it’s on the farm or off the farm. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, for the minister. 
Mr. Minister, speaking of being sensitive to farm families, it 
was your government — after the opposition brought it to your 
attention that we asked you if farm families were going to 
benefit from this employment supplement program, and it was 
after that inquiry by the opposition, I believe, that there was 
consideration for farm . . . or certainly there was debate in the 
House on that — that your government decided that they would 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

include farm families. 
 
Now certainly your government is knowledgeable enough to 
understand that the gross income of a farm family is far 
removed from their net income. There are costs associated with 
farming that bring the actual net income down to about 
one-tenth of what a gross income is. And so, Mr. Minister, we 
need to have fairness and equitable treatment for farm families 
as far as this employment supplement program goes. 
 
It doesn’t really take looking at another province to see what’s 
happening. It is clear in this province, if you understand what 
farmers are going through here and what kind of a margin they 
have between net income and gross income, that it’s pretty clear 
that you should be considering their net income as the basis for 
issuing or making them eligible for this employment 
supplement program. 
 
I think that other provinces may have something to offer — but 
I think it’s obviously up to you to make sure that you’re looking 
into that — if they have the same sort of program. 
 
Now I don’t know what you’re shaking your head about, but I 
do know that there are a lot of farm families out there that are 
completely dismayed, Mr. Minister, when they get their 
application form and they find out that this eligibility for 
application is based on their gross income. It is totally unfair 
because it is unlike any other working sector in the province in 
as far as they have a great deal of costs associated with their 
farming operation. So their gross income is much, much, much 
higher than their net income. 
 
And I’m just asking you if your government has taken that into 
consideration or will in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to correct 
something. The member stated that if it weren’t for the interest 
by the opposition that farmers would not have been included in 
this program and nothing could be further from the truth. The 
fact of the matter was that farmers were included in this 
program from the very start. 
 
The member raised questions in the Legislative Assembly about 
the question of gross income versus net income as was raised 
tonight to be sure. I recognize that. But farmers were included 
as part of this program from the very outset as farmers are also 
eligible for social assistance in Saskatchewan if they qualify. 
Farmers, or also farm families will also, depending on their 
income, income flow, receive the national and Saskatchewan 
child benefit and also will be eligible for a supplementary 
health coverage if they benefit from the child benefit. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member talks about other provinces. Perhaps 
she could enlighten the Assembly about what other provinces 
offer a program such as this because I am not aware of any. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, what I 
issued to you was a challenge to look at other provinces, if in 
fact other provinces had a program . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m not aware of any program like this. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right, if they have no program like that so be 

it. If this program is going to be fair and equitable to all people 
then there has to be consideration taken for the situation farm 
families are in, in as far as their income goes. 
 
So I guess I’m not going to stand and argue with you all night, 
Mr. Minister, in as far as who brought forward the idea that 
farm families should be considered. But when this program was 
announced there wasn’t to my recollection very much 
indication or any indication that farm families would be 
included, as you know that they would be able to have 
application for this program. After some questioning went 
forward I think that there was a mention by the minister that 
that would certainly be looked into and considered. 
 
So I rest my case and I just thank my colleague for allowing me 
to make a few statements. And, Mr. Minister, it is a good 
program. We’re asking no for fairness and equitability for farm 
families with others in the province when it comes to 
application and being eligible for application for this 
supplement program. 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, that 
nearly 500 farm families have received the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement since the program started in July of 
1998, but I do recall the member raising questions about this 
program in the spring of 1999. So the program was in existence 
before the member had raised questions about the entitlement of 
farm families for this specific program. And that’s the record. 
 
Again the member asked us to look at other jurisdictions. I’ve 
indicated that it is a considerable difficulty for us that there is 
no experience in other jurisdictions that might guide us with 
respect to this particular program. 
 
No other jurisdiction in Canada has a program akin to the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement that assists working 
families, including farm families. We don’t have any 
experience. We’re unique here. We’re leading the nation in this. 
So if we had help from other jurisdictions we’d love to get it, 
but we just don’t have it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — To the minister. Mr. Minister, on many accounts 
the opposition has been asking the government of the day, 
which is your NDP government, to take a leadership role. If 
there aren’t any other jurisdictions, fine; possibly you could just 
take some internal leadership in your caucus and see that farm 
families are treated more equitably as far as accessing this 
supplement. 
 
And that is what they’re asking. I don’t think there’s any need 
for going on with this. I ask yourself, as minister, to speak with 
your cabinet and with your government to ensure that farm 
families are treated better in this instance. 
 
And 500 farm families, Mr. Minister, just a reminder, are not a 
great number of families. I believe there were over 2,000 
families that did receive employment supplement funding — if 
I can recall correctly what your answer to my question was in 
this regard — so 500 families is not a great deal. 
 
And I guess it also remains to be seen and should be disclosed 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

exactly how much each of those families received. Because 
when you're looking at their gross income, I don’t think it can 
be a great deal of help to them. Any amount is welcome, but I 
think we have to be clear about the facts. And I don’t believe 
that there would be a great amount because of the stipulations 
involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate the member’s 
comments, Mr. Chair. And I can say that we will undertake to 
review this program over time — not only for farm families but 
for all families in Saskatchewan — as to whether it’s meeting 
the objectives that were first set out and is doing so in an 
efficient fashion and in a fashion that helps the children in 
Saskatchewan, whether they be children in our cities and towns 
or whether they be children in farm families. And that would be 
our intention, Mr. Chair, so I thank the member for her 
question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of committees, and 
welcome to the minister’s officials and to the minister through 
you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Just two quick questions on funding for supported employment 
programs in the province. In Swift Current we have . . . and 
many communities have various agencies that help deliver this 
program on behalf of their clients. In Swift Current, the 
Southwest Ability Centre is the agency that really does a 
remarkable job of providing services to their clients through 
programs like this and others frankly. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could outline for us the 
funding mechanism for this supported employment program, or 
at least I guess I should call it the planning process for it. I 
understand that not just ability centres in the province, but other 
agencies involved in the program have asked the government 
for some way of improving . . . I guess no government funding 
is fixed per se; it’s all subject to change. But they’re looking for 
more surety. 
 
And I wonder if you could outline specifically what they have 
asked for by way of funding changes in that regard? And what 
the department’s response has been to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, in Saskatchewan we 
have a network, I believe about 60 rehabilitation centres 
throughout the province that — I think the exact number might 
be 62 — that provide employment opportunities for people with 
primarily intellectual disabilities. And we have felt the need 
over time to help people with intellectual disabilities to locate 
employment opportunities in the community with regular 
employment, regular employers, and regular employment 
situations. 
 
So in this year’s budget we announced that there would be 
$300,000 extra to assist the disability community to look for 
specific ways in which that form of employment might be 
encouraged. 
 
We are in the process of negotiating with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres, which is an umbrella 
group for the 62 rehabilitation centres, to obtain their assistance 
in administering the funds and reaching out, not only to the 62 
centres across Saskatchewan, but also other groups in 

Saskatchewan that may have an interest, and to come forward 
with specific ideas on how to promote supported employment in 
the community. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
appreciate the answer, and in addition to the additional funding 
in the budget for what I believe is a worthwhile program as 
well. But I guess one area, just one area of my question that you 
didn’t quite touch on, is this issue of the desire on the part of 
these agencies and SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres), I guess, for its members to do a little 
more long-term planning in this regard, to have some greater 
surety of monies not only in the current fiscal year but in the 
future. 
 
So under the process that you just outlined or the direction that 
you’ve just outlined, the department is trying to go with SARC. 
Is that on the table and what’s the department’s response to it? 
Is the department open to this concept of providing a little bit 
more surety, for perhaps long-term funding for this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, the funding that 
has been provided this year, $300,000, is in concert with an 
increase of funding through Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training under the employment assistance for persons 
with disabilities, the EAPD (employability assistance for people 
with disabilities) program, and I understand that increase in 
funding is about $1 million. 
 
The question we have is to find opportunities for persons with 
intellectual disabilities in addition to persons with other 
disabilities to access those funds under Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. And we felt that it’s necessary to 
provide additional funds for the disability community, to work 
with them to help them identify these additional opportunities 
and to take advantage of the EAPD funding that is there as a 
result of negotiations with Ottawa. 
 
So for that reason we’ve allocated $300,000 in the budget this 
year. We’re hoping to allocate a similar amount next year again 
to see if there’s an infusion of new ideas and new interest, 
sparking new interest in communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. And after the two years we’ll evaluate where 
we’re at in that program. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Just one very 
final question and it goes to the same issue. I guess if you were 
speaking directly to the 62 agencies in the province, Minister, 
and they were asking you the question about five years down 
the road — understanding the vagaries of budgeting with 
government, with any organization frankly — what are our 
chances that we can plan on being able to offer this kind of 
supported employment program that far down the road or 
further into the future I guess? What would you be able to tell 
those folks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — On this all I could say, Mr. Chair, 
is that the EAPD is the successor to a former program — the 
VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons program). 
That program has been in existence for many, many years. We 
expect that the EAPD will similarly be there for many years to 
come, and be there to support people with disabilities including 
people with intellectual disabilities. 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

We see our funding at this point as being a short-term stimulus 
to help the rehabilitation community to identify some of those 
opportunities so that in the long run we can make better access 
for people with intellectual disabilities of those funds that are 
there. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and through you 
to the minister. First of all I’d like to welcome the officials here 
this evening. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, is with respect to the 
community-based organizations providing services to people 
with disabilities, and as you are aware we have a large number 
of agencies in this province that do an absolutely marvellous 
job of providing some very high quality residential vocation 
employment services to people with disabilities. 
 
Some of the challenges that those organizations have had to 
face over the last couple of years have increased dramatically, 
not the least of which are some of the changing demographics 
and aging population. And interestingly enough, in some way 
some of the agencies are a victim of their own success in that 
they’ve been very successful moving people with disabilities 
into employment situations. Consequently the individuals 
remaining in need of service are typically a more severely 
disabled individual. 
 
And the various staffing ratios that are made available to these 
organizations are based on level of ability. At the 
developmental centre level, the staffing ratio is 1:4; at the 
activity centre, I believe it’s 1:8; and at the sheltered workshop 
level, it’s 1:12. 
 
There’s always been some debate about whether those are 
adequate or not, but the one difficulty in that, Mr. Minister, has 
been that the managers of those agencies are included in those 
staffing ratios. 
 
Now a number of years ago that may have been entirely 
appropriate when the organizations were smaller and far less 
sophisticated than what they are today. But now we’re looking 
at organizations that are very much larger than what they were a 
number of years ago. Some of them are extremely sophisticated 
operations and the manager’s responsibilities and duties just do 
not allow them to directly supervise clients, residents, 
participants, employees, or whatever the case may be. 
 
And SARC, the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres, has passed a number of resolutions over the years, and 
I know that individual member agencies of SARC have lobbied 
your department to have managers withdrawn from the staffing 
ratio. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is there any thought to doing that, 
what would the cost of doing that be, and what would any kind 
of time frame for implementation of removing managers from 
the staffing ratios be? Thank you. 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, this is a funding issue 
that represents about $1.4 million. Our rough calculation is that 
for about 40 centres that would be affected at $35,000 per 

centre for management positions, it calculates into about $1.4 
million. This will be an issue of discussion with the SARC 
managers — in this year; likely will be next year. 
 
But we have made other changes. We have recognized, as the 
member points out, that we’re beginning to see an increase of 
clients in the rehabilitation centres who have multiple 
disabilities or very severe disabilities, and so some of the front 
. . . some of the funding for the front-end workers has changed. 
So some of the ratios now, for example, can be 1:2 depending 
on the caseloads that some workers may have. 
 
So there has been some recognition in that area. There hasn’t 
been the recognition of the issue that the member raises, but 
these are things in the long term that we hope that we can carry 
on with support for the rehabilitation community. We have just 
finished a program, I think, of four years of 4 per cent increases 
to the rehabilitation centres. This year there’s a further 2 per 
cent increase to help them with wage costs and the like, and we 
look forward to continuing our support in the years to come. 
And I want to thank the member for that particular question. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just 
one very quick question with respect to an issue we discussed in 
previous estimates. The vocational and transition program at 
Hudson Bay that’s being developed and established there, can 
you provide us with an update, Mr. Minister, as to where that’s 
at and what is the expected start date of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, the 
negotiations have been concluded. The funding is there and it is 
my understanding . . . I’m informed that the program can start 
just about any day now. I think all the necessary signatures have 
been granted, and so yes, any day. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, one of the most 
sensitive issues and one of the most heart-wrenching issues we 
have to deal with as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) has been with custodial and non-custodial parents 
and the children that are torn between them in cases of divorce. 
And often we get calls to our office, as I’m sure you do to 
yours, about the fact that the parents aren’t able to see their 
children. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve got one specific case where a non-custodial 
parent had charges laid against him that were later dropped, and 
there was no effort on anybody’s part to further pursue it, but 
still the worker is not allowing the non-custodial parent to have 
any kind of visiting rights even though he was allowed to under 
the court access before the charges were laid. And, Mr. 
Minister, without having the funds to go to court and further 
pursue it, this non-custodial parent is left without having the 
rights to see his child. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have contacted your office about different 
cases along this line and I know that it’s an issue that social 
workers deal with all the time and they find it difficult. But I’m 
wondering what can we be doing to help these parents to make 
sure that the children have the benefit of having both of their 
parents in their lives as the court has originally asked this to be 
. . . asked to be part of the children’s lives. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The member raises what is a very 
difficult area for our social workers. Suffice to say that, separate 
and apart from any determination that the courts may have 
about custody and the like, when we receive stated concerns 
about the safety of children, neglect, and abuse, then we have an 
obligation to respond, to investigate, and to act accordingly. 
 
Sometimes we investigate and there are no real issues. It was a 
complaint made by someone that ought not to have been made. 
Sometimes complaints are made and the safety of the children 
is at risk, and then we take the appropriate action — sometimes 
with the agreement of the parent. 
 
If there’s a need to remove the children from the home, then we 
look to . . . if in the case of the one parent, we try if at all 
possible to place the children with the other parent. If that’s not 
workable then we will sometimes . . . or we try to look to 
extended family to look after the children — if that’s not 
possible, sometimes foster care — until such a time as the 
courts can make a determination as to what should be done in 
the absence of the parents not being able to do so. 
 
All I can say is that when we receive complaints we are obliged 
to respond, to investigate, and to take the appropriate action at 
that time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, but in the case when the justice 
system has already determined that there’s no legitimacy to the 
complaint and all charges were dropped, then your department 
has determined that they still won’t allow the court ordered 
judgment to go ahead. On what grounds does your department 
determine that there is more problems than the justice system 
sees? When can the parents actually feel that they have been 
absolved of any problem and they have the right to see their 
child again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, there may be instances 
where complaints are made and both the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) and our department will investigate. 
And the RCMP may determine that they have insufficient 
information on which to base criminal charges. But there may 
be sufficient information for my department to continue with its 
investigation and to act because there may be cases of abuse or 
neglect even if that doesn’t lend itself to criminal charges being 
appropriate in the eyes of the police. There may be instances 
where we still need to proceed for the safety of the children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, a number of 
individual concerns. But I’m going to actually ask, Mr. 
Minister, if I forward a number of these for an immediate 
response. 
 
I would have to say first of all though just before I get into a 
couple of concerns I would like to raise here. Mr. Minister, I’m 
not exactly sure from the comment you made earlier if you 
really understand what a cash advance is. A cash advance is 
nothing more than a loan, and for an agriculture producer you 
take a cash advance out, the very first thing that happens when 
you deliver any product to market is that that funding . . . the 
income from that goes strictly to the cash advance. You don’t 
have anything to even take home to put against expenses that 
may be still incurring on you. So I think it’s important for 
people to realize that a cash advance is not free money. It’s 

money that has to be paid back. It’s like a loan. It really isn’t 
income and it’s usually taken just to cover expenses so that you 
can continue to operate. So I think that’s important for us to 
realize. 
 
Another comment in regards to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and her comments. I think sometimes, Mr. 
Minister, and certainly a number of situations have been 
brought to my attention, one begins to wonder at times if 
workers . . . when they’re responding to concerns that are 
raised, and especially in domestic situations, I think too many 
times be it the husband or be it the wife, complaints against the 
other spouse are fairly common, because of the turf war if you 
will that takes place in trying to get custody of children. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure if sometimes your department staff 
end up getting caught in this turf war in determining whether or 
not one spouse or the other should see a child. Certainly I’ve 
got a couple situations very locally where the fathers haven’t 
seen their children for six years, even though they’re supposed 
to have access. And part of the problem is they happen to be 
working away. And when you’re working on the rigs and 
you’re away for two months and you’re home for about two 
weeks and you come home and you don’t get a chance to see 
your child even though you have custody, and yet at the same 
time every time your cheque comes you’re sending a cheque to 
cover the support payments. So those are areas of very 
significant concern. 
 
(2245) 
 
And I think . . . I know what we’re discussing here actually has 
an overlap in Justice as well. But I think it’s very important that 
we recognize the fact that there are fathers out there who . . . 
and children need to have access to and be . . . have some input 
from the fathers in their child rearing as well. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, a couple of concerns that were 
raised here. And one comes from a pastor in a community in 
our province, who brings up the fact that in his involvement in 
this community there’s a food bank was set up some two years 
ago and continues to function to the point that they’re not 
exactly sure where to turn. 
 
The concern he has is that they provide a service to transients, 
to single parents, to those on social assistance, to the working 
poor, and to those who do not qualify for social assistance yet 
find it difficult to hang on to a job. 
 
And I guess what he is raising here is wondering where do they 
really turn? They’ve got this food bank set up and he’s 
wondering where the Department of Social Services is coming 
in and why they’re even providing assistance to people on 
social assistance. 
 
I would take it he feels . . . his belief is that the department 
should be helping and assisting people to provide for 
themselves, and why are they coming to the food bank looking 
for assistance? 
 
Now I can see it when it comes to transient workers. But, Mr. 
Minister, I’m wondering, has your office been consulted in 
regards to providing assistance to transients who may be 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

travelling across our province or from our province to another 
province, looking for work? Is there a means whereby 
consultation can be taken with your department in providing 
some assistance to meet the needs of individuals who are just 
travelling across the province? 
 
And also — maybe I’m just throwing too many questions at 
once — but the letter also brings out the fact that Mr. Martin 
talked about more help for families, or poor families across our 
province or across this country, in his recent budget. And is the 
province of Saskatchewan seeing any funding beginning to 
trickle down to assist in meeting the needs of those less 
fortunate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if there are transient 
individuals who can demonstrate to us that they have some 
opportunity, whether it’s in another community in 
Saskatchewan or in another community outside of 
Saskatchewan, if they can demonstrate that they have, for 
example, a job to go to or someone who can assume 
responsibility for them, then we can provide short-term 
assistance to help them with that. 
 
We will also work with other agencies including The Salvation 
Army and the RCMP where, if they determine that such help at 
a particular time is appropriate, then we’ll support them in 
doing that as well. 
 
With respect to the issue of poverty and . . . I am optimistic that 
given the changes that has been made that we will begin to see 
increasing impacts on the issue of child poverty in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As I indicated earlier, we moved immediately to a fully mature 
national child benefit which provides assistance of up to $2,500 
per child, I believe, maximum. In addition to that we have the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement which can provide a 
further, oh, perhaps up to $3,000 in some circumstances, plus 
family health benefits so that those poor people who might have 
been in receipt of social assistance but now have financial 
incentives to work, we can continue to provide supplementary 
health benefits for the children and their families so that some 
catastrophic illness doesn’t put them back onto social assistance 
because the assistance for health benefits was more generous 
under that program. 
 
We believe that this year when the statistics come out by 
campaign 2000 that we have reason to be optimistic although, 
you know, given statistics and how they’re measured are always 
subject to discussion. But we feel that we’re on the right track 
with the changes that we have made, which especially help the 
working poor in Saskatchewan including farmers whose income 
has been depressed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, you recently 
received a letter by the Leader of the Official Opposition in 
regards to a circumstance that was raised with our caucus, and 
brought to my attention as well, from a gentleman concerned 
about how some people misuse social assistance. And I believe 
the former minister was also . . . the concern was raised at one 
time and I believe in regards to the same instance. 
 
And I just would like to know tonight, Mr. Minister, what has 

been done? If you will or what is normally done when people 
raise these issues? Do you take them seriously and are 
corrective measures taken so that people don’t feel that they can 
continue to try and find ways to circumvent the proper use and 
the funds that are available for individuals who are legitimately 
in need of assistance and find themselves — and I’m sure your 
department as well — as funds get a little tighter, may be trying 
to reach out to meet the needs of others. 
 
So I’d like a comment from you, Mr. Minister, as to how these 
types of circumstances are dealt with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if I could just say with 
respect to the individual situation that the member raises, or for 
that matter any time that someone contacts our department 
about what they believe to be abuse of social assistance, we 
investigate. We have income verification officers located 
throughout our regional offices in Saskatchewan and we do 
investigate those complaints and act appropriately. 
 
And we do receive calls on an ongoing basis, not just in letter 
form from the Leader of the Opposition. We receive calls on an 
ongoing basis and we investigate them. 
 
I might say that Saskatchewan has comprehensive controls to 
prevent fraud and abuse. We have a sophisticated computer 
system to administer benefits. We have a provincial client 
registration system which prevents clients from receiving 
benefits in more than one location. We have client matching 
with other western provinces and some federal government 
departments and other provincial government departments. 
 
And as I indicated, we have verification workers, 30 of them, 
located throughout the province to assist case workers in 
confirming client circumstances. And the public may contact 
the department at any time to advise of possible fraud and all 
concerns are investigated. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, another 
question to the minister, and I hope you can appreciate, Mr. 
Minister, that we’re actually keeping our questions fairly short 
tonight. There’s some areas that I could really delve into a little 
more in-depth. 
 
But a couple general . . . and I will take the time, Mr. Minister, 
to forward these complaints directly to you to get a clearer 
answer in regards to the specific issue. But in generalities, in 
two questions I have here, one is in regards to assistance. A 
lady had gone on maternity leave and her maternity benefits 
didn’t kick in, so for a while social assistance did kick in and 
then her maternity benefits kicked in. And now she finds herself 
told that while she’s not back to work that she should go for 
employment benefits, but there seems to be a lag. 
 
What does your department do? Will your department assist a 
person in that case until employment benefits kick in, in 
receiving some assistance to tide them through that time until 
those benefits kick in? And I would assume that . . . it would 
seem to me, and I guess this is something the department should 
be making very well aware of, if the employment benefits 
actually trigger and are retroactive to a period of time and 
assistance has been paid until those employment benefits kick 
in, if I’m not mistaken those benefits then would either be asked 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

. . . would then become an overpayment, if I’m correct. 
 
So I think people need to be aware of the fact, and if that’s true, 
we just need to make sure people are aware of, if you’re giving 
them assistance to carry them through, that if employment 
benefits are retroactive that there may be an overpayment so 
that people aren’t caught and coming to me or to your office 
and saying, well why am I now being asked for a repayment of 
these benefits? 
 
And secondly, if I can do two questions at once here, another 
situation where a person has . . . maybe I’ll do that one separate. 
 
A letter regarding an overpayment went out, however there was 
nothing in the letter to explain exactly what the overpayment 
was for, and some inquiries had been made as to why this 
overpayment is requested with no real response from the 
department. And I wonder exactly, Mr. Minister, what happens 
in situations where a letter may go out but it doesn’t seem to be 
very clear as to what the overpayment was for. What action is 
taken by the department to address that concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, and 
again as I mentioned earlier, we do have client matching with 
some federal government departments, including employment 
insurance. And so when someone comes to us and says look, 
I’m eligible for employment insurance, I’m expecting a cheque 
in a couple of week’s time, we can provide him an advance on 
those funds. And we do have an agreement that those funds will 
be returned, paid back once the employment insurance benefits 
are actually received. 
 
With respect to if someone receives a letter about an 
overpayment, and it’s not clearly indicated as to why the 
overpayment is indicated, there should be a phone number on 
the letter as to who to call to get information if they’re not clear 
about that. And if that doesn’t work, they can certainly write to 
your office or to my office and we’ll make sure that it’s looked 
after by the appropriate officials. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, another situation 
that was brought to my attention — and again I’ll forward more 
information in regards to this — it’s from an individual with I 
believe three children who are all challenged and trying to send 
them to camp this summer — and I’m not sure, I don’t think 
she’s sending all three; looking at at least sending one — and 
was told to use some respite funds. And I don’t exactly 
understand all the avenue of respite. I assume that because of 
challenged children, she has . . . gets some funds for some care 
for those children so that she gets a break every once in a while. 
 
But her comment is that the respite funds would not cover even 
the cost of one child going to a camp, and if she did use respite, 
then she’d have nothing to assist her to give her a break during 
the year. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what is exactly 
done? Does your department work to assist people in giving 
children an opportunity to attend camp, especially children who 
are challenged, and what avenues do you follow? Or do you 
require that the few funds that are available to assist in some of 
the care that may be needed would be used up there for a parent 
who was forced then to rely solely on benefits and no respite 

later on in the year where they may be finding it’s very difficult 
for them to continue on providing that care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m informed that 
in-home supports that are managed by parents who receive a 
financial subsidy are available up to 60 days per year and up to 
$28 per day, and that can be used as respite care or, if the family 
wishes, they could also make arrangements for a recreational 
camp as the member outlined. But the maximum is 60 days at 
$28 per day. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so what you’re basically 
saying though, your department really has nothing to assist 
families and assist some young people who are coming from 
homes where they receive assistance to have an opportunity for 
any kind of a camp program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’ll just point out that 
where parents are supported by our department and they have a 
child with intellectual disabilities, the parents do have the 
option to determine how they will utilize the funds which are 
available, which is as I indicated 60 days at $28 a day, and they 
can use those as respite days or they can use that in part for 
camps if they so desire; but that’s the limit we set. The 
exception to that because of historical reasons and federal cost 
sharing, and what was initially deemed to be a therapeutic 
opportunity is Camp Easter Seal where there would be no 
charge to the parents if their children attended that camp. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, as well as another area 
that concern is being raised is the fact that when students of 
families on assistance when there is student day trips such as 
during the school year, sometimes they find that what’s 
available just doesn’t quite meet the need, or sometimes 
students don’t actually have the opportunity to have the same 
involvement as students of parents who aren’t on assistance. 
And is there any assistance that . . . I’m not aware of any, but is 
there is any assistance that would just be kind of a supplement 
to families to provide for their children to take advantage or be 
involved in some of the student or the school programs outside 
of the average school day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would point out that 
for families who are on social assistance, we do provide support 
for school supplies at the beginning of the year. For children 
under 6 we provide $50, for children age 6 to 13 it’s $85, and 
14 and over it’s $130. If there are in addition to the need for 
supplies, if there are school trips, we do not provide support per 
se. 
 
It definitely is better off for families to be working and to have 
the support of the national and Saskatchewan child benefit and 
the Saskatchewan employment supplement because there’s 
certainly more generosity under that program for low income 
families. 
 
I would point out though that with the increase, not only of the 
national child benefit but there’s also an increase this year in the 
federal child tax credit, there will be some small number of 
dollars, I believe $7 per child, available for families on 
assistance as well. 
 
And I also point out that families on assistance will be eligible 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

now for the provincial sales tax rebate, and I believe they’ll see 
their first cheque, I think, in the month of October. And that’s 
for families on assistance as well. We won’t claw that back so 
they’ll have those . . . that additional cash flow during the 
month of October to assist them with additional needs such as 
this. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if I 
understood you correctly. You mentioned about clawing back 
some funds if there’s some . . . were you talking about some 
extra additional federal funds that are going to be available and 
that your department would be clawing back? That word 
clawback raises . . . certainly raises some red flags, and I’m not 
exactly sure what you mean by what I . . . I guess the question I 
would have is if the federal government is going to be kicking 
in a little more, why would the province then all of a sudden 
decide they’re going to have to cut back on their level of 
support? 
 
And, if you will, if the cheque has already gone out, wouldn’t it 
be easier in recognition of working hand in hand, of having 
your income, the provincial income already hit that stage, rather 
than a clawback? It’s easier to just give the appropriate funds 
rather than trying to clawback something that’s already been in 
people’s hands and they’ve obviously had a need for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, this is going to get 
increasingly complicated. In addition to the National Child 
Benefit, there’s also a federal child tax credit. And in addition 
to increases in the National Child Benefit that the federal 
government agreed to do in co-operation with the provinces, 
and where we would treat any funds received under the child 
benefit as income when we assess eligibility for social 
assistance, in addition thereto, there is also a smaller sum under 
the child tax credit. 
 
And in addition to the increase in the National Child Benefit 
this year, the federal government also provided for a small 
increase in the child tax credit. But we do not propose to 
clawback that increase under the child tax credit, so there will 
be some small increase for families on social assistance as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I have 
it. But I guess I would just suggest that, as we look at working 
together, when the federal government is coming with 
programs, just designing and kind of working hand in hand so 
that when increases are there and you work hand in hand so you 
don’t find yourself in a position where there may be a place 
where — maybe clawback is the wrong word — but where an 
overpayment may result, that we’ve always got the payments 
coordinated. 
 
Just one other question I have before the member from 
Humboldt I think has a couple questions, unless my colleagues 
and I have addressed all of her concerns. But, Mr. Minister, a 
major concern for people with disabilities is transportation. And 
while I’m not exactly sure if this specifically falls in your area 
— I don’t think it does; I think it’s municipal — but I think, Mr. 
Minister, your department still would have some involvement 
because of the fact that a lot of people on disabilities do receive 
support from the department. 
 
(2315) 

And the question I would have, Mr. Minister, is what is your 
department doing in working with Municipal Government to 
address the problem of accessible transportation for people with 
disabilities? So that they can indeed get out to some of the 
services that they certainly do require, rather than being 
housebound on many occasions because of the lack of 
transportation. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department is doing 
something to work kind of hand in hand to address these 
concerns with the minister of Municipal Government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct. 
The question of transportation for people with disabilities is 
something that falls under the jurisdiction of Municipal Affairs, 
Culture and Housing and I think the member would be pleased 
to entertain any questions on that program. We certainly would 
have an interest or do have an interest in what happens in that 
program because we are concerned about people with 
disabilities. 
 
I might say that people who are eligible for social assistance, if 
there is a demonstrated need for transportation assistance 
related to employment or health or things of that nature, we 
certainly can provide assistance to those families and 
individuals who require that at that point in time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would like to 
just issue a question to you in regards to the exploitation, sexual 
exploitation of children and youth. Mr. Minister, there was a 
declaration and agenda for action that was presented by sexual 
exploitation . . . sexually exploited children and youth and 
delegates that were at the conference in Victoria, British 
Columbia, in March of 1998. And the declaration that was 
submitted as a result of this conference in part had in it that: 
 

We declare that the term child or youth prostitute can no 
longer be used. These children and youth are sexually 
exploited and any language or reference to them must 
reflect this belief. We declare this commercial sexual 
exploitation of children and youth is a form of child abuse 
and slavery. We declare that all children and youth have 
the right to be protected from all forms of abuse, 
exploitation, and the threat of abuse, harm, or exploitation. 
 

That is just in part some of the declaration. 
 
Do you as Minister of Social Services in this province, who 
initiated our own committee to deal with the prevention of 
sexual abuse and exploitation of children, do you as minister 
agree with the declaration brought forward at the time of the 
summit in Victoria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, it’s fair to say that our 
approach that we enunciated some, oh I think, two years ago in 
this area, in part legislative response and working with 
communities to assist children who are caught up in the sex 
trade, we took the position, as does the declaration, that children 
are victims and needed to be dealt with from that point of view. 
And that formed, I think it’s fair to say, the basis for our 
approach at that time. 
 
But as the member knows, we have questions about whether 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

that is the right approach, and think all of us do in 
Saskatchewan. And therefore we’ve asked a committee of the 
Legislative Assembly, chaired by the Chair and the member, to 
delve into these issues and to provide advice to the Legislative 
Assembly and the government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, I am particularly interested in whether 
you agree with the one statement: 
 

We declare that all children and youth have the right to be 
protected from all forms of abuse, exploitation, and the 
threat of abuse, harm, or exploitation. 
 

In adjunct to that, another declaration: 
 

We declare that governments are obligated to create the 
laws which reflect the principle of zero tolerance of all 
forms of abuse and exploitation of children and youth. 

 
Do you agree with those two statements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think that 
everyone in society would agree with those statements. I guess 
the question is, how do you implement those statements and 
give actual effects so that those statements can be turned into 
effective policy and into effective programs and services to help 
children. 
 
We put forward an approach in Saskatchewan that we thought 
was the right approach which is to work with community 
groups at the street level, to offer up a helping hand to children 
who are caught up in the sex trade, to help them off the streets. 
 
There have been questions raised by the member herself as to 
whether that is the right approach, and as a consequence we 
have asked the Legislative Assembly to strike a committee to 
investigate this matter and to provide advice to the Legislative 
Assembly and to the government as to whether or not the 
statements she makes — which I think we all agree to — have 
been properly interpreted by the Government of Saskatchewan 
in translating into not only legislative action but also program 
and service action at the street level. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. Another 
statement of this document states: 
 

The declaration and agenda for action must be adopted and 
implemented in its entirety because without all the pieces 
in place, children and youth in the world will continue to 
suffer sexual exploitation and its many inter-related issues 
and impacts. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, as you well know, I have tabled a piece of 
legislation entitled The Sex Offender Registry Act, and it 
seemed to me that that Act would be a major initiative to 
respond to the declaration, especially the declaration that says 
that all children and youth have the right to be protected from 
the threat of abuse, harm, or exploitation. 
 
Now we know that sex offenders do produce or pose a threat 
when they’re released from prison. And I just would ask you to 
consult once again with the Minister of Justice to see if we can 

get that piece of legislation through, because I know that it 
would be a compliment to all the work that the committee is 
doing in this province as well as honouring the declaration as 
put out at the summit in Victoria. 
 
And I thank you, Mr. Minister, for your time this evening for 
answering the questions so aptly and I thank your officials for 
coming, and I’m sure that the critic of Social Services would 
thank you also. They’re a little busy in conversation right now. 
But thank you very much for coming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — If I can just thank all of the 
members who asked questions this evening, Mr. Chair. They’ve 
raised good issues, some that we obviously need to do more 
work on, some issues that are simply very difficult in our 
society and seem to defy the right kind of solution where the 
member raises questions about custody disputes and so on and 
children getting caught up in that. We agree that it would be far 
preferable in our society if there was always a mediated 
solution and that parents could agree as to how to deal with a 
question of access and custody for their children and not 
involve third parties. 
 
But I want to thank all the members for their questions this 
evening, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thanks to the minister and to all the 
opposition members. 
 
Subvote (SS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SS02), (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS06), (SS07), 
(SS09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, if I might, I also 
wanted to thank my officials who have been here tonight not 
only to deal with a couple of Bills, but to help me with the 
questions that were put by the opposition. And I’d like to thank 
them for their attendance this evening and for their ongoing 
good work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As well, Mr. 
Chairman, to extend to the minister and to his officials our 
appreciation for their responses tonight even at this late hour. 
Thank you so much. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 
Vote 36 

 
Subvote (SS05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the hon. minister to introduce his 
officials. 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I’m 
pleased to have with me this evening deputy minister, Brent 
Cotter; Gord Sisson, Aboriginal Affairs; Ernie Lawton, 
Intergovernmental; Paul Osborne, and Al Hilton. And the back, 
Irene Janz from protocol; Glen Benedict from Aboriginal; and 
also we have Murray Langgard from anniversaries secretariat; 
and Donavon Young from Aboriginal. 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. Also, following from our last day in 
estimates there was a question from the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers concerning administration budget. I now 
table that. And there was also a question from the hon. member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy as to travel costs and I table that. 
 
The Chair: — Minister, I’ll request that you send it across as 
opposed to a more formal tabling. 
 
(2330) 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, the last time we were in 
discussing the estimates of your department, we were discussing 
the agreement that was signed between the province and the 
federal government that dealt with specific land claims and 
compensation that would be paid to SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) in lieu of taxes that would be lost 
and so on. And the minister felt that perhaps we may be trying 
to make this a political issue, and I can assure the minister we 
certainly weren’t. 
 
Merely what we were trying to do is raise the concerns of some 
of the RMs (rural municipalities) that had been talking to us and 
saying that they are going to be looking at some rather 
significant tax losses under this agreement, albeit 15 times the 
assessment certainly will provide more tax dollars than 5 times 
or whatever. But it is somewhat less, well you know, 
significantly less than 42.5 times. 
 
And to demonstrate that, I have information submitted to me by 
the RM of Cupar No. 218, an RM where there has seen some 
6,700 acres bought, selected under specific land claims. And to 
demonstrate the difference in potential tax losses, if all those 
. . . if the taxes . . . you know, if those lands . . . the tax 
replacement payments for the land selected under specific land 
claims would have taken place at 22.5 times the previous year’s 
taxes — this is only on the municipal portion — there would 
have been a fund of approximately $180,000 would have been 
put into this fund to replace taxes in future years. 
 
Under specific land claims that amount of dollars would only be 
approximately 120,000 so there’s a $60,000 difference in there. 
So you can see that there’s going to be considerably less 
earnings on 121,000 which means there’s fewer dollars to be 
distributed in the form of taxes. And that’s only dealing with 
the municipal share of taxes on those properties. 
 
And now if you would factor in then . . . and I don’t have those 
figures factored in, the school taxes, that would . . . we were 
talking considerable dollars in with regards to that land. And I 
had asked the minister earlier if the province has any intention 
to help with this deficiency in taxes, and the minister indicated 

that at this point in time they didn’t. 
 
And I just wonder if there has been any change in, or any 
rethinking of, that position. And as I indicated earlier, the 
purpose of these questions is just to demonstrate that on a 
localized basis there is some serious concerns in this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I wish to 
reiterate that all of the tax loss compensation comes from the 
federal government for the simple reason that reserves are 
created solely by the federal government. The specific claims 
compensation was again negotiated solely by the federal 
government, paid solely by the federal government, accepted by 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
 
This is not a provincial issue. No, the province does not intend 
to pay tax loss compensation. The municipalities accepted it. 
And while I agree that if the municipalities had been paid more 
they would have more money, this is an agreement negotiated 
between the federal government and the municipalities, 
accepted by the municipalities. And they were at the signing 
ceremony — they were all smiles, they accepted their cheques, 
they said they were happy. This was full compensation, the 
matter was closed, and that is where I will leave it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. The minister will know 
that SARM didn’t negotiate directly with the federal 
government. It was the provincial government that negotiated 
on behalf of SARM. And so that’s why we feel that perhaps the 
provincial government has some responsibility in this area. But 
nonetheless, we’ll leave the negotiating of the agreement and 
move on to some . . . at least one particular. 
 
I understand that the way the agreement reads is that at the time 
of purchase, the federal government will put 10 times the 
previous year’s taxes into the fund, and the First Nations bands 
themselves will put five times the taxes into the fund. 
 
Now will this take place simultaneously or will there be a drag? 
Will there be a time frame or a time lag in between the two 
funds . . . payments, the one coming from the federal 
government and one coming from the First Nations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — First of all, I wish again to stress the 
province of Saskatchewan is not a party to this agreement, was 
not a party to the negotiations. We did act as facilitator between 
the municipality and the federal government. We’re simply not 
a party. 
 
And it is very, very strange logic, not to say a legal departure, to 
suggest that a facilitator becomes liable for paying 
compensation. It’s certainly not something I’ve heard 
propounded before this discussion in this legislature. 
 
Now on the other question though, that of the payment of the 
compensation 10 times by the federal government — that’s 
already been paid; SARM has the cheque. As to the five times 
that comes from the bands as they make their selections, my 
understanding is that, as I’ve already pointed out, the federal 
government and the federal government alone puts land into 
reserve status. The bands don’t have that right, and of course, 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have that right. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

The federal government declares reserves and my 
understanding is that the federal government will not create 
reserve lands until the five times has been placed in trust. So 
they simply won’t get reserve status until the five times has 
been paid. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I’d like to thank the 
minister for that information. I’m sure that will provide some 
level of assurance to those RMs who will have land selected 
within their RM to go into reserve status under this agreement. 
 
What I’d like to do is just ask one or two questions of the 
minister with regards to some areas that his department does 
have jurisdiction in, and that is . . . or perhaps can provide a 
catalyst in developing service agreements between First Nations 
and municipalities. 
 
As the minister is no doubt aware, the municipalities have 
certain obligations under Acts such as The Noxious Weeds Act, 
The Stray Animals Act, and those sorts of things. And 
municipalities are finding that with the very nature of specific 
and treaty land entitlement properties — they’re dispersed 
throughout the RMs and surrounded by regular ratepayers’ land, 
if I can put it in that, use that term — and they’re really having 
a problem as to how they can come to some sort of a service 
agreement with First Nations and that sort of thing. And is the 
minister’s department . . . what work is the minister’s 
department doing in that area to help facilitate development of 
those service agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
hon. member, I would advise that, first of all, in the case of 
urban reserves, urban reserves are not declared until a service 
agreement with the contiguous municipality is in place. Rural 
reserves are somewhat different. In the case of a rural reserve, a 
service agreement is not required. 
 
And the hon. member referred to municipalities having 
responsibility. The answer is they don’t. When a land goes into 
reserve status, the municipality has zero responsibility. It’s not 
part of the municipality. And there’s the short and simple 
answer. 
 
However, I would agree with the hon. member that, as a matter 
of practicality, oftentimes joint agreements on services make 
good sense. And in that situation, our department is pleased to 
provide facilitator services and even mediation, if that will 
assist. 
 
However, I say there is a difference in that service agreements 
must be in place before the federal government will create an 
urban reserve; there is no such requirement in a rural reserve for 
the simple reason there is no obligation on the rural 
municipality. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I wonder if the minister 
could explain then why is it necessary with an urban reserve to 
have service agreements in place and not have the same 
conditions for rural reserves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, in response, Mr. Chairman, it’s just 
the different nature of an urban situation. In an urban situation, 
that reserve will continue to have to access the typical urban 

services of water, sewer, street cleaning, garbage collection, 
fire, police. That is not the case of farm or pasture land out in 
the middle of the country. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Many of the land that 
has been selected — whether it be treaty land entitlement or 
specific land claims — have building sites on them; there are 
people living on them. Once they become designated as a 
reserve, as I indicated earlier that quite often these are parcels of 
land that are interspersed amongst the rest of the land in the 
municipality. 
 
There are fire hazards. I mean it’s quite common for a fire to 
start on one piece of property and move across to another piece 
of property. I know the First Nations people have concerns in 
that area. Stray animals is another area that is an item of 
concern, both to rural municipalities and First Nations. 
 
So it would seem to me that there are enough issues there that I 
think we need to do a lot more work in working towards these 
agreements. And I realize that these service agreements can 
only be accomplished by having the federal government 
involved, the RMs involved, the First Nations involved, and to 
some extent the provincial government, if nothing else in the 
role as a facilitator. 
 
(2345) 
 
I have had experience serving on an RM council and working 
with a First Nations band trying to develop these service 
agreements. There aren’t even any guidelines that these various 
parties can use to try and establish a service agreement. And I 
think this is an area where the minister’s department really has 
to look very carefully into, and bring forward some guidelines 
in that area. 
 
And I just wonder if the minister has any work been done 
recently in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — First of all, I would say that the 
framework agreement is of course the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Framework Agreement. That was the agreement signed by all 
parties which provided that service agreements were a 
prerequisite of an urban reserve but not of a rural reserve. 
 
Nonetheless, the hon. member is of course quite right when he 
says that it is in the common interests of both the First Nations 
reserve and the adjoining non-Aboriginal lands and peoples to 
have common agreements in place as to how both will be 
properly managed. So both obviously share an interest in 
making sure that is done. Yes we would be happy to assist. We 
are available to help. 
 
We have helped. We have provided facilitator and mediation 
services and will continue to do so. And if the hon. member 
knows of any specific situations which might be benefited by 
the intervention or the assistance of our department, we’d be 
pleased to hear from them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good evening to the 
minister and to all of his officials. It seems like you have quite a 
delegation with you tonight but we appreciate you staying up 
this late. It is 10 minutes to 12 and I think the general public 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

should know that, how very dedicated as legislators we are. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have spoken with you briefly about the 
allegations of fraud and not only allegations of fraud, but 
actually charges of fraud and convictions associated with fraud 
and misappropriation of funds within the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when this whole issue was brought to my 
attention, the main concern was funding from the METSI 
(Metis Education Training Services Inc.) program that was 
being misappropriated and fraudulently used by some members 
that were in responsible positions or supposed to be in 
responsible positions in western region 2A. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all, I anticipate your answers to some of 
the questions that I’m going to be putting to you, but before I 
put the questions to you, I would ask you to relate to the 
Assembly and to all people of the province what your mandate 
is in regards to your portfolio as Minister for Aboriginal 
Affairs. What is your role there and your responsibilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Sometimes, Mr. Chairman, it’s easier to 
say what it isn’t, and I think the hon. member’s question is 
almost better answered by saying what my mandate is not. 
 
First of all, she mentions METSI, the Metis education training 
arm. Now that is an organization which is funded by the federal 
government and receives no assistance whatsoever from the 
provincial government. So if there are allegations of funds 
going astray, that’s not my responsibility nor should I be 
involved in that. 
 
The other thing the hon. member mentions is the possibility of 
criminal fraud. I’m not the police and I have told certain 
individuals, as the hon. member knows, if you have evidence of 
criminal behaviour you should immediately refer same to the 
RCMP. I’m not the RCMP. 
 
So from both standpoints, first of all the standpoint of law 
enforcement, that’s not me. From a standpoint of funding an 
organization for which there are certain allegations floating out 
there, they don’t get funds from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So if I may start by answering that on at least two counts, the 
questions about METSI are totally and completely inappropriate 
and are not within my mandate. 
 
Now what is my mandate then? The mandate of the department 
is to promote Saskatchewan’s interest through the management 
of the province’s relations with other governments, in Canada 
and abroad, and to work with Aboriginal peoples in the 
province and their organizations to develop and implement 
policies and programs which advance our common interests. 
 
The department also coordinates and manages matters related to 
official protocol, provincial millennium and centennial events, 
Government House, French language services, and provides 
administrative services to the Office of the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’ve often 

wondered what the mandate was, but I understood that your 
department had a role to play in the management of effective 
. . . to ensure effective and accountable governance structures. 
And I think you mentioned something of that when you just 
read your statement there. 
 
I would really appreciate you reading one more time to me the 
statement about the management . . . the clause or the line that 
you’ve indicated you are to assist or whatever it is with 
management. If you could read that for me again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — To work with Aboriginal peoples in the 
province and their organizations to develop and implement 
policies and programs which advance our common interests. 
 
Now I might also say though that in matters of accountability, 
where those come to the fore, obviously are when I am 
advancing monies on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and there of course, I have a very serious 
responsibility to make sure there is full accountability. 
 
And in that regard if I may read from a letter given to a 
particular organization we have just recently funded — but this 
is a standard letter which goes to every single organization I 
believe that we fund — and if I may just read portions of it I 
think it will assist the hon. member. 
 

(1) You shall submit a written report by (a given date) 
providing details of the project. 
(2) You shall provide to the Deputy Minister . . . receipts 
and other information relating to the costs incurred by the 
Project . . . 
(3) . . . (This) grant is made (on the subject of) the 
following conditions: 

(a) the statements made in your application are true; 
(b) that you do not significantly change your intentions 
concerning the nature of the project . . . 
(c) that you agree and understand that the Deputy 
Minister may wish to make a public announcements . . . 
 
. . . It is expressly agreed . . . that the Grant . . . shall, at 
the option of the Deputy Minister, become immediately 
repayable by you . . . upon the happening of any of the 
following events: 
(a) . . . the Deputy Minister determining the any 
statements made in your application are untrue; 
(b) upon the Deputy Minister determining that the 
funds advanced . . . to you . . . have not been utilized for 
the purposes and/or in the manner provided for in this 
offer. 

 
And then it goes on to list some other requirements as well. But 
I guess I have to say though I’m not sure that I have any general 
broad accountability, responsibilities, or rights in regard other 
bodies and other organizations, except insofar as they are 
funded by the Government of Saskatchewan. When they are 
funded by the Government of Saskatchewan, yes, there must be 
total and complete accountability and it is the responsibility of 
my department to make sure that there is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, Mr. 
Minister, part of what you read to me stated that your mandate 
was to assist in advancing programs and policies of common 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

interest to the people that are Aboriginal. I guess those weren’t 
your exact words, but that’s certainly part of your mandate from 
what you’ve told me. 
 
There seems to be a great deal of difficulty with the grassroots 
Metis people getting any kind of assistance from anyone. They 
seem to be having a great deal of difficulty getting the attention 
of you as minister. They are having a great deal of attention of 
getting accountability and responsibility from HRDC, and they 
certainly are not feeling that they are getting it from within their 
own executive of the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would think that as Intergovernmental 
Affairs minister, which means to me that you would be a liaison 
between the provincial and federal governments in matters 
pertaining to Aboriginal people — their concerns, their policies, 
guidelines, making sure that there is financial accountability, 
and those kind of things — would be something taken up by 
you in your responsibility. You are a liaison and it is your 
responsibility to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you will know who I’m referring to, but I 
know that you have been the recipient of correspondence, and 
I’m not too sure with phone calls or letter correspondence or 
just how the correspondence happened, by members of the 
grassroots of the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. And they did 
bring their concerns to you, and they feel that they’re not being 
addressed. They feel that they’re being put off — put off by the 
federal government, put off by the provincial government, put 
off by HRDC (Human Resources Development Canada). 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, these are honourable people who are asking 
for integrity, accountability, and proper government structure to 
be in place. 
 
One of their requests to you is to help them, and I guess to 
accept from them a proposal that they had put forward, a work 
plan that they had issued to you regarding the establishment of 
an independent Metis ombudman’s office. 
 
Now I know that you have spoken with them, and I would 
wonder if you would be so good as to comment on what kind of 
discussion did take place and whether or not you are willing to 
assist them — even if it is in the capacity of a liaison with the 
federal government — to bringing about this request, in 
consideration of the fact that they have no avenue, they have no 
other recourse for the accountability that they’re calling for? 
 
We have $10 million coming from the federal government 
every year to deal with youth initiatives. We have money that is 
in addition to that, in the sum of somewhere in the hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, coming for Metis urban governance. We 
have situations where that money that was coming to urban 
governance is going to establish an office . . . or to purchase an 
office building, I believe in Saskatoon, which is contrary to the 
guidelines that they are supposed to be using the money for. 
 
We have a great deal of corruption taking place, 
misappropriation of funds. And we also have nepotism that 
seems to be quite rampant, wherein family members seem to 
have all the control of how money is being used. 
 
Many people are being marginalized including youth that are 

Metis people, youth that are needing money and asking for 
money to apply for different programs under the METSI 
program. These people are being refused funding because 
persons in authority are taking it and using it apparently for 
their own purposes. 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been allegations of slippage — money 
being taken to use for businesses of people that are in the upper 
echelons of authority — and no one is checking this, and no one 
is countering it and no one is answering to it and nobody is 
assisting by having their request . . . the Metis grassroots people 
are requesting that you, as Minister for Intergovernmental 
Affairs, relay to the federal government and HRDC to take over 
all METSI programming. 
 
They want that done because they believe that with all of this 
happening it’s much better off that HRDC receives applications 
directly from the regional offices, and they distribute it . . . 
HRDC distribute it as they have done in the past. They’ve done 
this in the past and there were no problems. 
 
They have a great deal of problems now and no one seems to be 
concerned about this accountability and the funding that should 
be going to youth and young people for programming as it was 
designated for in the first place. 
 
(2400) 
 
They are also asking for a forensic audit of all MNS programs, 
departments, affiliates, and the head office. They’re asking for 
that and they’re getting no response from anyone. 
 
Now obviously there’s political protection taking place here 
somewhere. It seems like to these people, they’re thinking that 
HRDC is in bed with the MNS and they have no recourse about 
how to stop this corruption and they want to see accountability 
and integrity. And once again I mention, Mr. Minister, that it’s 
quite admirable that these people, for a couple of years now, 
have been really working hard and not giving up, to ensure that 
taxpayers’ money is being used wisely and rightfully. 
 
One other thing, Mr. Minister, that they’re asking for is for the 
Chief Electoral Officer to fully supervise the next Metis general 
election because there was 22 ballot boxes, from what I 
understand, where ballots were somehow tampered with. 
Election fraud was taking place in many forms. And again, no 
accountability. No one called them on this sort of happening. 
 
So those are all of very grave concern to me. And I think that 
it’s really incumbent upon you, Mr. Minister, as 
Intergovernmental Affairs minister to liaison with the federal 
government to see what they’re doing about this. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, have you done that? Have you spoken 
to your federal counterparts? Have you written letters? Have 
you talked to them to see that something is being done? 
 
We were told by the grassroots people that HRDC said that they 
had put in . . . they had issued a directive to MNS, and I think to 
METSI too, to ensure that their policy guidelines are being 
adhered to and so on, that all of this was supposed to be taking 
place. But unfortunately even though that issuance came 
forward from the federal government, there still seems to be 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

problems going on and on and on. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, have you spoken to your federal counterparts 
about the very grave concerns being put forward here by 
grassroots people of the Metis association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, first of all I would 
advise the hon. member what we have done. We have 
approached the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and the federal 
government with a proposal that we participate in the 
establishment of a Metis ombudsman position. And I advise 
that we are open to that, the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan is 
open to that. To date we have received no indication of interest 
from the federal government. So in terms of what have I done, 
that’s what I’ve done. 
 
I have to come back to it, though. The hon. member has used 
words like corruption, fraud, and political protection. I gather 
she considers me to be a part of that. However, she also talks 
about the Metis Education Training Services Inc., METSI. It 
receives not one penny of provincial funding. She talks about 
the need for me to do a forensic audit. Why would I audit 
money that doesn’t come from the provincial government? 
 
She talks about fraud and corruption. Again, I’m not the police. 
I don’t audit money that is paid by the federal government. So 
there is not one cent of provincial money going to METSI, so 
why would I audit it? And if there are allegations of funding 
going astray, they should talk to the funding agency which is 
the federal government, HRDC. 
 
If there is talk of criminal behaviour, and the member has made 
several references to criminal behaviour in her talk tonight, go 
to the RCMP. I can’t believe you’re talking to me about money 
that has nothing to do with me, nothing to do with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and . . . (inaudible) . . . criminal 
behaviour. Phone the police . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
you’re worried that I’m not going to start a criminal 
investigation. You’re absolutely right — I’m not. You’re 
worried that I’m not going to conduct an audit, a forensic audit 
of federal funds. You’re absolutely right — I’m not. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the minister, if the minister 
will just review in Hansard tomorrow, what I did say to that 
jumping Jack over there was that . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Order. Two issues come up. 
One is to use a member’s name, first or last, is not appropriate. 
 
The other issue is that of METSI, HRDC, and MNS. The 
minister has twice indicated that these are federal programs for 
which he has zero responsibility, and I ask the hon. member for 
Humboldt to direct her questions to the issues in 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, my 
apologies for using your first name, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you will check Hansard tomorrow, I’m sure 
there will be a clear indication to you that I asked you as 
Intergovernmental Affairs minister to act as a liaison with the 
federal government to check into the possibility of a forensic 
audit. I did not ask you to do that yourself. 

So, Mr. Minister, let’s get back to the issue of the request for a 
Metis provincial ombudsman, an independent one. 
 
Now I know that there was consultation with your office, and 
you have indicated that there was with some of the Metis 
grassroots people on this issue. I also understand that — from 
my understanding, I want to be clear with that — that there was 
some deliberation with yourself and the person who drew up a 
plan for the ombudsman’s office, this Metis ombudsman’s 
office, and that you encouraged that he continue working on 
that and that he issue it to your department and also to the 
federal government. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 
correct. We have, as I indicated, received a suggestion for a 
Metis ombudsman. We support that. We have discussed it with 
the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. They support it. We’ve 
discussed it with the federal government. To date they do not 
support it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, in my 
talks with the Metis grassroots people — many of them that 
have brought these issues forward — they’ve indicated they’re 
getting the runaround with this issue of the ombudsman’s 
office. They have indicated to me that the federal government 
tells them that the province will not cost share 50/50. The 
province says the feds are not talking to them, just as you have 
mentioned here tonight. So which is it, Mr. Minister ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that 
the federal government has written to these individuals to say 
no, they’re not interested in an ombudsman. In terms of the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan, you have it on 
record. I’ve said we would support the creation of an 
ombudsman. We have had indications of support from Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan. We have been told no by the federal 
government. 
 
And, of course, again the monies we’re discussing, the funding 
of METSI is federal money. So it’s a non-starter without the 
federal government because there isn’t provincial money in it. 
But in terms of you asking is someone giving these friends of 
yours the runaround – you’ve got it on the record, you’ve got it 
on Hansard — I have said we support the establishment of an 
ombudsman. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
did you or anyone in your office, the deputy minister, give an 
indication to the gentlemen who wrote up this plan that your 
office would reimburse him for his cost regarding research and 
organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I do confirm that he was 
told that, subject to the federal government approving the 
project and it being able to proceed, that he would receive an 
honorarium for having initially suggested the idea. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
it was indicated to me that in consultation with your office over 
this issue of reimbursement for expenses incurred in 
establishing the Metis ombudsman’s office that your deputy 
minister had indicated that possibly there could be some 
funding extracted from the associated entities fund to pay him 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

for his expenses. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I am informed that that is 
not correct. But through the internal department, an honorarium 
would be arranged which is of course different than an account 
for whatever. So, there would be an honorarium from our 
department if the project came to a successful conclusion, 
which means that the federal government agreed to co-operate 
in the establishment of the position. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you had indicated before that your responsibility lies 
with any funding that the province issues to the Metis 
association of Saskatchewan and, as you well know, I have 
posed a written question to you asking for some information as 
far as funding. And you sent me an indication of an allotment 
that was given for different purposes to the Metis association. 
The Metis Nation of Saskatchewan secretariat received a 
considerable amount of money for different projects, the 
bilateral work plan and then there was some money, $285,000 
to continue participating in the activities outlined in the 
1999-2000 tripartite work plan, including research, policy 
planning, and other related activities. And then there was, I 
think a total here of 15, 10, 25,000 in total to carry out activities 
related to Back to Batoche Days. What I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, is specifically who got that money? Who was the 
cheque issued to and who ended up getting the money for this 
planning, promotion, and related activities to do with Back to 
Batoche Days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the cheques are 
actually issued to the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and they’re 
all issued from the department. At present, of course, my 
department does not administer the associate entities fund so the 
money comes from my department it goes to Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, and of course we would be making no 
representations about associate entities fund. That would be 
quite improper for us to do so. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I would just encourage 
you to look into maybe assisting these grassroots people in your 
capacity as Intergovernmental minister responsible for 
Aboriginal Affairs in the province because I would like to table 
to you — if you have not yet received it — some photocopies of 
cheques that were issued to family members. It involves a 
nepotism — are they allegations of nepotism — and the lack of 
accountability for how this money is being used? 
 
And I think if you look at this you will certainly understand 
what has been brought forward here, and the concerns of the 
people bringing it forward. I will issue to you two documents 
that I would appreciate you looking at. 
 
In addition, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
police have already been informed, Mr. Minister. They have 
already been informed, and there certainly are charges that are 
being laid. Jack doesn’t want to have . . . I’m sorry, my 
apologies. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re saying you don’t want to have any part of 
looking at this and making sure that there is proper procedures 
and policies, guidelines and so on that are adhered to within the 
Metis Nation of Saskatchewan? Is that what you’re saying, Mr. 

Minister? 
 
(0015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I am definitely saying that 
if you have allegations of federal money going astray — not 
interested. I am also saying that if you have allegations about 
criminal behaviour — send it to the police. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I can certainly 
see why the grassroots Native people are frustrated. We have a 
minister in this province that has a mandate to ensure that 
policy is in place that will enhance the life of Metis people in 
this province. We have a minister that should be looking into 
the accountability of these things and making sure that there’s 
proper reporting mechanisms. 
 
I don’t think that you have to do that alone, and obviously you 
don’t see it as your mandate. You see it as the federal 
government’s mandate — so be it. But you are the liaison with 
the federal government and so it is my belief that you have a 
responsibility. 
 
I will at this time . . . at this time I think I’ll go on with a bit 
more questioning, because I’m really finding that this whole 
issue is being treated with a great deal of disdain and dishonour 
by members on that side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would also ask you if you have received 
any of the correspondence, any of the press releases and so on 
that have gone out that many people are putting forward. They 
would like to see something done about this whole issue. 
 
Have you reviewed any of these news articles, Mr. Minister? 
 
The Chair: — Just before I recognize the minister. Is the 
member dealing with the same issue, this METSI, MNS, HRDC 
issue or is it another one? The Chair is unclear. 
 
An Hon. Member: — MNS. 
 
The Chair: — MNS? Which is federal . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well there’s money given to the Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan by the provincial government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I wish to inform the hon. member, Mr. 
Chairman, that no allegations have ever come to my attention of 
provincial monies going astray. So if she has anything to that 
effect, obviously I would be very, very interested. I have seen a 
number of letters, newspaper articles, interviews, telephone 
calls, to the effect that federal money has gone astray. I think 
I’m on the record as to my interest on that. I have received a 
number of allegations — again tonight — allegations of 
criminal behaviour. I think I’m on record pretty clearly as to 
what I think ought to be done when there are criminal 
allegations and request for criminal investigations. 
 
So those I’ve seen them — do I personally take an interest? The 
answer is no, because I’m not the proper authority. Send it to 
the police if it’s criminal. If it’s an allegation of federal money 
going astray, take it up with the funding agency. I have never 
seen anything suggesting that provincial funds have gone astray 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and neither have my 
officials. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, once again I want to refer you to your mandate, and 
your mandate as was posed to me this evening. You are here to 
advance programs and policies that would enhance the lives of 
Metis people. That seems to me like it encompasses a great deal 
of responsibility. 
 
And I am not asking you to look into any allegations of 
fraudulent use of money if that is for the RCMP. That stands to 
reason, we all know that. 
 
But there is a great deal that you could do in reference to 
election procedures and so on, that obviously if there has been 
some accusation, and certainly by a number of people, that 
ballot boxes have been either tampered with or ballots 
themselves have been not validated. There are a number of 
things like that that you as minister could do to ensure that these 
people are having some just and accountable procedures taking 
place when they are calling for an integral government 
structure. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it within your mandate or your jurisdiction to 
ensure that there is a proper and just electoral process taking 
place within the Metis Nations of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Certainly we do have a very serious 
interest to make sure that elections are properly held and that 
the leadership of the Metis Nation reflects the wishes of Metis 
people. 
 
There are processes in place to ensure that happens, and that of 
course is the third piece in the puzzle that I neglected to point 
out earlier, but the hon. member is absolutely correct. I pointed 
out that if it’s federal money, it’s a federal concern; if it’s 
criminal allegations, it’s a police concern; and the third is that I 
have not said before but the hon. member is absolutely correct, I 
have had allegations brought to me that the leadership doesn’t 
represent the true wishes of the Metis people and that is for the 
democratic process to work out. 
 
I dare say the hon. member would probably say the leadership 
of this province doesn’t represent the feelings of the people in 
the province and I may disagree with her on that. 
 
But we have a democratic process and that’s how we determine 
these things and that’s how the Metis Nation also should 
determine these things. I again am not going to sit in judgment 
as to whether the Metis Nation executive represents the true 
wishes of the Metis peoples of the province. That’s to be done 
by the democratic process and certainly we are concerned the 
democratic processes be respected. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, you are 
concerned that the democratic process be respected. Are you 
doing anything to ensure that there is a just democratic process 
taking place? 
 
I’ll give you an example of what has happened just recently. On 
June 15 in Prince Albert, which was just this last Wednesday, 
there was to be an election for the new president of local 7. 

Now there are 1,000 registered voters for local 7. Forty people 
were admitted into the doors. So many people were not being 
let in . . . the doors were being locked on all the others other 
than these 40. 
 
Now this is what has come to me and I’m just wondering if 
something like this has been brought to your attention in the 
past other than the ballot boxes that were missing, where ballots 
were spoiled, or not validated, etc. We do have this kind of an 
issue now. Is that within your mandate to ensure that this kind 
of thing does not happen? Is it or is it not, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, there are as I indicated, 
processes in place for someone to bring complaints of an 
electoral process that did not go right. I would advise that the 
individuals aggrieved are welcome to contact my office to be 
advised of the exact and precise legal steps that are required. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, so from your comments just now, 
Mr. Minister, I take it that yes, you do have a responsibility; 
because if they’re going to come to you to be advised of proper 
steps and process to ensure democratic election, then I take it 
that that is part of your mandate, and would you take that 
responsibility, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, my office will be pleased 
to provide the information as to the steps that are to be taken to 
follow the proper process for an aggrieved party who believes 
an election was not properly conducted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, I 
want to close with some remarks that are a reflection of the 
frustration that grassroots Metis people are feeling in regards to 
the many issues they have brought forward. And after I make 
these comments, I want to tell the House that my colleagues 
will be presenting you with further questions this evening. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, this is a press release that has been put 
forward on March 12 of the year 2000, this year, by Gordon 
Robert Dumont of Prince Albert. He says: 

 
The time has come for the institution of a Metis 
ombudsman who will take our complaints seriously and 
who will have the jurisdiction and authority to provide a 
remedy. 
 
I am tired of taxpayers’ money going to an organization 
like the MNS that merely pays lip service to reform and 
continues to flaunt due process, flaunt their own guidelines 
and the Metis constitution for their own personal gain. 
 
I again urge the federal government to protect taxpayers’ 
money by suspending all funding to the MNS until they 
finally abide by their own rules. 

 
That’s the end of Mr. Dumont’s quote. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would ask you and urge you also to 
correspond with the federal government to ensure that the 
wishes of these people come to fruition so that they can have 
just and democratic governance within the Metis association. 
 
I thank you in advance, and I’ll turn the questioning over to my 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

colleagues. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
colleagues, what other parties have to be adhered to besides the 
urban municipalities or town councils in finalizing a land treaty 
entitlement agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, there of course has to be 
agreement or consultation of the municipalities and all third 
party interests and ownership. And I’m sure the hon. member is 
aware that treaty land entitlement is satisfied solely on the basis 
of willing seller, willing buyer. There is no expropriation in the 
process. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, or Mr. Minister. 
What happens when one or more of the parties . . . because in 
other words what you’re saying is if third parties don’t agree 
with the agreement, what are the steps that must be followed in 
order to get this agreement finalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, my department does 
provide mediation services to attempt to achieve unanimous 
agreement of all third party interests. But if the hon. member is 
asking what happens if there’s a holdout and agreement is not 
possible and what do we do about the holdout, the answer is 
nothing. This is willing seller, willing buyer. There is no 
expropriation. And so there is absolutely no force or 
compunction in the process. If mediation doesn’t work, there is 
no sale. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, in other words what you’re 
saying, if the school division does not come to agreement with a 
First Nations band, then the agreement is off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not exactly sure I’m 
following the question. If the school division owns land, then 
it’s willing seller, willing buyer, if that’s the question. If a 
school owns land, they’re not required to sell it. If he’s talking 
about, if a school division doesn’t want any reserve land within 
the school division, that’s not a third party interest. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, you said that third party 
interests have to be addressed. Well if the town agrees or comes 
to a service agreement but the school division doesn’t, that 
doesn’t mean to say they have to own the land. The third party 
is that the school division and the band have to come to an 
agreement regarding the taxation of school taxes. What happens 
if they don’t come to an agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, if a school division is the owner or 
has a third party interest, then they have to come to an 
agreement or there’s no sale. But if you’re just saying that a 
school division doesn’t want reserve land in its school division, 
like I say, that’s not a third party interest. 
 
(0030) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The question I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is 
regarding the taxation, collecting of taxes. And that’s the big 
issue when it comes to either dealing with the town or with a 
school division, is the collecting of taxation. What happens if 
that school division and the reserve do not come with 
agreement in collecting of the taxation? Is the agreement off the 

table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, as we discussed earlier 
this evening and quite a lot the previous time we were present, 
there is the tax loss compensation agreements: 22.5 in the case 
of treaty land entitlement; 15 in the case of specific. And it’s 
out of these funds that compensation has been achieved for 
municipalities and school divisions, which is the only interest 
they have here is compensation for taxes. 
 
However I would advise the hon. member that if there is a 
specific situation that is concerning him, I would invite him to 
contact officials in my department to discuss the specific 
situation and certainly we’ll provide whatever information or 
assistance we can. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and through you, 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to welcome the minister’s officials and wish 
them good morning. My question is for the minister. Have you 
been in contact with or has there been any consultations with 
Chief Perry Bellegarde with respect to the controversy currently 
surrounding the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I understand that I and the minister will 
be meeting with them later today. I have not spoken to him 
since the present controversy began. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chair. 
Mr. Minister, what is your position in regard to Chief 
Bellegarde’s assertion that the province has no jurisdiction over 
the board of directors of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I wish to advise the 
hon. member that my view is that section 207 of the Criminal 
Code gives jurisdiction to the province. The province does have 
jurisdiction. And I am confident and expect that compliance 
will be achieved. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will you and 
your department be involved in or part of any decisions or 
recommendations to dismiss the board of directors of SIGA, or 
any other kind of sanctioning of SIGA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the answer to 
that is, no, in that that would be a decision of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority which is a quasi-judicial body, 
which is a regulatory body operating outside of the political 
process. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have one 
question that I wanted to put to you, and I will do so at this 
time. I’d like to ask you who is reviewing and monitoring bank 
statements and, you know, funding that’s been distributed to the 
MNS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to 
advise that the grants are all monitored by my department in 
line with the conditions and requirements that I outlined when I 
read from a letter to one funded authority, and I’d be pleased to 
go into some of these specifics again if the hon. member would 
wish that. But, anyway, the monitoring is done by officials of 
my department. 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. Just 
one final question. Mr. Minister, how many failed NDP 
candidates are consultants with the MNS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of . . . oh, 
yes, I’m aware of one. And beyond that, I may say that if I 
listen to hon. members on the other side I suppose I may need 
another career before long. So I thank the member for that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that probably there’s 
going to be an issuance to you from a number of people of 
being more accountable and responsible in your own role 
because there’s a need for a liaison with the federal 
government, and I think that’s part of your responsibility. 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your officials for 
coming this evening. 
 
Subvote (IA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (IA02), (IA14), (IA15), (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — It being well past the normal hour of 
adjournment, the committee will report progress and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I just wish to convey 
my thanks to my officials for all the help they have been to me 
since assuming this portfolio and especially for coming out this 
evening to assist in answering the penetrating and thoughtful 
questions of my friends across the way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I think it’s probably time that we 
move we rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — That is already taken care of, it being well past 
the hour of closing. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:40 a.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


