




















































Hansard: April 06, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 545 
 April 6, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are opposed to the forced amalgamation of municipalities 
in our province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
And the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Guernsey, Humboldt, Watrous, Tway, Meadow Lake, St. 
Benedict, and Pilger. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Spalding, 
Wadena, Rose Valley, Naicam, and Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Weyburn, 
Melfort, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. The petition that I’m presenting deals with the fuel tax. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, costs shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting today is signed by 

individuals from the communities of Star City and Melfort. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise on behalf of the 
high-cost fuel and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents per litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And my petition is signed from people from Melfort and Star 
City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I once again rise in the Assembly on 
behalf of people in Swift Current who are concerned for their 
hospital, even more so now that their generator went out last 
night, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital by providing approximately 
$7.54 million and thereby allowing the Swift Current 
District Health Board the opportunity to provide improved 
health care services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition of concerned 
citizens against forced amalgamation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reject any proposals regarding 
the forced amalgamation of municipalities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition this afternoon in 
regards to fuel tax reductions of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 
governments to immediately reduce the fuel tax by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received: 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

Petitions pertaining to the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic, the 
amalgamation of municipalities, the Swift Current 
Regional Hospital, and finally, the reduction of fuel taxes. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: please detail all programs and 
services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a question. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: please detail all programs 
and services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
And if I may, I have a second question. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Women’s Secretariat: 
please detail all programs and services in your budget that 
were eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 
budget. 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Seniors: please detail all 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
And on day no. 22, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, a 
similar question to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: please detail all programs 
and services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In an effort to keep 
this government open and accessible and transparent, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: please detail all programs and 
services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice of 
motion for the first reading of a Bill and I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2000. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to give notice 
of question, I give notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the 
government the following question and this one is: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: please detail all 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall give notice on 
day no. 22 to ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Property Management: 
please give a detail of all programs and services in your 
department that were eliminated or reduced as the result of 
the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: please detail all program and services in your 
department that were eliminated or reduced as a result of 
the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: please detail all programs and 
services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: please detail all programs and services in your 
department that were eliminated or reduced as a result of 
the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: please detail any 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day 22 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Disability Issues: please 
detail all programs and services in your department that 
were eliminated or reduced as the result of the 2000-2001 
budget. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, also I give notice that I shall on day no. 22 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: please detail all programs and 
services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Sask Water: please detail 
all programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: please detail 
all programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: please detail all 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-200l budget. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training: please detail all programs and services in your 
department that were eliminated or reduced as a result of 
the 2000-200l budget. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Energy and Mines: please detail all 
programs and services in your department that were 
eliminated or reduced as a result of the 2000-200l budget. 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: please detail all programs 
and services in your department that were eliminated or 
reduced as a result of the 2000-2001 budget. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the Assembly two 
very special guests who are seated in your gallery, John Penner 
and his wife Jo. 
 
John had a very distinguished career as minister of Energy, 

minister of Crown Investments Corporation, and an absolutely 
spectacular associate minister of Finance. 
 
So please welcome these two guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m delighted to stand in the Assembly today 
to welcome through you to all the members, four people from 
my constituency: Connie Anderson, Noreen Peterson, Merv 
Osterlen, and Don Connell. They came from Rose Valley today. 
We had a meeting with the Minister of Municipal Affairs; 
concerned about the well being of the community of Rose 
Valley. And I’d like everyone to welcome them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are 
honoured this afternoon to have with us two members of the 
House of Commons in Ottawa. I would ask them to kindly 
stand while I introduce them. They are Claude Bachand of the 
constituency of Saint Jean, and Monique Guay of Laurentides. 
It is my hope that they are enjoying their visit to this legislature 
and to our province, and I would ask all members to join with 
me in a warm welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you, special guests here today, 
Dell and Mary Halbert, who are farmers in the Weyburn-Griffin 
area. Mary is a long-time political activist and her husband, 
Dell, has the honour of being a member of the Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame. He played with the great Griffin Club 
baseball team. And they are seated in your gallery and I’d like 
the Assembly to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not often 
that members of the Assembly could complain about the noise 
coming from the gallery but I’m afraid if I don’t do this 
introduction pretty quickly, we all will be doing that. 
 
I’d like to, first of all, say that when I was first elected in 1991 
many of the members here would not know that — the recently 
elected members, I should say — wouldn’t know that I wasn’t 
married and I didn’t think I’d ever introduce a guest, but 
certainly I did not . . . introduce my wife, but certainly I did not 
think I’d be introducing a son in the gallery from this position. 
 
And I would like to ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming my wife, Virginia Wilkinson, and my son, Mayson 
Clark Sonntag, to the Assembly for the very first time today. 
And they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 
seated beside my wife as well, I’d like to ask members to 
welcome from my constituency Russell and Cathy Nelson. 
Russell is the fire chief in Meadow Lake and he’s down for the 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

next several days, I believe, at the firefighters’ convention here 
in Regina. Please join me in welcoming them to the Assembly 
as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just to join with the 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development in 
welcoming John and Jo Penner to the Assembly. Certainly a 
great many people in Swift Current would agree that Mr. 
Penner’s service here was distinguished. But the legislature’s 
loss, Mr. Speaker, is Swift Current’s gain as Mr. Penner is back 
involved in Rotary; he’s a president of that club. 
 
He’s also actively involved in Dr. Noble Irwin Health Care 
Foundation raising money for health care in our community. 
And I’d just like to join with the minister in welcoming him 
here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve just been 
doubly blessed today that I’m able to introduce through you and 
to you to all members of the Assembly, first, a group who were 
here with us earlier today in the legislature treating us to the 
music of the bagpipes, and to the Regina Highland Dancers and 
their dancing skills. 
 
I rise to ask all members to welcome the guests in your gallery. 
They’re members of the Sons of Scotland Benevolent 
Association and they’re here commemorating Tartan Day. I 
have a list of some of the members and I’ll name them and they 
can stand and be recognized. I don’t have the complete list, but 
I’ll know you’ll want to also welcome everyone warmly. 
 
With us is Worthy Chief Danny McKay, Murray Kyle, Ian and 
Doreen Mentiplay, Mick Brown, and Bob Nichols. Also there, 
someone I was able to visit with a bit earlier, is Ian McLeish, 
who reminded me that the message that was found in the bottle 
of the Legislative Assembly was written to us from the past by 
a John McLeish. And so Ian is here as well, and a number of 
other people who came to help us commemorate and celebrate 
Tartan Day. 
 
And I ask all members to join in giving them a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Rushing away from the celebration I 
was able to then meet with 24 grade . . . 24 grade 4 students that 
are seated in the west gallery. They’re here from the 
constituency . . . they’re from the Balgonie Elementary School, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re here with teachers Deidre Mallett and 
Barb Lawrence. 
 
They had excellent questions of a member of the Assembly. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was so pleased to see how enthusiastic and 
excited they were to be here. I did give them an explanation of 
all of the boisterous exuberance that will occur during question 
period. They’ll leave us to go on a tour following question 
period. 
 

And I ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the hon. member opposite to welcome the sons of 
Scottish benevolent society to our legislature here this afternoon 
on, on a very important day for them on Tartan Day here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And on behalf of the official 
opposition, we’d like to join with them and welcome them to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join my 
colleague, the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs, and welcome my two former colleagues from the 
House of Commons — M. Claude Bachand and my friend, 
Mme. Monique Guay. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would also 
extend on behalf of the opposition in Saskatchewan a warm 
welcome to our province to my two former colleagues in the 
House of Commons. I know from firsthand experience how 
hard every Member of Parliament works. Although we don’t 
always agree, it is good to see Members of Parliament coming 
to Saskatchewan from other provinces, and we wish them a 
very warm stay in our province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Two New Schools in Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister 
of Education and I were pleased to announce the construction of 
two new schools in my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin — 
one public and one separate. 
 
I campaigned for them in September, Mr. Speaker, and here 
they are. The Silverspring community is one of Saskatoon’s 
fastest-growing areas and needs these schools. Saskatchewan 
Education will provide $200,000 for initial planning and design 
work which will begin immediately. The goal is for the schools 
to open in the 2001-2002 school year. 
 
The creation of the Centenary Capital Fund in the provincial 
budget makes this early date possible. The fund provides $5 
million in each of the next four years for school projects. In 
fact, the provincial budget contains a total of 29.2 million in 
financial support for school capital projects. 
 
Saskatchewan Education and the school divisions will share the 
cost of the two new schools, estimated to be 11 million. 
Together the schools will provide space for more than 600 
students from kindergarten to grade 8. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank and congratulate the two school 
boards, the parent committee, and Saskatchewan Education for 
making this possible. 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tartan Day 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we heard 
earlier of course that today is Tartan Day in the legislature and 
in Saskatchewan. And it is with great pride and privilege that I 
had to bring forward the private members’ Bill that established 
that day a few years ago in our province. 
 
And I was pleased at the time to gain the government members’ 
support for the piece of legislation in that it ultimately passed 
our legislature. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Scottish people of this province 
have made many contributions to not just Saskatchewan but 
indeed all of Canada. And to commemorate them on this very 
special day is indeed a privilege for myself and I’m sure all 
members of the legislature. 
 
As someone who has a Scottish history, it is with great pride 
that I join with all members to congratulate the sons of the 
Scottish benevolent society on today, Tartan Day in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few years 
ago I saw a Cape Breton tourist magazine with one column 
listing recently deceased islanders. On the list were something 
like 25 McDonalds, many McIsaacs, a few MacLennans, 
MacLeods, MacPhails, and one Smith. 
 
That list tells us all we need to know about the history of the 
influence of the Scots on the Maritimes and our country. But 
today we celebrate Tartan Day in Saskatchewan — a day 
proclaimed in 1992 in this legislature in honour and 
appreciation of Scottish clans in our province. 
 
As was mentioned, the private members’ Bill was introduced by 
the member from Kindersley and was enthusiastically supported 
by all members. 
 
Those here with Scottish heritage might not be as pervasive as 
in the Maritimes, but their presence and their influence is 
appreciated and recognized. Individual Scots have contributed 
greatly — we need only to mention the name, Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the individuals and families from Scotland 
came their customs, their love of literature and the arts, their 
rigorous theology, and their games. What would Saskatchewan 
be in the winter without curling? And, Mr. Speaker, the Scots 
brought us haggis to eat once a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a people of many sources, many roots, and 
we treasure them all. Today we celebrate one root, and in the 
words of Scottish poet, Robbie Burns, “May we be blessed with 
health and peace and sweet content.” 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Parking Problems 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
for Wood River now says he supports the Saskatchewan Party 
plan to cut the gas tax. Not that you would know it because 
when the vote was taken, he was busy moving his truck. Turns 
out he was parked in the wrong spot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the last six months we in the Saskatchewan 
Party have been saying the Liberals have parked themselves in 
the wrong spot. And I know some of the members opposite 
would agree. For instance, I know the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast thinks there’s a Liberal parked in her spot. The 
member for Coronation Park thinks the member for Melville is 
parked in his spot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the Minister of Justice would 
start enforcing the parking rules. But he’s too busy trying to 
figure out how to get the Premier out of his parking spot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at least yesterday the Leader of the Official 
Opposition was able to get one Liberal punted from his parking 
spot. 
 
Good luck to the rest of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Youth Initiatives 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform 
the House that yet again another Saskatchewan company has 
received national recognition. SaskTel has received two 
prestigious national awards in acknowledgement of their 
involvement in the youth employment and education. 
 
Canada’s Top Employers of Youth Awards recognizes 
employers who hire youth and provide them with 
career-oriented opportunities. Entrants were judged on their 
success in creating structured career paths for youth, providing 
entrepreneurial support for youth, helping Aboriginal youth 
with careers, and expanding vocational, technical, and/or 
apprenticeship training for youth. 
 
In particular, SaskTel was recognized for its co-operative 
education program, computers for schools program, Aboriginal 
program, and partnerships and youth scholarships. 
 
The second award received by SaskTel was the National 
Partners in Education Award. This award recognizes Canadian 
businesses and education institutions that ensure youth develop 
relevant skills for their work world of today and tomorrow. 
 
SaskTel and Scott Collegiate are recognized for their 
partnership. Scott is a Regina high school whose students are 
predominantly Aboriginal. The partnership provides skills 
development and support for students through actual workplace 
experience, awareness of available career options, and an 
opportunity to associate with adult role models. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate SaskTel on their strong 
and devoted initiative to work with Saskatchewan youth and the 
community. Thank you. 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carmel Youth Wins Wrestling Competition 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I’d 
like to recognize a talented young man from my constituency, 
from the small hamlet of Carmel, and this young man is Ryan 
Shedlosky. 
 
Ryan, a grade 11 student at the Humboldt Collegiate Institute, is 
well known for his wrestling abilities. Last month he captured 
his second consecutive Saskatchewan Amateur Wrestling 
Association age class championship in Regina. Ryan was 
representing the Saskatoon Wrestling Club Hounds competing 
in the 50-kilogram class when he captured his gold medal. Last 
season he won the 46-kilogram class and the bantam division 
for the 14- and 15-year-olds, and in the juvenile division for the 
16- and 17-year-olds. 
 
This victory, Mr. Speaker, has allowed Ryan to represent 
Saskatchewan at the National Juvenile Championships being 
held this weekend in Abbotsford, BC (British Columbia). We 
wish you the very best of luck this weekend, Ryan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Concerns 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week as we 
know, the Minister of Finance delivered the first budget of the 
new century. Little did he know that this so-called historic 
budget would become so discredited by the people of 
Saskatchewan, and so fast. And is it any wonder. 
 
Every day — the discovery of new hidden taxes, or fees, or a 
charge, or whatever the term the Premier decides to use when 
he wants to pick the pockets of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And the editorial writers agree, Mr. Speaker. From the 
Lloydminster Meridian Booster comes the following, and this is 
from Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

The promise of income tax cuts lose a lot of their appeal 
when Saskatchewan residents begin to realize how deeply 
the government is dipping into their other pockets. 
 
Even Lloydminster’s PST exemption won’t be able to 
protect local residents from increased utility rates, the 
Premier’s favourite hidden tax. 
 

And the quote continues, Mr. Speaker: 
 
At a time when the public is crying out for tax relief as 
quickly as possible the government has the audacity to 
produce a budget that is laced with many tax increases as 
(there is) tax cuts. Instead of real relief, Saskatchewan 
residents are going to feel the tax pinch first and that’s . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is another example in the editorial board of a 
tax grab. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Women of Distinction 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — On Wednesday, March 29, the 
Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction awards was held in 
Saskatoon. I particularly wanted to attend this banquet because 
four of the 11 recipients are constituents. Unfortunately I was at 
a Health ministers’ meeting in Ontario. 
 
Our constituency has many notable and noteworthy individuals, 
but it’s rare for four to be honoured on the same platform at the 
same time. Mr. Speaker, there were 23 outstanding women 
nominees in the 11 categories, each worthy of recognition, and 
our city is the richer for the contributions of all women who 
were recognized and nominated. 
 
From my constituency, awards went to Rene Baxter, who was 
presented with a lifetime achievement award; Caroline Cottrell 
took the award for education and lifelong learning; and the arts 
award went to Kate Hobin; and Debbie Harksen for sports and 
fitness. Quite the neighbourhood we live in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other award recipients were: Sylvia Cholodnuik for community 
development; the Saskatoon Women’s Calendar Collective for 
culture and heritage; Mercy Arinze for the entrepreneur award; 
Sylvia Chorney for health, well-being, and spirituality; Elaine 
Shein for management; Eleanor Bonny for the young woman to 
watch; and Dr. Roxanne McKay in science, technology, and the 
environment. 
 
My congratulations to all of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fees and Service Charges 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and my question 
is for the Minister of Finance. Over the past week, we found out 
a lot of things about your budget, Mr. Minister — new taxes, 
new fees if you prefer that term, new charges definitely. Now 
we find out the NDP (New Democratic Party) has a new 
accountability plan — hide all the bad news in the budget and 
see if the Saskatchewan Party can find it. That’s the NDP 
equivalent of Where’s Waldo. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to stop playing games with 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. Will you table a complete list of all 
the fee and service charge increases you’ve hidden in the 2000 
provincial budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to clarify some points that the opposition doesn’t 
like to raise about the budget. And there appears to be some 
confusion on their part, Mr. Speaker. For example, there will be 
this year a net tax cut in Saskatchewan of $44 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because, Mr. Speaker, on July 1 of this 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

year the Saskatchewan flat tax is going to be cut in half. And I 
don’t hear the opposition saying anything about that. So I would 
say to the Leader of the Opposition, why are you hiding the fact 
that we're going to get a tax cut this year? That’s what I would 
ask him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this budget, Mr. Speaker, represents the largest tax cut in 
Saskatchewan history and I don’t hear the Leader of the 
Opposition talking about that. So I’d ask him again, why is he 
hiding the fact that this budget contains the largest tax cut in our 
history, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance 
table a list of all the fee and service charges increases in this 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, the 
members opposite have tabled written questions asking for all 
of those details from all of the departments and agencies and 
those answers are going to be tabled in this legislature. And 
then we’re going to discuss the effect to the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that I did neglect to 
mention in the budget speech that with respect to the sales tax it 
will not apply, Mr. Speaker, to repair parts used in farm 
implements and machinery. I neglected to mention that, Mr. 
Speaker. And it will not apply to repair services on farm 
implements. I neglected to mention that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It will not apply to veterinary fees, drugs, and medicines 
administered to farm livestock. I neglected to mention that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It will not apply to air compressors purchased for farm use or 
electric motors purchased for farm use. I neglected to mention 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It will not apply to books, Mr. Speaker, confections, or 
firewood. I neglected to mention those facts as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister clearly stated, 
clearly stated in that answer that he will not tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the increases that are involved in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question for the minister. And this is 
important. The Supreme Court of Canada says that any 
government fee greater than the cost of the service for which it 
is charged is a tax. 
 
But, Mr. Minister . . . but the Minister of Environment told this 
House just a few days ago, 70 per cent of the fees collected by 
his department go into the General Revenue Fund. That means 
that 70 per cent of the fees charged by the Department of 
Environment are actually taxes. The Supreme Court goes on to 
say that it’s illegal unless you pass legislation entitling you to 
collect these new taxes. 
 

So I ask the Minister of Finance: will you commit to table a list 
of all fees and charges levied by the provincial government and 
identify the cost of the service for which each fee is collected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I already indicated to the 
Leader of the Opposition in answer to his last question that 
answers to the questions are going to be tabled in the 
legislature. So the question has been answered, Mr. Speaker, 
and the information is going to be tabled. 
 
What the Minister of the Environment said the other day — 
which the Leader of the Opposition didn’t give the complete 
statement — he said 30 per cent will go directly into 
environmental activities; the other 70 per cent into the General 
Revenue Fund. But, Mr. Speaker, it will go out of the General 
Revenue Fund back into the Department of Environment to do 
work with our fisheries and our parks and our environment and 
all those . . . (inaudible) . . . will be done to protect the 
environment, Mr. Speaker. That’s where those fees are going. 
 
But I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition that I find it 
curious, Mr. Speaker, that day after day he refuses to support in 
this House the abolition of the Saskatchewan flat tax. And he 
refuses to support the budget measure to take 55,000 
low-income people off the tax rolls. And the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, because . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that interesting answer 
underscores why the Provincial Auditor questions the 
accounting measures of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that the province of Alberta 
reacted to the Supreme Court by freezing all government fees. 
Alberta then established a committee of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and private sector representatives to 
review every fee levied by the province. The review identified 
which fees and charges were equivalent to the cost of service 
and which ones were simply tax grabs by the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, today the Canadian Taxpayers Federation is 
calling for an immediate freeze on all government fees and 
increases until a comprehensive review can be completed. Will 
you do that, Mr. Minister? Will you freeze all government fee 
increases in your budget immediately? And will you establish 
that committee to look at the appropriateness of government 
fees and charges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’ll tell you what we will not do, Mr. 
Speaker. We will not do what the Leader of the Opposition 
does, which is to advocate a flat tax for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reality, Mr. Speaker, as was revealed in this House just 
yesterday, is that the members opposite are creating a lot of 
noise about the budget because they oppose the abolition of the 
Saskatchewan flat tax; they oppose taking 55,000 low-income 
people off of the income tax rolls. 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

And why do they oppose it, Mr. Speaker? You need only to 
look at their platform. They oppose it because they want a tax 
cut for their rich friends instead of a tax cut for the ordinary 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not going to let 
them get away with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I would say 
to the Minister of Finance, if he was listening at all, that he 
would know that we agreed with Mr. Vicq’s recommendations 
to de-link provincial income tax from the federal tax collected. 
But he doesn’t pay attention. He doesn’t listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The stark contrast between Alberta and Saskatchewan could not 
be more clear. In Alberta, the government reacts to the Supreme 
Court decision by freezing fees and charges. In Saskatchewan, 
the NDP responds by increasing those fees. In Alberta, the 
government appoints a committee to review government fees. 
In Saskatchewan, the NDP doesn’t even know how many fees 
they have and how much those fees are bringing in. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance is pretty simple. Will 
you agree to immediately freeze all government fees? Will you 
immediately release a list of all government fees and charges? 
And will you establish a committee of MLAs and private sector 
representatives to review all government fees? Will you do that 
for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the committee of . . . 
like there’s a committee of the legislature which is called 
Committee of the Whole, which is going to examine all aspects 
of the budget, and all the estimates and line by line budgets of 
every department. And if the members opposite have some 
question about some fee, they should do their job in estimates 
and ask the questions. 
 
But I say to the Leader of the Opposition, let’s look at the big 
picture, Mr. Speaker, and the big picture is this. The big picture 
is that we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we need to look at the big 
picture. And the big picture in this province is that we need to 
support a budget that contains a tax cut for ordinary people and 
low-income people; that eliminates the flat tax — cuts it in half 
July 1, eliminates it on January 1. And we need to reject the 
platform of the Saskatchewan Party which says that we should 
only have a tax cut for the rich. And we are not going to let 
them get away with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Administration Costs in Government 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Finance. Mr. Speaker, every day since the provincial budget 
was delivered we have learned more and more about what costs 
have been hidden within this budget document. 
 
But guess what? Something else this government hasn’t told the 

public is the administration budget is going up within the 
departments. Mr. Speaker, 11 out of the 16 government 
departments see an increase in administration costs. The 
average increase is six and a half per cent. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister has allocated 
$2.4 million more for administration. 
 
Mr. Minister, please justify to the Saskatchewan public why the 
administration cost in government departments has gone up 
over 6 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, I would say 
to the member opposite that he will have an opportunity in 
estimates in this House to go over the administration budget of 
each and every department, Mr. Speaker. There’s no problem 
with that. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, having answered his 
question, that the member opposite earlier said something about 
picking the pockets of Saskatchewan people. And I want to say 
to the member opposite and to all members of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that one thing we’re not going to do is pick our 
children’s pocket by running up a deficit and passing it on to 
the next generation the way they advocate when they advocate 
the kind of spending increases they advocate in this House, Mr. 
Speaker — which was $1.2 billion in five days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can fool some of the people some of the time, 
but the Saskatchewan people are not going to be fooled by a 
party that tries to be all things to all people and spends $1.2 
billion debt and deficit in five days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I think the real answer there 
got lost in the bureaucracy somewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the administration costs in the Department of 
Finance alone went up 16 per cent — 16 per cent. That’s the 
largest, the largest increase in all of the government 
departments. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are hearing from businesses who can’t get a 
straight answer from the Finance department on this expanded 
PST. One person will tell them you must remit the PST; other 
ones will say, no, you don’t. The Finance department also says 
that they don’t compile fee structures or they don’t review 
government fee structures. 
 
Mr. Minister, why on earth does your department require 16 per 
cent increase in the administration budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already advised the 
member that we’re going to get into the details of every 
department in estimates and he can ask those detailed questions. 
 
I also want to say that in terms of operational spending, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan spends about the least per capita of any 
government in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have a very efficient government, 
unlike the governments that were run by the members opposite 
when they were in office. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker — the member talks about 
business asking questions about the PST — we don’t have an 8 
per cent PST like Conservative Ontario, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 
have a 7 per cent PST like Manitoba. We don’t have higher 
PSTs like the Tories do in the Maritimes, Mr. Speaker. I think 
New Brunswick, it would be 8 per cent; Prince Edward Island, 
10 per cent. 
 
Now that would be a real nightmare if we followed the policies 
of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing. 
 
This morning our caucus met with the former Provincial 
Auditor. He once again expressed concern on a number of 
issues. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor has been requesting access 
to review and audit the First Nations fund for some time. Just a 
few days ago, a new gaming agreement between the provincial 
government and the First Nations was signed. 
 
Mr. Minister, will this new agreement allow the Provincial 
Auditor access to fully and openly audit the First Nations fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that 
we did sign the extension of the original agreement that has 
been worked together in partnership with the Indian federation 
to allow for the proper control and regulation of gaming in this 
province. 
 
That extension of the agreement contains three amendments, 
Mr. Speaker. The first one is to see consistent licensing across 
this province under the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
The second one is to see, as the casinos go on reserves, the 
development of community development co-operations that 
work with the local communities to provide, under the same 
rules as the original agreement, for monies to go back into local 
communities. 
 
The third one is to see a new revenue-sharing split that was 
contemplated with the original agreement, Mr. Speaker, where 
thirty-seven and a half per cent of the monies will go to the 
General Revenue Fund, thirty-seven and a half per cent will go 
to the FNF fund (First Nations fund), and twenty-five per cent 
will go into the AEF (associate entities fund), Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate it if the minister 
would just touch on the question a bit. I assume that that answer 

was a no. But the question here is . . . the issue here is 
accountability. The former Provincial Auditor says that there 
isn’t any and we agree. 
 
Madam Minister, what specific action are you taking to ensure 
the Provincial Auditor has full access to the records of the First 
Nations fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for her question. I believed she asked 
about the extension of a very positive working partnership with 
First Nation people. 
 
When the original agreement was signed, it was stated within 
that agreement that the audited funds could . . . auditing of those 
funds could be done either by the Provincial Auditor or 
consistent with the Provincial Auditor’s guidelines, a private 
auditing firm. 
 
Those funds are totally audited by their private auditing firm. 
That information has been available. The chief of the Indian 
federation has said publicly he would publish those in every 
newspaper across the province if the members opposite needed 
that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the question for 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs, and I am trying to be as 
direct as possible. Do you believe the Provincial Auditor, the 
Provincial Auditor should have access to the First Nations 
fund? And again, I stress the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, many departments here 
have audits conducted to their workings. As well, the agreement 
states that it could be a private auditor or the Provincial 
Auditor. They have chosen to have a private auditor look at 
their books and they put that forward in a public manner to 
anyone that wants to see those. 
 
In the same way, Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to understand why 
that member would single out the First Nations of our province 
when she doesn’t single out school boards or municipalities or 
any other third parties who get their monies from similar 
arrangements and have the ability to have private auditors look 
at their books. 
 
We don’t ask for them to submit that, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
wondering why she’s asking for that to occur in this manner for 
our First Nation people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI Premiums 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that was a 
rather bizarre set of answers we had when the Provincial 
Auditor himself specifically said he had some jurisdiction in 
that area and this socialist government wouldn’t look at that. 
But the member over there, I guess, isn’t aware of what the 
Provincial Auditor is saying or she would have addressed that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s another day today and we have another hidden 
tax. Saskatchewan association of automobile repairers has 
written our caucus denouncing your massive tax grab contained 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

in this NDP budget. Much of the work done by body shops 
comes from SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
insurance claims. About 60 per cent of the total repair cost is 
labour. That now, Mr. Speaker, is taxable. 
 
And to the minister responsible for SGI. Mr. Minister, this 
morning in Crown Corp committee, SGI president, Larry Fogg, 
confirmed that added costs in the SGI field will be passed on to 
drivers. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I ask the member to 
please go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, how much will SGI be forced 
to increase and hike their rates as a result of your PST tax grab. 
And that’s to the minister responsible for SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as with all businesses within 
the province — and SGI is a business — they will be taking a 
look at how these taxes affect their operations. And my 
understanding that this tax will be one of quite a number of 
factors. But I do know that it’s very clear that in the whole 
automobile repair industry — as it relates to the cost of 
insurance — the biggest issue is not a sales tax increase. The 
biggest issue is the fact that many of our new cars are built with 
larger parts, with parts that require much more repair for each 
piece that is fixed; and that, as a result, the concern is the cost 
of auto repair, not the cost of tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very interesting, 
we have a question on taxation and the minister in charge of 
SGI wants to talk about car parts. And obviously when he 
thinks the size of the part necessarily influences the cost, he’s 
rather lost. 
 
Mr. Minister, surely you must have been talking to the Minister 
of Finance prior to this budget. Hopefully you were . . . you 
were very disappointed. You knew that this tax hike was 
coming — at least we hope you do — and you knew that it 
would have a direct impact on the SGI repair claims. The 
minister says not a whole lot. 
 
It’s 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 6 per cent on those particular areas, 
directly. So if you were doing your job, Mr. Minister, you 
would have asked SGI to do an analysis of the impact on the 
Auto Paks bottom line. How much will rates be going up? Will 
you release that analysis today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question that was 
answered . . . or asked right now is the same question that was 
asked this morning, as I understand, of the president of SGI. 
 
And he indicated in dealing with all of the various costs, the 
increase in the personal sales tax is one part of it. And the 
biggest issue, and the biggest issue for that corporation is 
obviously the cost of repairs. 
 

Now I think the very important thing to note is that when the 
Vicq report was looked at, there was a suggestion that there be 
personal sales tax placed on all insurance premiums. And that 
was clearly one thing that after much discussion was decided 
that we wouldn’t do that. That type of a change would have had 
a dramatic effect on the consumers of the province and we 
decided not to do that. 
 
I think it’s extremely important that we recognize that SGI will 
deal with all of these issues and costs in the same way that other 
businesses in the province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that 
this minister in charge of SGI is prepared to say because the 6 
per cent doesn’t cover 100 per cent of SGIs costs, it somehow 
doesn’t count. Well I sure hope you can go ahead and tell the 
people of this particular province when they get their rate 
increases that somehow this doesn’t count — so when they send 
that in . . .  
 
Mr. Minister, did you do an analysis of the impact that that PST 
would have on the SGI auto fund’s bottom line and on 
registration fees? If you did that analysis, would you release it 
today? And if you didn’t, why not? What were you doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, to have a member stand up 
here and say that these kinds of things don’t count to the people 
of the province is a very silly thing to say. Because practically 
what we know is that SGI has the lowest, if not the lowest or 
the second lowest rates for car repair in the province. 
 
The net effect, the net effect of all of this is in Saskatchewan 
that we will continue to have a system of car rates, car 
insurance rates, that are very great.  
 
Now to answer the specific question that the member asked, we 
know that the increase on the PST, on the auto fund will total 
about $11 million, and that figure is the biggest . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would hope that 
he would table that information that he had and couldn’t quite 
get through. But I do have a question, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
The Minister of Finance has his Regis tie on with the want to 
make a million. Unfortunately he has the impression with his 
budget that it meant want to take a million. I’m afraid he’s got 
that all wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question for the Minister of Finance is: auto 
body shops and vehicle repair shops now have to charge an 
extra 6 per cent on private transactions, not just SGI jobs. For 
all those auto body shops close to Alberta, you have just 
increased their cost to private repair transactions by 6 per cent. 
 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

So what’s going to happen, you have driven that business into 
Alberta or into an underground economy. Mr. Minister, how 
can you justify this massive tax grab that will close down many 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. A question has been 
asked. Kindly allow the answer to be given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just respond 
to the member opposite who obviously knows very little about 
auto insurance here or in any other part of Canada, here or any 
other part of Canada. 
 
In the budget document, which is not a secret document, it 
compares auto rates, insurance rates, for this year, for this year, 
in Saskatoon and in your favourite province of Calgary. That’s 
what you’re always comparing. Let me continue . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well add 6 per cent to this number. 
 
In Saskatchewan it’s $916; in Alberta $1,700. Now even with 6 
per cent, even with 6 per cent, my friend, you will get a much, 
much better deal right here in good old Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18  The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — Order. The first item of business before the 
Committee of Finance is that of interim supply. Before we start, 
I invite the . . . or before we get more formally going, I invite 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today, beside me, Mr. Paul Boothe, the deputy minister of 
Finance; and on the other side of me, Kirk McGregor, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs. 
 
Behind Mr. Boothe is Mr. Terry Paton who’s the Provincial 
Comptroller. Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle who’s the assistant 
deputy minister of the Treasury Board branch of the 
Department of Finance. And behind Mr. McGregor is Mr. Len 
Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister of the revenue 

division of the Department of Finance. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, if I may, I would like to move resolution no. 1 
which reads: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $915.254 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2001. 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
And as the House knows, I am pinch-hitting for my colleague, 
the member for Canora-Pelly, who for health reasons is not able 
to be here. We are still pulling for him. Our thumbs up, of 
course, are for the hon. member who we want to see back in his 
chair very soon. 
 
Nine hundred and fifteen million dollars, plus. A lot of money 
we’re talking about here. I thank the minister for bringing his 
officials. I don’t think he brought, at least he didn’t introduce 
the member of his department who is responsible for 
communications, perhaps with good reason, because the 
communication of this budget has been an absolute disaster. 
I’ve seen quite a few budgets, both provincially and federally in 
my day, and never have I seen one communicated in a more 
devious or awkward way than the budget, Mr. Minister, that 
you brought forward. 
 
The problem is of course that the communications do not fit the 
product, and the product is a tax grab and the communications 
is a tax cut. Now I recognize that there are proposed cuts down 
the way and that if you look at the whole, that there may be $40 
million savings when you balance off PST expansion versus 
personal income tax cuts. Of course that seems to be being 
gobbled up in areas by utility rates. The problem being the 
people of Saskatchewan have, if anything, less dollars in their 
pocket after your budget rather than more. 
 
And now you’re coming to this House and asking for some 
interim financing. And that causes us a great deal of concern 
because we’re concerned that your management is not too good. 
And we’re concerned that your communication has not been as 
forthright as it should be. In other words our evaluation is 
things are in a bit of a mess over there, and we will give you 
some opportunity now to try to clarify some of those problems. 
 
First some general questions for the minister. We want to know 
a bit about your department, what amount is going to be spent 
in the Department of Finance if this interim supply Bill is 
passed. And would you be so kind as to tell us precisely, and I 
have to emphasize that word precisely, in what areas of the 
department these expenditures will be made. And we want to 
know what amount of revenue will be taken in by the 
government in this two-month period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 
questions. And certainly I appreciate his advice with respect to 
management and how to manage things. I think I’ll just leave it 
at this, Mr. Chair — most people looking at our record in terms 
of fiscal management versus the previous administration will 
know that in fact we’ve delivered seven balanced budgets in a 
row. And we’re very . . . pretty good at fiscal management 
compared to the record we inherited, which was one of large 
deficits and debt that we’re still paying for. 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I want to confirm for the Leader of the Opposition 
that he is in fact correct — that there will be some tax cuts this 
year, as he indicated. Specifically to answer his question, will 
there be tax cuts this year, yes. 
 
Yes, the farm fuel rebate is retroactive to January 1, 2000, so 
farmers will enjoy a fuel tax cut. Also, Mr. Chair, there will be 
a PST rebate going out to people with incomes under $35,000, 
commencing effective April 1, although the cheque for the 
period April to October will go out October 1. 
 
And thirdly, this year we will have an income tax cut on July 1, 
which is the earliest date that you can have an income tax cut 
pursuant to agreement with the federal government, which will 
reduce the Saskatchewan flat tax from 2 per cent to 1 per cent. 
And I know that that’s welcomed by most people in the 
province, even though for some reason the Leader of the 
Opposition is opposed to the abolition of the flat tax which 
follows on January 1. 
 
Now to answer the Leader of the Opposition’s question 
specifically — he asks how much money will the Department 
of Finance spend specifically in the two-month period — I 
would refer the Leader of the Opposition to the Estimates, 
which have been tabled with the budget, a copy of which of 
course the Leader of the Opposition is provided with by me on 
March 29. 
 
The Estimates contain a line by line description of funding and 
spending by the Department of Finance, what the department 
will spend the money on. So all the specifics are there in the 
Estimates. And for the two-month period, I’m advised by the 
officials that we will spend approximately two months of the 
amount in the Estimates. 
 
And with respect to the question on the revenue, to answer it 
specifically, I’m also advised that it’s fair to assume that 
roughly — not exactly, but roughly — the revenue of the 
province comes in, in equal instalments on either a monthly, a 
twice a month, or a weekly basis, and that we can assume that 
in the next two months, the revenue of the province will be 
equivalent to one-sixth of our annual revenue. 
 
In other words, there’s nothing terribly different in terms of 
either the spending or the revenue for these next two months — 
we’re dealing with April and May — than all of the months of 
the year, generally speaking. And as I said, the details of the 
expenditure is all line by line in the Estimates, and we’ll in fact 
be going over that in the Estimates and I’ll be very pleased to 
answer any detailed questions at that time from the Leader of 
the Opposition or any of his colleagues on the other side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That was partly an answer, but it wasn’t 
the entire answer. I was asking precisely what areas of the 
department these expenditures will be made and I believe that’s 
why your officials are with you. I would hope that you could be 
a little more precise on that, and also the question is what 
amount of revenue will be taken in by the government in this 
two-month period. I’m not sure that we have those numbers. 
 
We do have numbers here in front of us indicating that the 
estimates for your department in the 2000-2001 budget is 

201.352 million less statutory amounts. The amount to be voted 
is 101-million-and-some-odd, and two-twelfths interim supply 
is 16.935 million. Is that what you were referring to? We’d like 
you to clarify that. 
 
Just to clarify for the minister because he has yet not seemed to 
understand this one point. The Saskatchewan Party did respond 
officially to the Vicq report, and our response was to implement 
the income tax cuts as proposed by Mr. Vicq. 
 
The minister maybe has not heard that, but that was . . . there 
was press release. I’m sure that his department should have seen 
that press release. So that would have meant the elimination of 
the flat tax and all those other add-on taxes if you in fact 
decouple from the federal government, which we agreed should 
be done. So I just want the minister to be very clear so he 
doesn’t misinform the House in the future. 
 
As to deficits in the past which he also referred to, I would 
remind the minister that I have publicly been opposed to 
deficits of past governments, including the Blakeney 
government, and including deficits in the early . . . his early 
administration. But we have to make it clear that his party, 
during the ’80s, was advocating more government spending. 
 
He seems to forget that that was actuality, that was fact, that we 
could go through a number of newspaper articles and statements 
here in the Legislative Assembly to show that while the 
government of the day was overspending, his party, in 
opposition, was calling for even more spending and greater 
deficits. 
 
And so I would just encourage the Finance minister to be more 
forthcoming with his evaluation of what happened in the ’80s. 
Not to absolve those who brought upon far more debt than we 
should have seen in this province — and we agree with that; we 
certainly agree with that — but also to acknowledge that his 
party was calling for even greater debts. 
 
A couple of more questions for the minister and his officials, 
plus the clarification of those other two items. In the 
Department of Finance, can you provide us with a list of the 
government fees and other charges that will be used to collect 
revenue over this two-month period, and can you provide us 
with a schedule of all fees and charges in the department? 
 
And then thirdly, can you tell us which of these charges or fees 
have gone up as result of the budget and therefore will collect 
more revenue during this two-month period. And I want your 
answer confined to the two-month period that we’re talking 
about as far as interim supply is concerned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do 
appreciate the efforts of the Leader of the Opposition to clarify 
the position of the opposition with respect to the flat tax. I 
suppose the source of my confusion about their position is that, 
first of all, their platform in the election did not call for the 
elimination of the flat tax and did not call for tax relief for 
low-income people. 
 
It called, in fact, Mr. Chair, for a simple reduction which would 
result in a very large tax cut for the rich, but very little for 
ordinary people. And so the Leader of the Opposition says that 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

I’ve misinformed somebody. The source of my misinformation 
would be the platform of the party led by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
But having said that, I want to also point out to the Leader of 
the Opposition that we had an opportunity in the Legislative 
Chamber just yesterday to vote on the abolition of the flat tax 
and taking 55,000 low-income people off of the taxation rolls. 
And while the members on this side of the House voted in 
favour of the abolition of the flat tax and tax relief for ordinary 
people and low-income people, the Leader of the Opposition 
and the members opposite voted against that, Mr. Speaker. And 
nobody has to take my word for it; it’s on the public record. 
 
(1445) 
 
But let me say also, in response to the Leader of the Opposition, 
that he refers to not liking deficits and debts and somehow 
referred to the government of Mr. Blakeney. Well that’s going 
back 20 years, Mr. Speaker, but I want to say that Mr. Blakeney 
introduced 11 balanced budgets in a row. Mr. Blakeney did not 
run deficits, Mr. Chair. 
 
And if the Leader of the Opposition is under the impression that 
Mr. Blakeney ran deficits, then I would beg to differ. And I’d 
like to point out to the Leader of the Opposition that Mr. 
Blakeney did not run deficits. And I hope that he finds that 
information helpful because I offer that information only in the 
spirit of wanting to be as helpful as I can in providing 
information to the Leader of the Opposition who is new to this 
House. 
 
But in answer to the question, I want to say I think the Leader 
of the Opposition has correctly gone through the numbers 
himself with respect to the statutory and funds to be voted in the 
Department of Finance for the two-month period. 
 
And I would simply say to the Leader of the Opposition that 
there is detailed information about the revenues that will be 
collected through the Department of Finance. Those appear in 
the statement of revenue that are in the budget address which 
has been tabled in the legislature and, Mr. Chair, was provided 
to the Leader of the Opposition of course on budget day. 
 
And as I said, the advice I have from my officials is that the 
amount that we would collect in the next two-month period 
would roughly be two-twelfths of the revenue that we expect to 
receive over the 12-month period of the fiscal year. And those 
amounts are fully detailed in the statement of revenue. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition would like to refer specifically 
to any part of the statement of revenue and ask questions about 
that, then he may do so. But the information is there, and there’s 
information in the estimates as well. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Boy oh boy, 
this is going to take longer than I thought it was because we’re 
not getting answers to our questions. 
 
You obviously keep telling us to refer to your own documents, 
and yet when we look in your documents, we don’t see some of 
the fee increases that have been uncovered over the last few 
days. We don’t see the increase in fishing licences and other 

hunting fees and . . . It’s not there. It’s not listed. 
 
And so that’s why we’re asking you, when you have your cadre 
of assistants and department officials with you, to enlighten us. 
And so, you know, we would really appreciate it if we could get 
some more specific answers than you’re providing in your 
documents. 
 
And, you know, just again to set the record straight, you talk 
about the Blakeney government. And we just can’t let you go 
unchallenged because this needs to be made aware that the 
Blakeney government, while in the General Revenue Fund may 
have claimed to be balancing their budgets, were passing on the 
deficits to the Crowns and to the teachers’ unfunded pension. 
The total of which was over $6 billion. 
 
So it’s all a matter of accounting. And I think you know that 
and I know that. All governments — and I’m not pointing a 
finger solely at the NDP — all governments, Mr. Chairman, 
were guilty in the ’70s and the ’80s — the federal government, 
all provincial governments — of spending and mortgaging their 
children’s future. 
 
I think we all recognize that has to stop. So I mean you’re no 
more pure at pointing your finger at us or anyone else than 
pointing that finger at yourselves. And so let’s call a spade a 
spade, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would say through the chairman to the minister, that as far as 
his explanation of how we voted against the elimination of the 
flat tax because we voted against the budget, of course, is a bit 
of political rhetoric. He’d have to admit that. We made it very 
clear the reason why we voted against the budget. It was 
because you expanded the PST which we were publicly 
opposed to. That was why we voted against the budget. 
 
And I might even add on the income tax side, Mr. Vicq 
recommended that basic personal exemptions be higher than 
your budget indicating those exemptions will be. So in fact 
you’re not even bringing forward the amount of income tax cuts 
that were recommended by Mr. Vicq and which we of course 
publicly agree with. So let’s call a spade a spade when we’re 
analyzing our position and your position. 
 
Now through the chairman to the minister and his officials, and 
please if you could be a little more specific it would certainly be 
helpful, as a result of your budget can you tell us which 
programs or services in a department have been eliminated or 
reduced? It’s just not written here in your book for us to read. 
So would you tell us that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for his questions. I don’t think I’ll say much more 
about the record of Mr. Blakeney, because I think the record of 
Mr. Blakeney is well known to Saskatchewan people and 
speaks for itself. I think Mr. Blakeney is quite well respected all 
across the province and his contributions are very much 
appreciated. 
 
Having said that, I want to say, Mr. Chair, simply that the 
difficulty with the position of the Leader of the Opposition, and 
perhaps the reason why I have trouble understanding why it 
would make sense, is that I believe that the kind of tax cutting 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

and the kind of spending that is being advocated by the 
opposition would lead us into deficit and debt. And the member 
of the . . . the Leader of the Opposition says that he doesn’t like 
deficits and debt and I would simply say neither do I. And so 
let’s stop talking about tax plans and program spending that 
would lead us into deficit and debt. 
 
And that’s the difference between the members over there and 
the members over here. We believe in balanced budgets, and we 
want to continue presenting a balanced budget, even over the 
opposition of the members opposite. 
 
But I want to say also the Leader of the Opposition referred to 
the fact that the tax credits are lower than Mr. Vicq 
recommended, that is the 8,000 versus $8,500 exemption — 
and that’s true. But what we did instead was not to expand the 
PST as broadly as Mr. Vicq recommended, hence the 
adjustment to the credits. And we decided, Mr. Chair, to more 
than double the amount of the PST rebate to low-income 
people, which also makes a difference. 
 
And I would just say to the Leader of the Opposition that 
Professor Vicq himself, when asked for his response to the 
package we came up with for tax cuts, said I would give the 
budget an 85 per cent. Now that’s what Professor Vicq said. So 
he doesn’t have any problem with the package that we came up 
with. He gives it, he gives it an A, and I’ll settle for that. And I 
only wish the Leader of the Opposition was as supportive of 
cutting taxes as Professor Vicq and many other citizens are. 
 
In answer to the specific question that the Leader of the 
Opposition also asks, which is do we have — I believe it’s do 
we have programs being eliminated in the Department of 
Finance? The answer is no, we do not have programs being 
eliminated in the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one very 
short question and I’d appreciate a short answer to this. If in 
your budget you were not . . . you left the PST as is, would your 
revenues have been $160 million less than you projected in this 
budget? And had you taken another $160 million out of the 
liquor and gaming fund and applied it to program expenses, 
would your budget still have been balanced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, the answer is 
yes, if we had not expanded the PST, then the revenues would 
in fact be $160 million less. And the second part of the 
question, well could you take that out of the accumulated 
revenue of government that was used to be in the liquor and 
gaming fund — the answer to that also would be yes, you 
could. 
 
The budget would be balanced this year but the difficulty would 
be that you would be building in spending that would occur this 
year and each year thereafter from one-time funds, because 
once you take your accumulated revenue and spend it, it’s gone. 
And therefore you would not have a deficit this year but in the 
. . . a few years later you would go into deficit which of course 
would then increase the debt of the province, and that’s the 
problem we have. 
 
And that’s the fundamental difference between the position of 
the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chair, and the government, is 

that we do not want to spend more money than we really have, 
and we do not want to go into deficit and debt. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, in making that statement are 
you calculating that based on your earlier projections that the 
liquor and gaming fund would have $348 million in it? Are you 
making that — I’m taking about the long-term outcome — are 
you making that speculation on the fact that your liquor and 
gaming fund had reached almost $700 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re taking into account, Mr. Chair, all of 
the money that was accumulated in the liquor and gaming fund. 
And my answer stands that we want to avoid deficit and debt 
for the reasons I’ve indicated, and we’re going to avoid it for 
the reasons indicated. 
 
And the four-year projection is set out in the budget which the 
member opposite has. He can see what the projection is, what 
the surpluses are, and I’ll leave the answer at that. I think that 
clearly answers the question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Minister, for that 
answer, but I’m not sure that’s coming to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because I guess that would mean then, Mr. 
Minister, that on the long term, if Alberta, the Minister of 
Finance there continues to lower income taxes, you won’t be 
able to keep up. In fact the gap would increase. 
 
So are you admitting then that if Alberta’s projections are 
correct and they will drop their income tax rates to below that 
11 per cent flat rate that they’re talking about, even to the 
possible elimination of personal income taxes, that we are 
locked into an economy in Saskatchewan that we are going to 
have to maintain the PST at high levels and not be able to 
reduce income tax in light of what they’re going to do in 
Alberta; are you admitting defeat in this fight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly not. Absolutely not, Mr. 
Chair. And I find this very curious because day after day the 
Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues say, oh, how awful 
it is that tax cuts aren’t occurring in Saskatchewan today but 
won’t start for three months from now. But the system that 
Alberta is bringing in that the Leader of the Opposition is 
referring to doesn’t come in until January 1, 2001, Mr. Chair. 
That’s when Alberta will go to their flat tax system. 
 
And yet, we don’t hear the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues saying how horrible the Government of Alberta is 
for implementing their system on January 1, 2001, Mr. Chair. 
We don’t hear that. And even though we’re actually cutting our 
taxes this year — nor do they talk about that — they somehow 
want to pretend that Alberta is doing something sooner than we 
are when they’re not. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite as well that this talk 
of elimination of the income tax in Alberta has also been 
coupled with talk by officials and politicians in the Alberta 
government of going to a consumption tax which they haven’t 
had heretofore in Alberta. 
 
And so I think you have to be very careful what you’re talking 
about when you’re talking about what is being proposed in 
Alberta, because this is actually something that the members 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

opposite have claimed not to be in favour of. And I think the 
Leader of the Opposition might want to study the budgetary 
situation in Alberta this year and in the out years in some detail 
and be sure that he understands exactly what’s being proposed. 
 
But I simply repeat again that the Alberta system comes in on 
January 1, 2001, and there’s a very good reason for that. That’s 
the earliest that we’re allowed — either Alberta or 
Saskatchewan — to go to a tax-on-income system, to change 
our system, is January 1, 2001. Alberta’s changing their system 
then — so are we. I think that we’re headed in the right 
direction, and I think that our tax system is going to be quite 
competitive. And I think people, when they look at the income 
tax changes that we’re proposing, think that it’s a pretty good 
package, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, 
Minister, for that answer. But again it’s not too reassuring 
because the Alberta government always seems to exceed 
expectations. They seem to be very cautious. They lower 
expectations and then perform above what they’ve announced 
whereas the Government of Saskatchewan seems to do the 
opposite — they seem to raise expectations and then continually 
disappoint. 
 
To the Minister of Finance through the Chair of the committee, 
another more specific question: in this department will 
two-twelfths of the budget actually be spent over the next two 
months, or will more be needed or will less be needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 
question, Mr. Chair. And I’m happy to report with respect to his 
comment that the Alberta government has exceeded its targets 
and so on, I’m very happy to report that in fact if you look back 
throughout our tenure in government, we have exceeded the 
targets that we have set for balancing the budget and usually our 
surpluses are larger than projected. 
 
In fact, one of the things that the Leader of the Opposition has 
been complaining about is he feels that we ended this year with 
too much money. I like to think that it’s better than ending the 
year with not enough money. But that’s been one of the 
complaints of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
So when he says that we haven’t met our targets, we have 
exceeded our targets as he, himself, has pointed out. And I’m 
sure the Leader of the Opposition therefore should be quite 
happy about the fiscal situation that the province generally is in. 
Not a situation that allows us to be all things to all people or do 
things that would lead to deficit and debt, but nevertheless a 
pretty good fiscal situation. 
 
And I’m glad to have the words of endorsation, in effect, from 
the Leader of the Opposition that exceeding our targets is 
welcomed by him. And I think as a Saskatchewan person, and 
he’s a Saskatchewan person, we can both agree that it’s good 
that we have met and exceeded our targets. 
 
In answer to the question will the money be spent? In general, 
yes it will. In general terms, each year there is an appropriation 
of one-twelfth or two-twelfths depending upon how these 
appropriation Bills are done, that enables the departments to 
proceed. There are some departments that would have more 

seasonal spending at different times of the year than others. But 
on average, in general, two-twelfths, if appropriated, would also 
be what would be spent by the departments. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Of course . . . Yes, 
it’s not wrong I guess to exceed revenue targets. But what that 
means is you’ve collected money from the people of 
Saskatchewan that we think you should return to them in 
numbers higher than you initially planned. And that’s where 
you’ve fallen short. 
 
It seems rather odd that your liquor and gaming fund reached 
almost $700 million but you only found it in your heart to 
return $40 million of that to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the 
people from whom that money came in the first place . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, but it was 600. According to 
your own numbers, there was 695 million in there. Anyways, 
we’re not going to argue with the member who obviously hasn’t 
read the minister’s documents. 
 
It’s important these days, if your revenues are high, to 
recognize what impact that’s having on your economy. And the 
result of high revenues in this case is taxpayers are feeling 
beleaguered and they’re leaving the province. And you’ve heard 
many of my colleagues give illustration after illustration of 
people who, upon reading your budget, it was the straw that 
broke the camel’s back, and they have now made plans to leave 
the province. 
 
What we are suggesting to the Finance minister, Mr. Chairman, 
is that he should have returned more of those dollars to 
taxpayers than he did. And that’s why we oppose the expansion 
of the PST, which I would still argue was totally unnecessary 
and was certainly a reason for us to vote against his budget. 
 
Just a couple of questions in conclusion here. To the minister: 
how many agencies or third parties will receive money from 
this department — I’m talking about the Finance department — 
as a result of this interim supply Bill? And do third-party 
agencies receive their allotments from the government in 
monthly instalments or in one lump sum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I thank the Leader of the Opposition 
for the questions. And the first thing I’d like to point out, 
because I realize the Leader of the Opposition was serving in 
Ottawa and may not have known this, but in terms of exceeding 
our expectations, and the Leader of the Opposition says that 
some of the revenue should be passed on to the people. We 
actually, Mr. Chair, have been reducing taxes each and every 
year since we balanced the budget in 1994-95. 
 
Specifically in 1995 and ’96 this government cut the 
debt-reduction surtax in half. In 1997 we reduced the provincial 
sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. In 1998 we reduced 
income tax, the basic rate, from 50 per cent to 48 per cent. In 
1999 in the budget we reduced the provincial sales tax from 7 
per cent to 6 per cent. So we’ve had tax cuts each and every 
year. 
 
But our rule has been that we must only cut taxes enough so 
that we don’t go into deficit and debt; and this is where we have 
a disagreement with the members opposite who have a tax plan 
and spending plans that sound good on the surface, but 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

unfortunately, lead to deficit and debt. And that’s what we’re 
trying to avoid. 
 
I might say to the member opposite, with respect to the tax cuts 
we’ve done — I haven’t talked about the ones proposed in this 
budget which is opposed by the opposition — generally 
speaking, we have done pretty good compared to the other 
provinces. And I have the details here but I won’t go into them 
right now. 
 
Now the member opposite says that somehow as a result of the 
budget, that people are going to leave the province. Well I just 
want to say that the rate of people leaving the province has gone 
considerably down under our government. We still have 
negative out-migration — I’ll admit that — it’s in the hundreds 
and maybe sometimes 1 or 2,000 but it was, between 1985 and 
1991 when we were not in office, Mr. Chair, the rate was 
12,000, 15,000, something like that, every year leaving the 
province in droves. And the Saskatchewan people have made a 
lot of progress trying to turn that around. 
 
And I also want to say to the Leader of the Opposition in that 
regard, that some of the comments we’ve got from the business 
community in particular, because the opposition has raised the 
business community being upset with the budget, these are the 
comments that we’ve got. These are quite representative of 
what I hear when I talk to people generally and personally. 
 
The college of dental surgeons actually put out a press release 
the day of the budget and it says: 
 

Revisions to personal income tax rules proposed in today’s 
provincial budget should help (to) keep dental surgeons in 
Saskatchewan, according to Doctor Gordon Johnson, 
President of the College of Dental Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan (CDSS). 

 
The president of the University of Regina said there were 
positive signs in the budget. And the budget allowed the 
universities to strive for sustainable quality. 
 
The president of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) said the budget was good news. 
 
The Regina police chief said he was encouraged by the part of 
the budget that said we were going to put more emphasis on 
policing. 
 
The president of the chamber of commerce, which the Leader of 
the Opposition seems to think would be upset with the budget, 
says: “When you take all of the elements into consideration, 
there’s more money in the pockets of Saskatchewan people at 
the end of the day.” 
 
And this, of course, is correct, Mr. Chair. The president of the 
chamber of commerce says this puts us in a much more 
competitive position. 
 
And this is what we’re trying to do — to have a fair tax system 
for ordinary people and low-income people and working 
people, not just the rich as the opposition would want. But 
ordinary people want a tax cut — working people, seniors who 
are getting hit with the flat tax, and minimum wage earners, and 

single parents. These are people we have to help. 
 
And so I even ask the members of the opposition to reconsider 
their stance on the budget and maybe come out against the flat 
tax and in favour of income tax relief for low-income people. 
 
But also Marilyn Braun, of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business says, “These changes are going to be 
significant.” She says they’re significant. Shirley Ryan of the 
North Saskatoon Business Association issued Finance Minister 
Eric Cline — I’m sorry, I don’t know if I should be referring to 
myself by a first name, Mr. Chair, so I apologize — but said 
that the Finance minister should get a grade of A. And I already 
said Professor Vicq said the budget should get an A. 
 
And I don’t say that to be boastful, Mr. Chair. I simply say that 
notwithstanding what the opposition says, most people in the 
province say that this is a good package. 
 
In fact, Glen Feltham of the University of Saskatchewan — he’s a 
commerce professor — says it was enormously important to do in 
the budget what we did in the budget, and so on. 
 
The Regina Chamber of Commerce says they are pleased with the 
movement on tax that was in the budget. And the Moose Jaw 
Chamber of Commerce says, “I think it’s a very forward thinking 
and innovative budget; I’m quite pleased,” and he goes on. 
 
And my point is, Mr. Chair, there are a lot of things to be very 
positive about in Saskatchewan, and it’s easy to hang the crepe 
and come out with all the doom and gloom. But I think we have to 
recognize that cutting the flat tax, helping ordinary people with the 
personal tax cut that comes in on July 1 — flat tax is being cut in 
half; January 1, elimination of the flat tax, the debt reduction 
surtax, and the high income surtax; lower income taxes for 
everybody; the PST rebate. These are very positive moves. 
 
And continuing to answer the question of the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Chair, the Department of Finance does not fund 
any agencies or third parties directly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. 
I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials here today. And 
I’m pleased with the opportunity to ask them some questions, and 
hopefully we’ll actually get some real answers. 
 
The minister went on a fairly wide-ranging discussion on the 
virtues of his budget. Mr. Speaker, there were a large number of 
people who supported the initiatives that the Minister of Finance 
brought out on budget day of March 29, because they read in there 
exactly what the minister wanted them to read. 
 
And the minister was promoting what he calls a historic reduction 
in taxes — a historic budget. A budget though, Mr. Chairman of 
Committees, that would take place over four years. 
 
What the minister failed to provide in his budget address, and 
again today, was that there was also a historic tax increase. That 
the PST was broadened to an extent that it had never before 
been in Saskatchewan. While the government and the Minister 
of Finance was promising the bird in the bush in the future, he 
was strangling the bird he had in his hand with increased PST. 
 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

So I can certainly understand why the Minister of Finance, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, doesn’t want to talk about the present impact 
of his budget but rather wants to talk about his projections, his 
promises, and his very, very limited view of the future. His 
promise is that three, four years down the road there will be 
income tax cuts. But the reality today is we have a PST 
increase. 
 
When I get my paycheque at the end of the week, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there won’t be a tax decrease on that paycheque. But 
when I go down to buy my dog food this week, there will be a 
PST increase for every person across Saskatchewan. Not just 
for the rich that the minister talks about but every person, no 
matter what their economic level, pays the additional PST. 
 
This budget was a tax on every strata in our society and it hurts 
the most with those low-income people. No one escaped the 
Minister of Finance’s long greedy fingers. He reached into 
every pocket of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No one 
escaped his grasp. 
 
In fact there was a lot of things that the Minister of Finance 
didn’t tell us in his budget document. He said in addressing the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, if you want to know how 
much money we’re bringing in, how much the fees, charges, all 
other items in the budget we’re bringing in, look at the schedule 
of revenue. Well I have it before me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
no place in here does it refer to the coyote tax. It’s not in here 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . because there is one. 
 
The member from Regina Albert South says oh, no, there isn’t 
one. Well when you put on a government charge for which 
there is no corresponding cost, according to the Supreme Court 
of Canada, that is a tax. There is no cost to the government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for coyotes, but there certainly is a charge if 
you want to eliminate them. 
 
And the fact is I could see this Minister of Finance at some 
point in time putting a tax on the reduction of government 
members. So if at election time government members were to 
be defeated, the people of the province would have to pay for 
that. 
 
But excuse me, I think they already did that. They already did 
that because there was a significant number of members that sat 
opposite prior to the last election, that did receive a $20,000 
payment from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. So I guess there 
is a government member reduction tax charged to the taxpayers 
of this province. They like to sneak those in every chance they 
get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have increased park fees, increased fishing fees, increased 
fees for seniors buying non-prescription drugs, increased fees 
for seniors in nursing homes. There are very few people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this province that don’t pay utility bills, and 
yet the government opposite, through their rubber-stamp 
committee, allowed for an increase in SaskEnergy and SaskTel 
costs, all of which end up in the government coffers. 
 
(1515) 
 
Those are taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of 
Finance either directly or indirectly levies on the people of this 

province. The minister talked about and quoted a number of 
people throughout society. Particularly he likes to quote from 
the business community whenever he can find a positive 
statement in his mind. And it’s difficult to find those because 
they are few and far between. 
 
But there were a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on budget day 
because those people had not yet had a chance to learn about the 
long fingers of the Minister of Finance, and that he was dipping 
into their pockets in very, very many, less obvious ways — one 
has to be parliamentary after all in describing these terms. 
 
The Minister of Finance has reached into the pockets of every 
businessman. When he expanded the PST he caught people like 
we saw today, the auto body industry that is going to be 
dramatically impacted through the increased costs associated 
with repairing automobiles in this province. Those who live 
near the borders will be looking to have their work done outside 
of this jurisdiction. 
 
Another good example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be in the 
advertising industry. Most businesses and people, when they 
look at advertising, set themselves a budget. They say, we are 
going to spend X amount of dollars; now how much advertising 
can we get for that. 
 
The initiatives brought forward by the Minister of Finance 
mean that they will get six per cent less for their money. 
Because they won’t spend any more money, they will just end 
up with six per cent less service. And that means there’s a 
reduction to all those industries that are participating in the 
advertising industry will take a six per cent less impact in their 
bottom line. 
 
So I guess the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have for the 
Minister of Finance: there is going to be a dramatic impact on 
the business community of this province, there is going to be a 
dramatic increase in the number of people that purchase goods 
and services in this province, did he include in his calculations 
the amount of that impact, particularly the amount of impact 
that would be associated with his increases along the borders? 
 
Obviously in Regina and Saskatoon where you have to drive 
150, 200 miles to leave this province, it’s going to have a lesser 
impact. But when you’re in Swift Current, it certainly has an 
impact. When you’re in Yorkton, it has an impact. When you’re 
in Carlyle or Meadow Lake, it has an impact. 
 
Has the Minister of Finance looked at what that impact will be 
to the businesses, people and to the financial coffers of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I certainly thank the member for his 
question. I want to say first of all that there . . . the Department 
of Finance has an economic and fiscal policy branch as well as 
a taxation and intergovernmental affairs branch and a revenue 
division. All of those branches working together try to estimate 
as best they can what the impact of any tax changes will be, and 
certainly this budget is no different. 
 
And so yes they’ve tried to take that into account. Do we have 
any sort of special written studies with respect to this particular 
aspect of it? No. But do we take it into account? Yes, we do. 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

And I might say of the officials of the Department of Finance, 
they’re usually pretty much accurate in terms of the impact of a 
tax change or the revenue we’re going to have. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite who apparently 
thinks, Mr. Chair, that the business community and others only 
supported the budget insofar as income tax cuts went but did 
not support the whole package. That is not what in fact 
accurate. In fact the chamber of commerce for Saskatchewan 
was well aware of the entire package of the PST expansion and 
the income tax cut and indicated publicly many times that they 
support that package, as have several chambers of commerce 
around the province and other business people. 
 
And I can tell the member that I have been speaking at public 
meetings. Yesterday I spoke to the Institute of Public 
Administration, to the chartered accountants, to the certified 
management accountants, to the certified general accountants, 
and to the financial planners, and they were very, very 
supportive of the measures in the budget. In fact they described 
the budget as visionary in positioning the province well for the 
future. 
 
So I appreciate that the member does not support the budget, 
and I respect the member’s right to do so, but it would not be 
accurate to say that many people in the province do not support 
the budget because the budget in fact has widespread support 
amongst the business community and others in our province and 
many low-income people who see the income tax to their 
advantage. 
 
I want to say that I think the difference in approach here, Mr. 
Chair, to be helpful perhaps to the member opposite, is that the 
budget is a document that sets out a vision for the future. It says 
we’re going to cut the flat tax in half on July 1; we’re going to 
eliminate the flat tax on January 1 of next year, which is the 
earliest time we can move to a new system; and we’re also 
going to substantially reduce income taxes, not only this year 
but next year as well. 
 
I want to correct the member opposite when he says that there 
will be no tax cuts this year as a result of the budget. In fact, as 
I’ve tried to point out to the members opposite, on July 1 of this 
year the flat tax will be cut in half and January 1 it will be 
eliminated. And the net result of the tax cuts this year, Mr. 
Chair, will be approximately a $44 million tax saving to people 
in Saskatchewan. So taxes are coming down notwithstanding 
the change to the PST. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Chair, we will be reducing 
income taxes by a total, by the year 2003 — that’s only two and 
a half years away — total of $443 million. And the net tax 
benefit of that will be $260 million tax saving to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that when the member indicates that the PST is 
going to be charged to low-income people, the member is 
correct in that regard. But he should mention also that we’re 
bringing in a PST rebate for the first time to actually pay 
low-income people a rebate for the expanded PST that they pay. 
And they won’t be worse off; they’ll be better off, Mr. Chair. 
And I think most people that have looked at the package fairly 
know that. 

I want to say also that the budget takes 55,000 low-income 
people off of the tax rolls. One thing we’ve seen — and I’ve 
heard a lot about this in my years in politics — is that seniors, 
people with low-income whether they’re minimum-wage 
earners or single parents, people working but have low wages, 
are hit by the Saskatchewan flat tax. And we’re charging them 
the flat tax at a low level of income. 
 
And so to the senior citizen right now, we’re starting to put 
income tax — because of the flat tax — on a senior at about 
12,800. We’re increasing that to about 14,800 before we start 
taking income tax from the senior. 
 
Many families will go from 17,000 where we start charging 
provincial income tax to 24,000, because what we’re trying to 
do is cut the taxes for low-income people, for ordinary people. 
 
And the difference between our support for the budget and the 
members opposite is we support the abolition of the flat tax, we 
support taking the 55,000 people off of the tax rolls, we support 
tax relief for low-income people. The members opposite have 
voted against that. They voted against that in the House 
yesterday. 
 
And I respect the viewpoint of the members opposite that tax 
cuts should only be for the wealthy, but it isn’t a viewpoint that 
we share. We think that we have to have tax cuts for 
lower-income people as well. And that’s why we’re doing what 
we’re doing in the budget notwithstanding the objections of the 
members opposite. 
 
And we’re going to continue with it, Mr. Chair. We’re not 
going to give up. We’re going to keep saying the flat tax does 
have to go. Let’s cut it in half on July 1; let’s eliminate it on 
January 1. Let’s take the 55,000 low-income people off the tax 
rolls. That’s the first part of the budget. 
 
The other part is that we’re taking a balanced approach. We’re 
trying to match that off by spending in important priority areas 
like health, education and highways. The members opposite 
haven’t raised those matters, but those are important to people 
too. 
 
But what we don’t want to do is to take an approach being 
advocated by the opposition, which is that we should spend 
$1.2 billion more than we take in, which would lead us to 
deficit and debt. 
 
So what we’re trying to do in the budget is fair taxation, tax 
relief for ordinary people, take low-income people off the tax 
rolls, put some increases into health and education and 
highways and so on, and keep the budget balanced, Mr. Chair. 
Because if we go into deficit, as is being advocated over there, 
it won’t do us any favour in the longer run. We have to keep 
that budget balanced, pay down the debt and lower taxes. And 
that’s what we’re trying to do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again I have to disagree with most of what the minister said. 
There is a few points in there that have some value of 
consideration. 
 
He says he’s taking 55,000 low-income people off of the 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

income tax roll. But he can spread out their cost on the PST 
today. He’s removing them, or claims he’s going to remove 
them because he certainly hasn’t done so today, that he will be 
in the future removing them from the income tax roll, but he 
started charging them more taxes on March 29 of this year. Not 
at some future date, but a date in the past as we speak today. 
The day the budget came down he started taxing them further. 
 
Now he can promise, and people look at promises from the 
government with a very jaundiced eye. We have all heard those 
stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they look in their pocket today 
and he’s taken more out today than he was on March 28. And 
that’s what the people understand. But unfortunately the 
minister doesn’t seem to comprehend that. 
 
The business community certainly did. Yes they were 
complimentary on March 29. But they aren’t any more. Because 
they recognized that the minister was trying to pull the wool 
over their eyes. He didn’t tell them about the added costs that he 
put on them. With camping fees, fishing fees, all of those added 
extra costs. The nursing home cost that their mothers and 
fathers now have to pay. That wasn’t in the budget. 
 
And I noticed the minister very studiously avoids trying to talk 
about those issues, because he understands the anger that the 
seniors feel about having this tax imposed on them. Because it 
is a tax. You can call it whatever you want. You can call it a 
fee, you can call it a schedule, you can call it a charge. But it’s 
money out of their pockets at the end of the day, and that’s what 
they understand. 
 
The minister talks that there’s going to be a $44 million 
reduction in revenues, that taxes to the people of Saskatchewan 
will be reduced by $44 million at the end of the year. But again 
he fails, fails miserably to tell the people how much extra 
they’re going to be paying for all those added fees that he has 
hidden and added into the budgetary process. He failed to tell 
them about the 41-plus million dollars that they’re going to pay 
extra on their SaskEnergy bills and their SaskTel bills. 
 
Even if you just took the utility rate increases without regard to 
other fees and charges he’s added into there, it’s a wash. It 
pretty well breaks even on what the minister says he’s reducing 
income tax by at the end of the year to what we’re going to pay 
extra for our utility costs. 
 
And the minister says oh no, you can’t include utility bills in 
this because they’re separate entities. There’s only one name on 
the ownership list of SaskEnergy and SaskTel. It’s not publicly 
held and traded with millions of people holding shares. There’s 
one shareholder and that’s the government and province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are lots of people who have in essence a little piece of it, 
because every person in Saskatchewan theoretically owns a 
little piece of it. But they’re never invited to be a part of the 
board. They’re never invited to vote on whether or not an 
initiative by a Crown corporation is either good or bad. They do 
get a chance though to vote for the government, but never 
directly on an issue related to a Crown corporation. 
 
(1530) 
 

So there only is one owner and when they pay a dividend, that 
goes directly to the Government of Saskatchewan who charges 
and collects the taxes. So it ends up in the same coffers as the 
income tax money, the same coffers as the PST money, the 
same coffers as the fishing licence. 
 
It’s a tax, Mr. Speaker. And so the minister’s historic budget 
along with the minister’s historic raising of utility rates comes 
out awash. And yet very, very many people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in this province are being negatively impacted by the 
hidden increases that this government has put in as well as the 
broadening of the tax base with the PST. 
 
I’d like to direct the Minister of Finance’s mind to his fancy 
slush fund. The money that . . . the $405 million that was put 
aside from the liquor and gaming fund. What I’d like to ask him 
is, is there actually any money in that account? Is there a bank 
account someplace, either in Saskatchewan or Switzerland or 
the Cayman Islands or wherever it might be, that has $405 
million in it? 
 
Or, which is more likely, a line in a book someplace that says 
this slush fund has $405 million in it. And there’s another line 
underneath there that says we have lent this money to the 
Consolidated Fund. That in actual fact there isn’t a single red 
cent in that account. That the money has actually been spent by 
this government already and all we have is a book entry. 
 
So, Mr. Finance Minister, my question to you is: is there 
actually an account with the money in it for the $405 million in 
your new fancy slush fund, or is it simply book entries and 
you’ve already spent the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, it’s a very interesting question, Mr. 
Chair, because for several days now, including the day after the 
budget day, the members opposite were accusing me of sitting 
on a slush fund of $700 million. 
 
And so one day I’m supposed to be sitting on all this $700 
million, and now today what we have is the member opposite 
saying there’s no money there — there’s no money there. It’s 
just a book entry — there’s no money. 
 
Well, you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Chair. You can’t on one 
day say that we’re sitting on $700 million, as has been said 
repeatedly. And you can check . . . they can check the Hansard 
themselves, Mr. Chair. It’s right there. They’ve all been saying 
I’m sitting on $700 million, which of course, I’m not. 
 
And now the member opposite is saying, oh, there’s no money 
there. You’re saying there’s money and there’s no money there. 
Well which is it? Am I sitting on $700 million on the one hand, 
as they say one day, or is there no money there, as they say on 
another day? I don’t know. 
 
But I say in response to what the member opposite has been 
saying, that although he refers to the fact that the expanded PST 
went on March 29, he fails . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 
going to get back to the question in more specifics as well, Mr. 
Chair, but I’m going to address some of the other points the 
member opposite raised. 
 
He fails to mention that the low-income PST rebate started 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

being accumulated by people on April 1 — on April 1 — not 
some time in the future, but we’ve already passed that date. In 
other words, when somebody is going to the store and buying 
something, the PST . . . they’re also accumulating a PST rebate 
starting on April 1, which in years to come will be paid on April 
1, but this year will be paid on October 1, going back to April 1 
— three cheques in one on October 1 for that PST rebate. 
 
He also fails to mention that the farm fuel reduction was 
retroactive to January 1, so that started coming off January 1 of 
this year. 
 
And of course he says, well what are they going to do. He says, 
are they going to keep their promises. 
 
Well I’ll say this to the member opposite. A year from now I’m 
going to be standing in this legislature, I hope, and I’m hoping 
that the member opposite will be still healthy and in the 
legislature and asking me questions. And a year from now when 
he does that, this is what I’ll be saying to him, I’ll be saying, I’ll 
be saying that on July 1, 2000, the flat tax was cut in half and 
on January 1, 2001, the flat tax was eliminated and we’re going 
to a new income tax structure. 
 
And I say to the member opposite who’s telling people that you 
can’t trust government promises, we have met and exceeded our 
financial targets each and every year. Every time we have 
promised a tax cut, we have delivered a tax cut. We’ve had 
seven consecutive balanced budgets. This was the sixth 
consecutive budget with personal tax decreases and we’re going 
to continue on that record. 
 
But what we are not going to do, as I’m trying to explain to the 
members opposite, is we are not going to keep the flat tax. They 
seem to oppose the abolition of the flat tax. We do not agree 
with them that we should not take low-income people off the 
provincial income tax rolls. We should give tax relief for 
low-income people; not follow their plan which would only 
give tax relief to their rich friends, Mr. Chair, which I think 
would not be the right thing to do. 
 
I want to say also that I take it from the member’s comments — 
the member goes on talking about Crown corporations — and I 
take it from his comments that they still are advocating, over 
there, the privatization of our utilities like SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and SaskTel. And this is another area where we 
differ from them, Mr. Chair. We do not agree with the 
privatization of the utility Crowns. 
 
These are owned by the people. They should be kept in the 
hands of the people. Not sold off to rich friends who the 
members opposite also want to benefit with a tax cut only to the 
rich. 
 
To return to the member’s final question and comment, the 
assets in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund will be used to minimize 
interest costs to the operations of government. There’s no 
question about that. We will not have them sitting in a shoe box 
somewhere. We will have them used for government purposes 
to minimize interest costs to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
And if the member opposite does not agree with that, I would 
put this question to him. Is he proposing that those funds should 

sit collecting no interest? Or is he proposing that the interest to 
the General Revenue Fund, which is paid by the taxpayers, 
should be increased by not accessing monies that are sitting in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? That is the question I have for the 
member opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. I 
guess what the minister is actually saying in his last comments 
is that there is no money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the 
fancy slush fund. That there actually isn’t any money there. 
Because he said that they are using it to minimize interest costs 
to the government. That sounds to me like they’ve already spent 
it. 
 
Well if they’ve already spent it, then there’s a debt in that 
particular account. That there is no money there. The 
government then owes the Fiscal Stabilization Fund $405 
million. So they’ve increased the government’s debt. I wonder 
if they’re actually paying any interest on that particular account. 
Or is this sort of an interest-free loan or grant from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund to the Consolidated Fund? 
 
If we’re going to be using the money that’s supposed to be in 
that account for government purposes, I guess the real question 
has to be, what’s the point of having it if the money has already 
been spent? 
 
Why don’t you just simply take the money that was available 
out of the liquor and gaming fund rather than starting up a new 
fancy fund to cover up your tracks? Simply put it into the 
Consolidated Fund and pay down the debt with it, which is 
what you seem to be indicating — only seem to be indicating 
— is what you may have done with it. 
 
So, again, I ask the minister: is there cash in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund or is there a debt there owed by the 
provincial government to that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is there is a fund. It is lent 
interest free to the General Revenue Fund, the reason being to 
minimize the interest costs. And if you did not do that, then the 
General Revenue Fund would be paying higher interest costs. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, if you utilize the funds . . . to 
say that there is no fund there is like saying that when you 
deposit your money in your bank account, that the bank should 
simply leave the money sitting there. And that isn’t the way the 
real world operates, Mr. Chair. 
 
The way the world operates is you take your money to the bank. 
You have an account receivable from the bank which is a 
financial institution. Your money is there, but that doesn’t mean 
that the bank just sits on the money and does nothing with it. 
The bank will lend that money out for other purposes which is 
how the economy operates. 
 
The member opposite seems to be of the view that in order to 
have a fund and in order to have an account, you should put 
your money in a shoebox, lock it up in a safe, and leave it there. 
And I can only say, Mr. Chair, that this is the sort of — if I may 
say so — erroneous thinking that got our province into a lot of 
trouble in the past. 
 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

We’re following correct accounting procedures by having that 
money put into a fund, having it used to minimize interest costs, 
having it as an account receivable — as I’m hoping the member 
does with his own funds. I’m hoping that he doesn’t take them 
home at the end of the month and put them in a sock under his 
mattress, and then say, well I’ve got some money there. I’m 
hoping that the member has an account in a credit union or a 
bank or somewhere else where he’s got an account receivable. 
 
And this is the way that things operate in the real world. And 
yes, we do put the money into an account. We do have an 
account receivable for that fund. That’s the way we should do 
business. That’s the way I would hope the member does 
business in his own personal life — that he puts some money 
into an account for savings as we’re doing. 
 
And I think that that’s a big difference between us and the 
members opposite, Mr. Chair, that we do believe in setting 
some money aside as savings instead of spending every penny 
we have and then, when something happens that you’re not 
expecting, going into deficit and debt which ultimately you 
have to pay for. You have to raise taxes or do something else or 
get the next generation to pay for it, and we don’t want to do 
that. 
 
We think it is proper to have some funds set aside, as I’ve 
described, to deal with any volatility that may occur in 
revenues. And I can only hope that the member does the same 
thing in his own personal life, and I’m quite sure that he does. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Well what we have in this 
particular case is no bank. What we have is like an individual 
gets a paycheque and they get their cash in their hand and they 
put it in this pocket. But what they do later is they take it out of 
this pocket and they transfer it over to this pocket. Now this 
pocket was the liquor and gaming fund, now the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. They take the money out of this pocket and 
pay down a debt. 
 
The question is: is there any money left? No, there isn’t. This 
pocket is empty. This pocket is empty except for a little piece of 
paper that says this pocket owes this pocket some money, but 
there is no money. The money is gone, it’s spent, and that’s 
what the government situation is. 
 
I’d like to read a little quote from the Provincial Auditor on 
these very funds on how the government likes to shuffle money 
back and forth. And I quote: “To me it’s almost like you don’t 
have respect for taxpayers when you create these things,” 
Strelioff said. 

 
That’s what the Provincial Auditor said about the creation of 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and all of the funds like it. The 
people out across the province that vote understand that if you 
put money in one pocket and take it out and put it the other 
pocket and take it out and spend it, even though you say pocket 
B owes pocket A the money and you’ve spent it, there is no 
money left. 
 
The Minister of Finance’s much vaunted Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, quite frankly, is broke. It doesn’t have a red cent. All it 
has is a piece of paper that says pocket B owes pocket A some 
money. 

(1545) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Chair, what we have is some 
subterfuge by the Minister of Finance to try and confuse the 
public of Saskatchewan, and I believe that’s wrong. It’s most 
unfortunate that the Minister of Finance believes he has to 
resort to those kind of tactics in presenting his budget. 
 
And it wasn’t only the Fiscal Stabilization Fund that he resorted 
to those tactics in, he resorted to it in every branch and 
department. Why else would the Minister of the Environment 
say, we weren’t going to tell; you didn’t ask, so we’re not 
telling you. 
 
And the fact is on the park increases, when the people around 
Saskatchewan that operate in the parks heard that there might be 
some increases they phoned the Department of the 
Environment. And they asked the people in there, well weren’t 
you going to tell us that there was a fee increase? 
 
And the response they got back from the officials in the 
Department of Environment was no, we were going to slide it in 
the back door. They weren’t even prepared to tell the people 
that operated in those areas that there was going to be a fee 
increase. 
 
I can just see the park superintendents on May 1, when they 
start charging fees to enter the park. He’s standing out in front 
of the booth, 8:59, 9 o’clock, grabs his little sign and nails it up 
on the wall and hopes to heck nobody made it through there 
before he got the fees increased. That was the notification that 
people of the province of Saskatchewan were going to receive 
on the fee increases that this government is putting in. 
 
So, Mr. Minister of Finance, since there is no money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, why did you even bother creating it? 
Why don’t you simply transfer the fund from the liquor and 
gaming commission to the Consolidated Fund to pay down the 
debt which is what you claim you are doing with the money 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I certainly thank the 
member for his questions. And I must say that they seem rather 
confused in this sense, that as I’ve said — and this is on the 
public record in Hansard — the members opposite have been 
accusing me in the last number of days of sitting on a slush fund 
of $700 million. 
 
They’ve been saying I’m sitting on this $700 and I should be 
giving it out and doing this, that, and the other thing with it. 
Now, today, the members opposite are saying, there’s no money 
there. 
 
Well, it can’t be both ways. It can’t be on the one hand they say 
that I’ve got $700 million that I’m sitting on to spend. And on 
the other hand say, you don’t have any money when you say 
you’re having some money. So it’s very difficult to follow the 
logic of the members opposite. 
 
But I just say to the member opposite, without trying to 
belabour the point, because I’ve answered the question already. 
 
When you have money, you don’t keep the money in a shoe box 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

or in a safe or in a box or in a mattress that you’re sleeping on. 
The member says, well there’s just a piece of paper to represent 
that money. I point out, well it’s the same when the member 
goes to the bank and puts his money in the bank. He’s got a 
deposit book or a receipt indicating that he’s got that money, 
that he’s got a receivable. 
 
And the Fiscal Stabilization Fund exists as a fund. It also has a 
receivable from the General Revenue Fund which has the effect 
of decreasing the amount of interest that the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan have to pay. And I can only say that it is no 
different than any situation including, I’m hoping, as I said, that 
the member has bank accounts with pieces of paper that 
represent his right to get his money back, as the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund does too. So I just want to say that. 
 
I also want to say to the member opposite that he can . . . he 
seems to be under a misapprehension that somehow you would 
have fees going up and nobody would be told about them. And 
of course nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Chair. 
 
I think that the member opposite is confusing the budget 
address and the fact that not all things are covered in the budget 
address, and the announcements that occur after budget over a 
period of time so that there can be full public discussion and 
debate of every issue — as in fact we would encourage to 
happen — and certainly no different with respect to the 
camping and the fishing fees. 
 
And I want to say that nobody ever likes it when a fee goes up. 
You know, the fishing fee licence is going from $16 to $25. 
That’s true. But also you can get a three-day pass to go fishing 
for $12. 
 
And also, Mr. Chair, a lot of our people that fish are from out of 
province. I think it is fair that we charge a fee for people to fish 
that we can use to restock our fishery, to protect our wildlife, to 
improve our environment, to work on the parks, and do all of 
those things to make Saskatchewan even a more beautiful 
province than it is already. 
 
And I also want to say to the member opposite that we’re going 
to be tabling in the legislature answers from every department 
and agency that has been asked about as to any program 
changes, such as have been asked about by the opposition. I 
have a tremendous amount of respect for the opposition and the 
job that they do and also my colleagues. 
 
One of the things we do in the legislature is to in fact have a 
public discussion of all these issues. And to suggest that we’re 
not going to discuss these issues publicly is of course not right. 
That is what we’re going to do. That’s our intention. 
 
And the real complaint is, well you’re maybe talking about it on 
a Tuesday instead of a Wednesday. But these things should be 
discussed, certainly, over time — and they will be. And all of 
that information will be tabled. So I hope that reassures the 
member opposite, and I have every confidence that it will, but 
any information that is needed, I can assure you, Mr. Chair, it’s 
going to be tabled and made public and debated in the 
legislature. 
 
And in fact, we’re going to go through the budgets of each 

department on a line by line basis and really get into a lot of 
detail in departmental estimates. And I welcome that. That’s 
what we should be doing. So in that sense, I’m in complete 
agreement with the member opposite that we need to get into 
estimates of each department and really look at these things in 
the detail that they deserve. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Minister, I agree 
with you that we need to get into the items on every department. 
But your budget should include not just those items you wish to 
use as propaganda across this province, it should include all 
items of transaction and policy that are changing which affect 
the people of Saskatchewan. And you only presented half of the 
story. 
 
On your analogy about the bank, Mr. Minister. When I put 
money in the bank and the bank uses it for various and sundry 
purposes, that’s the way it should be. But when I go down to 
that bank and say, Mr. Banker, I would like my money back, 
what I don’t have to do is turn around and make a deposit so 
that I can get my money out. But in your case, Mr. Minister, if 
you wanted to extract money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
you would actually have to make a deposit to your so-called 
bank, to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund so that you could 
withdraw money out of it. 
 
You’re simply shuffling money around to try and confuse the 
people of Saskatchewan so that you can hide the transactions. 
There is no money there. There never was any money there. It’s 
simply paper, and you’ve already spent the money that could 
have gone into that account. 
 
Since the money isn’t there though and since all there is is a 
paper that says you owe the Fiscal Stabilization Fund $405 
million, I wonder if you have included that $405 million in your 
statement of revenues, expenditures, and accumulated deficit? 
Have you included the $405 million as a debt to the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the $405 million is included as an 
expenditure in the accounts that have been tabled with the 
legislature. And I want to say to the members opposite that the 
purpose of the fund is that Saskatchewan can have a savings 
account as anyone should have a savings account. 
 
And the answer to the member’s question is if he went to the 
bank and presented, you know, his deposit book and wanted to 
get his money, yes the bank would have to go and get the 
money if they didn’t . . . if it was a very large withdrawal for 
example. Banks don’t always have reserves on hand, but they 
would go and get the money and they would give it to the 
member. 
 
And similarly, as I’ve tried to explain to the member, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund has an account receivable from the General 
Revenue Fund. And likewise if the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
wanted to withdraw their money from the General Revenue 
Fund, that’s what they would do. 
 
But the essential question here, Mr. Chair, is whether or not 
Saskatchewan should have any savings. That’s the question. 
And the difference between the position being taken by the 
members opposite and the position of the members of the 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

government is that we are saying that we should set aside a 5 
per cent of our revenue as a savings account to protect us in the 
interests that there is some volatility of revenue and our 
revenues go down. So that we don’t have to cut services to 
people or raise their taxes, or go into deficit and debt. 
 
The members opposite are essentially saying they don’t believe 
we should create the savings account that we want to create. 
They believe that we should spend all the money as soon as it 
comes in. And that’s a very dangerous game to play because 
we’ve seen it in the past that you go into deficit which means 
that you go into more debt. And instead of reducing taxes, you 
increase taxes and that’s why we believe we do need a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund to act as a savings account for the people of 
the province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, you say that just like a bank, if somebody makes a 
withdrawal, they get some more deposits from somebody else 
to pay that. In this particular case though with your so-called 
bank, who are they going to get the deposit from? Are they 
going to get it from the Government of Saskatchewan, or are 
you going to get that deposit from the people who supply their 
moneys to the liquor and gaming commission? 
 
Where do you get your deposit from to provide the money to 
pay that out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The funds would be paid to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund by the General Revenue Fund if those funds 
were drawn upon. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So in actual fact, there is no money. 
That’s what the minister just said. That it’s simply paper being 
shuffled back and forth, and if he wanted to withdraw money 
out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to transfer it to the 
Consolidated Fund, he would have to pay money from the 
Consolidated Fund into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund first. 
 
There is no money. That’s what the minister is finally saying. 
Since there is no money, again I would like to refer to page 10 
of the budget under statement of revenues, expenditures, and 
accumulated deficits. 
 
Under the headings of accumulated deficit at the beginning of 
the year and accumulated deficit at the end of the year, is the 
$405 million owed to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund included in 
that number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is part of the accumulated deficit, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So in actual fact then, you’re saying, 
Mr. Minister, that the money supposedly in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is actually being recorded under accumulated 
deficit for the year ending March 31, 2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The General Revenue Fund has an 
accumulated deficit. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund has a 
surplus. That is indicated at page 10 of the Estimates as the 
member has indicated. And the matter is fully reported there. 
 
And I say to the member what I’ve said before, that the fund 

has an account receivable as any bank account would. The fund 
is there. 
 
It’s fully accounted for in the Estimates, and it will provide a 
savings account for the people of the province; something that 
we should have in order to avoid deficits and debt. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps you 
can walk me through this then. 
 
We have revenues here under the statement of revenue, 
expenditure, and accumulated deficit estimated for the year 
2000 and 2001 of $6.382 billion. 
 
We have operating expenditures of $5.29 billion, for an 
operating surplus of $1.091 billion. Servicing of the public debt, 
677 million, transfer to Fiscal Stabilization Fund of $405 
million, for a surplus of $9 million, $9.4 million. 
 
Accumulated deficit, beginning of the year, $798 million . . . or 
excuse me 7 billion and 98 million. Accumulated deficit at the 
end of the year, 7 billion and $89 million. 
 
Can you explain to me all of that $7 billion deficit? Exactly 
where’s that being held? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think what I need to explain to the 
member opposite, Mr. Chair, is that the accumulated deficit is 
not the deficit of this year. This year there’s a surplus of $9 
million. 
 
The accumulated deficit is the deficits accumulated from all the 
years past. And what that figure . . . the member is talking about 
apples and oranges. What the accumulated deficit means, is that 
for example, looking at the same page we can see that for last 
year, the accumulated deficit at the end of this last fiscal year, 
1999-2000, was 7 billion and 98,000 dollars . . . 7 billion and 
actually that’s $98 million. 
 
And this year as a result of the estimated surplus — this is 
forecasting to the next year and March 31, 2001 — the 
estimated surplus is $9.4 million. And so the accumulated 
deficit will go from $7 billion, 98 million to $7 billion, 89 
million and that’s what the accumulated deficit is. 
 
It doesn’t mean that you run up a deficit of $7 billion this year. 
It means that we used to have an accumulated deficit of 
somewhat higher. I don’t know what the highest it ever was in 
this book would be, but it’s been coming down over the years. 
And it continues to go down because we’re operating at a 
surplus instead of a deficit. 
 
That’s a separate point from, really, a discussion of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. But I’ll point out to the member that is what 
is happening in this current fiscal year that we’re now in, the 
new budget year, is that the revenue is basically $6.4 billion. 
But that includes an approximate sum of $695 million coming 
in as revenue from the liquor and gaming fund. And as fully 
disclosed in this document, we’re taking in 6.4 billion, we’re 
spending 5.3 billion on operations, that leaves you with an 
operating surplus of $1.1 billion. 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

Of that we are going to pay $677 million interest on the debt 
and we’re going to transfer $405 million to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. And so you end up with a surplus of $9 
million, which then has the effect I’ve described on the 
accumulated deficit. 
 
And all I can say to the member, Mr. Chair, is these numbers 
are here. They’re recorded for all to see. They’re completely 
transparent. They’re easy to follow and understand. I’m not sure 
if they are if you’re just listening to this and you don’t have the 
document in front of you. But everything that is coming in, 
everything that is spent is itemized in the Estimates and the 
other budgetary documents that are tabled with the legislature 
— there’s no mystery to it. And the sum of $405 million is 
being transferred out of the operating surplus into the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
And I can’t explain it any differently than that — that is a fact 
and it’s a fact that is fully disclosed in the Estimates. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed it is in 
the book here. So the only changes in the accumulated deficit 
from fiscal year, which just ended, to the fiscal year which will 
end March 31 next year is a $9 million reduction in that 
accumulated deficit. There will be no other transactions within 
that account . . . that accumulated deficit over the period of that 
fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well that’s correct. Because the 
accumulated deficit simply reflects accumulated deficit last year 
minus projected surplus, or if you were in deficit then it would 
add the projected surplus, and then you get the new 
accumulated deficit for this year. And that is what appears in 
the book. And this is nothing new. This is what appears every 
year in the book. 
 
And I might add that this is not necessarily a reflection of the 
amount that the debt of the province would be reduced because 
then you’ve got to look at the amount of the guaranteed funds 
and sinking funds and so on. But in terms of the accounting of 
an accumulated deficit, of course, that is the result — that you 
start out on last year’s figure, then you add your surplus . . . or 
subtract your surplus, and you end up with the new accumulated 
deficit. That’s quite correct factually and it’s a matter actually 
of simple arithmetic. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, I’m glad that the minister 
said that that was the only transactions. Because in this year, 
this budgetary year we’re discussing, he shows a transfer from 
the Consolidated Fund to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund of $405 
million. So in theory, we have $405 million sitting in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
Now he admitted earlier that he has used the money, that he’s 
used it to reduce the interest costs to the province by paying 
down debt, that there would be a debt owed to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, but it doesn’t show it here, Mr. Minister. 
You, yourself, said that in this fiscal year, the only transactions 
in and out was the $9 million. 
 
In reality, you’re running a deficit, Mr. Minister, in this 
budgetary year of approximately $396 million. That seems to be 
the truth, Mr. Minister, of your numbers and your book work. 

Since there was no corresponding debt accumulation to the 
accumulated deficit at the end of the year, you didn’t show the 
transfer from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to the accumulated 
deficit. We have a debt sitting there that’s unrecorded by your 
account. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, which is right? Either there are more 
transactions taking place than you admitted to in the first place 
or you’re running a deficit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I can only advise the 
member that the way in which the accumulated deficit is 
accounted for in the books has been the same since the province 
was created in 1905, Mr. Chair; the accumulated deficit is 
something that has been accounted for in the same way since 
1905. And all I can say to the member opposite is now I’m 
getting pretty confused because now he’s trying to say that we 
have somehow a $405 million deficit . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 396. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Oh, $396 million deficit. Last week he and 
his colleagues were saying we had a $700 million surplus that 
we were sitting on. 
 
So I don’t know which it’s supposed to be. Is it the $700 
million surplus that last week you were yelling at me that I was 
sitting on $700 million and I wouldn’t spend it, or is it today’s 
$396 million deficit? Well the reality, Mr. Chair, is it’s neither. 
 
What it is, is what is stated in the books. What it is, is what is 
audited by the Provincial Auditor every year, and these books 
will be audited as they are. And I can only say to the member 
opposite and his colleagues that you really have to be more 
careful about what you’re saying in this House. 
 
Because at least try to be consistent. And don’t one day stand in 
the House and accuse me of sitting on $700 million surplus and 
the next day accuse me of a $396 million deficit. Because I’ll 
tell you, it doesn’t make sense. It doesn’t add up. The people of 
the province know that your math doesn’t add up. And at least 
if you’re going to use your funny money Tory math, at least try 
to be consistent and decide whether you’re going to accuse me 
of sitting on a $700 million surplus, as you did last week, or 
sitting on a $396 million deficit as apparently you’re trying to 
do today. 
 
At least try to be consistent. Which is it? Is it the surplus today 
or is it the deficit? Let’s come clean with the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we took your 
numbers at face value and it looks like you’ve blown a billion 
dollars in less than a week. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you account for the transfer of money in 
this budget from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to the 
accumulated deficit that will be in place at March 31, 2001? 
Where does that transfer show up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I’ve tried to explain to the member, 
Mr. Chair, it’s two completely different things. The 
accumulated deficit is a fund that goes back . . . it’s been 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

accounted for since 1905. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund is a 
new fund being created this year. It’s quite clear in the 
Estimates. 
 
I really can’t add anything to what I’ve already said to the 
member. He’s talking about apples and oranges. And with the 
greatest of respect, he’s actually quite confused about the 
numbers, and his confusion seems to be getting worse as time 
goes on. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, when will you transfer the 
$405 million into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — During the current year, subject to enabling 
legislation being passed by this House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, when will you withdraw 
the money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised by the officials that we will 
begin to draw down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in the three 
years subsequent to the current fiscal year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So then at the end of March 31, 2001, 
there will be an account, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, that 
actually has a cash value, money in the bank of $405 million. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As I’ve explained to the member, Mr. 
Chair, there will be a receivable of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
which will amount to $405 million at the end of this fiscal year. 
That would be March 31, 2001. 
 
It will be $350 million at the end of the 2001-2002 fiscal year, 
$320 million as of March 31, 2003, and $290 million as of 
March 31, 2004, which is equivalent to approximately 5 per 
cent of the revenue, which is the target of the fund. 
 
I might add that the reason the fund is being created at a level of 
$405 million this year is to provide a payment next year of $25 
million for the farm property tax rebate; and also next year, $30 
million to the Centenary Capital Fund, and then payments of 
$30 million in the two subsequent years to the Centenary 
Capital Fund. 
 
And when you take out the monies that will be drawn down to 
the Centenary Capital Fund and the farm property tax rebate, 
you will be left on March 31, 2004 with a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund of $290 million, which is the 5 per cent target. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, at the end of the year 
unpaid either operating accounts or other monies owed become 
deficits and debt at the end of the calendar . . . not the calendar 
year, the fiscal year. Is that not right? That’s how we 
accumulate a deficit. 
 
It’s an addition of all the debt that has accumulated over the 
years at the end of each fiscal year, that is the accumulated 
deficit — is it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Deficits and debt are two separate and 

distinct things, Mr. Chair. 
 
The accumulated deficit would relate to the deficit or surplus of 
the General Revenue Fund, and would be adjusted according to 
what happens in each year as has occurred since 1905. 
 
If the province undertook debt — whether guaranteed debt, 
Crown corporation debt, or general government debt — that 
would be accounted for as debt. It would not be accounted for 
as a deficit or a surplus. And it would not, in that sense, impact 
on the accumulated deficit. 
 
And I don’t know how to answer the member other than to say 
that the concepts of debt and deficit are two different things. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — They absolutely are. Deficit is what I 
run short of this year, and debt is what I ran short of every year 
before that — accumulated. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said at the end of the year, this fiscal year, 
that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund will have a receivable, I 
believe, of $350 million with the Consolidated Fund. That 
means the Consolidated Fund owes the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund $350 million. 
 
Now are you accounting for that debt, deficit, what you owe, to 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in the accumulated deficit because 
it’ll be owed at the end of the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well again, first of all, it would not be the 
figure of $350 million because I already said to the member — 
and I might add that this is outlined in the budget book itself; 
there is a schedule for the amount of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund — I’ve already said to the member in my answer, two 
questions ago, that the amount available in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund at the end of this current fiscal year will be 
$405 million. 
 
So the member’s using a figure of $350 million. That figure is 
not correct. There would be a receivable of $405 million, not 
$350 million. 
 
Now the member is referring to two concepts in one question. 
He’s referring to the debt of the province, and he’s referring to 
the accumulated deficit. And I’m trying to say to the member 
that the concepts of debt and deficit are separate. 
 
The accumulated deficit is something different than the 
statement of debt of the province, and he’s mixing those two 
things . . . the two concepts in one question, Mr. Chair. It’s not 
a sensible question, and it’s not possible to answer the question 
because the question itself doesn’t make sense, because it 
confuses the deficits and debt which are two different things. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I think it’s the Minister of Finance 
that’s trying to confuse things so that the general public doesn’t 
know what he’s doing with $405 million. 
 
Because he’s saying I’m putting it into an account; and then 
he’s saying I’m taking it out of an account but it’s still in the 
account. So if I need the money I can get it, but I’ve got to take 
. . . I’ve got to pay it back to there so I can take it out, so I have 
$405 million. But I already spent it to reduce the deficit. But I 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

have it there still if I want it. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the end story is the money’s gone. 
And I guess the real question is now, is: has the minister 
accounted for it? And it would appear that somehow or another 
he may have missed it when he was adding and subtracting. 
 
That’s what I want to know — is did he miss it when he was 
adding and subtracting the debt that will be owed by the 
province of Saskatchewan at the end of the fiscal year, March 
31, 2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the answer is no, it certainly has not 
been missed — $405 million is obviously a large sum of money 
and it’s accounted for in the Estimates. 
 
But the problem with the question is the member is saying, are 
we using that money to reduce the deficit. And no, you would 
not use that money to reduce the deficit. You would use that 
money to reduce the debt of the province, Mr. Chair. But that 
would have very little to do with the accumulated deficit which 
deals with a different concept, as I’ve been trying to explain to 
the member. 
 
And I can only say to the member that our goal is to have a 
savings account that can be drawn upon when there is a change 
to the revenue so that we will not have to cut services, increase 
taxes, or go into deficit. And it’s very important for the 
province that some of our monies be set aside in a savings 
account to protect the people of the province from volatility of 
revenues so that we don’t have to go into deficit. 
 
Because ultimately, there’s only one thing, I think, perhaps that 
I agree with the former premier Devine on, and that is, he said, 
deficits are a deferred tax. And I think that’s correct. 
 
And we have to try to avoid deficits, continue on our record of 
balanced budgets. We’ve just presented the seventh balanced 
budget in a row. And the goal of what we’re trying to do here is 
to be able to continue to do that and avoid deficits. 
 
And we ask the hon. member and his colleagues to support us in 
that effort so that indeed we can avoid deficits and keep the 
budget balanced. And I know that all members hopefully will at 
least say that they share that view, and we need the co-operation 
of the members in order to create that savings account to avoid 
the kind of deficits we otherwise would have. 
 
So I hope that is helpful and I certainly appreciate the 
opportunity to discuss the issue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you still haven’t 
answered the question. When I look through various and sundry 
other pages in this budget, it talks about schedule of borrowing 
requirements, and yet I don’t see the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
in there. It talks about lending receipts, loan repayments, 
investing receipts, investing disbursements, other loans, lending 
disbursements. No place in there does it talk about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
I looked at schedule of debt for the province. No place in here is 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund included, and yet the number is 
impressive. It’s 11-plus billion dollars. But the minister himself 

said that at the end of the fiscal year, March 31, 2001, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund would have a receivable from the 
Consolidated Fund of $405 million. 
 
Well if I have a receivable, that means I owe somebody some 
money. Well perhaps I owe the member from . . . used to be the 
member from Pelly but now he’s the member from Regina 
Northeast. So perhaps I owe the member from Regina Northeast 
some money. He has a receivable on me. I owe him some 
money. It needs to be accounted for someplace. 
 
And yet in this budget book, that $405 million is not accounted 
for. It shows that the member from Regina Northeast got the 
$405 million into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, but it doesn’t 
show where it went to, because he actually doesn’t have any 
money. 
 
But it doesn’t show where it went to. No place in here does it 
show where the money went to; no place does it show that the 
Consolidated Fund owes the Fiscal Stabilization Fund $405 
million. It’s not accounted for in either debt or deficit as the 
minister wishes to split hairs on. It’s not accounted for. 
 
If I owe money, if the province owes money in this fiscal year 
that it doesn’t have the ability to pay with the current revenues, 
that is a deficit. And when you add it with the previous deficits, 
it becomes a debt and it becomes the accumulated deficit. That 
means unless the minister can pull some rabbits out of a hat and 
explain this, that he’s actually running a deficit this year of 
$396 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well again, Mr. Chair, I simply say to the 
member that he’s got to get his story straight because last week 
I was accused of sitting on a $700 million surplus. Now I’m 
being accused of sitting on a $396 million deficit. So I don’t 
think, I don’t think even Houdini could sit on a $700 million 
surplus and a $396 million deficit at the same time. So you 
better get your story straight which it is I’m supposed to be 
doing, because you can’t have both a surplus and a deficit. 
 
But to answer the member’s question, I’ll answer it this way, 
the . . . this year is the first year of the creation of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. The revenue that goes into the fund is 
contained in a transfer that is itemized on page 10 of the 
Estimates, the “Statement of Revenue, Expenditure and 
Accumulated Deficit” where it is indicated that $695.4 million 
is being transferred in as part of the SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) fund. So that’s where the 
money’s being transferred in. 
 
It’s itemized on page 10. And I might add it’s itemized also on 
page 12 as transferred from the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority retained earnings of $695.4 million. So 
certainly it’s itemized there and on page 10 again. The 
expenditure out to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is also itemized 
on page 10, an expenditure out from the General Revenue Fund 
to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund of $405 million. 
 
So where does the money come from? That’s itemized both on 
page 10 and page 12. Where does it go to? That’s itemized on 
page 10, Mr. Chair, and that is where the money comes from; 
that is where the money goes. 
 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

And I could also refer the member to the budget; I think it’s 
page 51 of the budget document which has a chart called 
“Fiscal Stabilization Fund Forecast.” And it has the information 
about the amount in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, a four-year 
plan to take money out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
It is there not only for the member but for all the world to see, 
Mr. Chair, and certainly as is the record of this government, 
properly recorded, properly accounted for, and quite properly it 
will be used again to avoid deficits, avoid increased debt, and to 
keep our budget balanced. And that’s what we’re going to do, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and to the minister, I’d still . . . I’d like to come back to this 
fund for just a minute. And in regards to the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, if I heard you correctly, the fund will have at the end of 
this fiscal year $405 million actually sitting in it. 
 
Currently it has no money in it. Just other than a transfer 
agreement from the General Revenue Fund to that fund. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, not quite, but generally the . . . 
Currently there is no fund because the fund has to be authorized 
by legislation. Currently what we have are monies being 
transferred from the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) into the General Revenue Fund. And the goal is that 
when it’s authorized by the legislature, we will put $405 million 
into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, so 
are you saying that the liquor and gaming fund of $695 million 
is actually being transferred to the general revenue pool at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it’s been recorded as revenue in this 
fiscal year as is itemized on page 10 of the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, so that money 
currently is in the general fund, and the General Revenue Fund 
currently was showing a much larger number than the $9 
million surplus that you’re actually showing for the end of the 
fiscal year for the simple reason that at the end of the fiscal 
year, by March 31, 2001, you’re actually going to transfer $405 
million into this Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, subject to legislative approval. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So what you’re 
basically saying to us is that you are currently using the money. 
And you’re using that money to offset the growing debt by 
paying down debt — is that . . . so that the interest rates are 
lowered and at the end of the fiscal year, you will then transfer 
. . . And I guess that’s a question I do have. While you’re 
currently . . . you’re not showing right now that you actually 
have that additional surplus of 405. If I read correctly, the 405, 
which will be transferred which is currently being used, should 
be actually showing about $414 million in added surplus that 
we actually have today, or will have today in your budget until 
you move that $405 million into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well generally speaking, I think that’s 
correct. The only part, I think the only part of the question I 
would disagree with is the member referred to a growing debt. 
We don’t have a growing debt. We actually have a declining 
debt. The debt is going down. 
 
But you’re right. If we didn’t create the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, if we didn’t transfer the $405 million to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, then we would have a surplus this year of 
$414 million approximately — that’s right. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what is the total debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as of this time, the end of the last 
fiscal year, the total debt of the province of Saskatchewan is 
approximately $11.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, according to the 
fall financial report, interim report, it showed the total debt of 
the province as being $18.7 billion — isn’t that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well there are different ways to report 
debt. In fact, even the credit rating agencies, if you look at the 
attribution of debt to various jurisdictions, will calculate the 
debt in different ways. 
 
But the debt of the province, according to the summary 
financial statements that have been approved by the Provincial 
Auditor as at the end of the last fiscal year, is, according to the 
summary financial statements — I’ll get you the exact, the 
exact figure so that we can put it on the public record because 
this figure has been audited by the Provincial Auditor. And I 
think it’s important to note that the debt has been declining each 
and every year, and we’ve been making some progress on that 
score, both reducing the absolute amount of the debt but also 
reducing the amount of the debt as a percentage of our 
economy. 
 
The member may be interested to know that in 1993 and ’94 
our debt was over $15 billion and it was about 70 per cent of 
our gross domestic product. But that’s gone down now to 
approximately $11.3 billion and it’s about 38 per cent of our 
gross domestic product. So we’ve been making some 
considerable progress with respect to reduction of debt, and of 
course we want to continue to do so. 
 
And according to the Public Accounts for 1998-99 — this is 
from the main financial statements which were audited by the 
Provincial Auditor — the total debt of the province was 
11,082,307,000 as of 1998-99. And that is the most up to date 
audited statement we have with respect to the size of the 
provincial debt. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, and, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Minister . . . and I’m sorry, I forgot to bring the auditor’s 
interim report, fall interim report, and I hope to have that 
shortly — but in the auditor’s interim report, the auditor points 
out the fact that the actual overall debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan is over $18.7 billion. And I guess what I find 
interesting, Mr. Minister . . . And you’re correct, based on the 
information you’re giving us today, you’re showing an $11.2 
billion deficit with a net deficit of about $9 million. 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

However, Mr. Minister, there are a couple of funds that you 
continue to refuse to expose to the people of Saskatchewan and 
reflect upon the people . . . or let the people of Saskatchewan 
know what are part of our overall debt that is going to have to 
be dealt with in the upcoming years. 
 
And the auditor is basically, has been saying time and again, 
that we need to be upfront with the public of Saskatchewan and 
indicate what the total debt of the province is. Not what the debt 
is of a portion of the expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, when we talk about debt, it’s not just right 
to talk about debt in regards to the general revenue pool, but 
you have to acknowledge the fact, Mr. Minister, that since 1991 
the unfunded pension liability in the province of Saskatchewan 
has grown from 2.7 to $3.7 billion. 
 
There’s other debt that has grown to $3.8 billion. So when you 
add 3.7 and 3.8 to the 11.2, you end up with a debt of over 
$18.7 billion. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in looking at the Public Accounts of 
volume 1, Mr. Chair — and I can refer the member to page 26, 
the General Revenue Fund, schedule to financial statements, 
schedule 6, debt — and it is itemized there that the Crown 
corporation debts are $3.428 billion, the general government 
purpose debt is $7.654 billion, for a total of $11.08 billion. 
 
And in addition to that, we have some guaranteed debt that 
brings our debt as of March 31 of this year to approximately 
$11.2 billion. 
 
There are, in addition to those debts that are itemized in the 
schedule of debt, also unfunded pension liabilities that the 
member will be aware of. If we added those to the debt as it 
used to be in 1993, then the debt wouldn’t be $15 billion; it 
would be some other figure, perhaps up to 18, $19 billion at that 
time. And now our debt is 11.8 billion, plus guarantees, debt is 
about 11.2 billion, plus unfunded pension liabilities which 
continue to exist. 
 
But I think the point here is, however you look at it, the debt of 
the province is going down each and every year and has gone 
down as a percentage of our GDP (gross domestic product) 
from about 70 per cent to 38 per cent. So, however you cut and 
slice it, the debt of the province is being reduced. 
 
And on this side of the House we’re saying we need to continue 
to try to reduce the debt instead of passing that on to the next 
generation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Well 
we’ll acknowledge that the debt is being decreased and being 
addressed in a number of ways. The unfortunate part is the debt 
is not just $11.2 billion as you would like the public of 
Saskatchewan to believe. 
 
If you were to take the Report of the Provincial Auditor, 1999 
Fall Report Volume 1, you will find on page 15 that the overall 
debt, while it has been reduced slightly, is still $18.7 billion. 
Now the facts are, Mr. Minister, some government in the future 
is going to have to deal with some of these funds that are sitting 

there. 
 
Since 1991, Mr. Minister, the pension liability that has been 
pointed out by the auditor has grown by $1 billion. And I think 
the former Finance minister said, well we really don’t have to 
worry about that right now because we don’t have to pay it out. 
 
Well somebody is going to, somebody is going to have to in the 
future look after that. So that’s going to be have to paid out. 
Whether you talk about your children . . . and that I guess, Mr. 
Minister, is what I’m saying. 
 
If you talk about creating a problem for our children down the 
road, someone is going to have to pay that. Whether it’s the 
interest today or whether it’s making up the unfunded pension 
liability which has continued to grow and other bonds and 
debentures . . . or not the bonds or debentures, but other forms 
of liabilities which have grown from 2.7 to 3.8. 
 
And what I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is why you are 
not being a little more forthright with the province of 
Saskatchewan. Acknowledging that yes, there are certain areas 
yet that we’re accountable for, that the public in general will 
have to be accountable for in the future, that we still not have 
addressed. 
 
While your bonds and debentures and the general revenue pool 
has gone down, your underfunded pension liability has 
increased. The other debt area that the auditor refers to has 
increased as well by over a billion dollars. That, Mr. Minister, 
as I read this document, is going to have to be addressed as 
well. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to address those areas of 
expenditure that have increased, that in the overall broad picture 
are still continuing to place a burden on the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well what we’re doing, Mr. Chair, is not 
adding to the debt. And we’re doing that by operating on a 
balanced budget. Every time you spend more money than you 
take in, you go into deficit. The deficit is added to the 
accumulated debt. 
 
What we have done since 1994-95 when we balanced the 
budget, is to not operate at a deficit. Therefore we have not 
added to the debt. And moreover, and I think more importantly, 
what we’re doing is reducing the size of the debt both in 
absolute terms and as a percentage of the economy. And I’ll say 
to the member that the debt has gone from about 6, well 70 per 
cent, as I said before, down to about 37.5 per cent of the GDP 
(gross domestic product) and we project that that will go to 31 
per cent of the GDP by year 2004. 
 
And when the member says that that is something we should be 
concerned about, I agree entirely with the member. And of 
course as I think is well-known in this province, we have been 
dealing with the debt and that’s why our province has received 
five credit-rating upgrades in the last four years. 
 
Don’t take my word for it, Mr. Chair, or the opposition. I would 
say look at what the bond-rating agencies say about our debt, 
and what they say is we’re back to the straight A’s in terms of 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

our credit ratings. When we took office we had close to the 
worst credit ratings in the country. They moved up to the 
straight A’s. We would like to see them move further, and part 
of the reason for that — I think a very major part — is because 
of our commitment not to go into deficit, not to add to the debt, 
but to try to pay that off as we can. 
 
And the member says what are we going to do? What we’re 
going to do is to continue what we have been doing and that is 
not to add to the debt, not to operate at a deficit, to reduce the 
debt as we can. That’s what we have been doing; that’s what 
we’ll continue to do. 
 
The member is correct when he says that we have operating 
debt. We have Crown corporation debt. We have unfunded 
pension liabilities. The member is correct when he says these 
are serious issues. They are, and I say to the member we’ve 
been trying to deal with those issues. 
 
I don’t think the member wants to get into a debate about what 
happened in the ’80s versus the record of our government and 
so on. I think he’s well aware of the historical facts of how the 
debt came to be what it is, and we both have our own opinions 
about that. But I’ll say to the member that I hope that he would 
agree with the position of this government, which is to try to 
operate at a balance and reduce the debt as we’ve been doing. 
And we’re going to continue to operate in that same way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I know your 
arguments sound impressive but at the end of the day the next 
. . . at the end of the day when you’re no longer sitting in that 
seat and your government or your party is no longer leading the 
province of Saskatchewan, somebody’s going to be stuck with 
the fact that you’ve allowed portions of government 
responsibility to grow — areas that most of the public are not 
aware of — and those are going to have to be addressed. 
 
If you think that there wasn’t any debt in 1982, you’re sadly 
mistaken. And if there’s an area of major complaint certainly 
one of the problems that had to be dealt with in 1982 was an 
unfunded pension liability and a teachers’ pension plan that was 
going down the tubes as a result of some of the investments 
through the ’70s and decisions by the former Blakeney 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, when you take a look at 
these figures here again . . . and if there’s anything that I hear 
especially from teachers and some of the public sector, they’re 
concerned about the fact that the unfunded pension liability has 
continued to grow and someone is going to have to be 
accountable for that, and the other debt that has continued to 
grow. 
 
And it’s interesting — I guess it’s easier to argue 11.2 and 
forget about these two funds out here because the public . . . 
You want to leave that impression that you’ve really got the 
debt down to about 9 — I believe — $9 billion net right now 
when the reality is, when you add all of it into one large sum, it 
really isn’t down at that low level. 
 
(1645) 
 
There is liability sitting out over here that somebody is going to 

have to deal with in the future. And then when a former 
government has to deal with it — and God forbid that we have 
another NDP government re-elected in the future — they’ll say, 
yes, you ran a deficit. 
 
Well that government had to deal with trying to address the 
concerns that the NDP government of the 1990s allowed to 
grow while they, on one hand, said this area of expenditures is 
decreasing. We’ve reduced the debt. Oh yes, you reduced the 
debt in the general revenue pool, but everything else has grown. 
Somebody’s going to have to live with that. 
 
When are you going to begin to address those areas, Mr. 
Minister? Or are you just going to continue to reduce the 
general revenue pool while the other areas continue to grow, 
basically coming to a saw-off? Isn’t that what you’re doing, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member is skating on 
thin ice, and I’ll tell you why. 
 
First of all, I want to tell the member that when you include all 
of the debt including pension liability, the debt peaked at one 
time at about $20.8 billion. I’m reading from the report of the 
Provincial Auditor. And today, or at least 1999, I’m happy to 
say, it is down to $18.7 billion on that analysis. So it’s been 
reduced by over $2 billion. 
 
But the reason I say the member is skating on thin ice — and he 
should be careful about what he’s raising here — is that he says, 
well you know if you leave office, then somebody else is going 
to have to take over and what if there’s a big debt. And I mean 
that, Mr. Chair, with the greatest of respect to the member from 
Moosomin, is just frankly the height of hypocrisy for the 
member from Moosomin to raise. 
 
And I’ll you why. Because the member from Moosomin was a 
member of the Devine government of the 1980s. And when the 
member from Moosomin and his colleagues in the Devine 
government left office, and this government — and now a 
coalition government — came to this side of the House, what 
we found, Mr. Chair, was the highest per capita debt in the 
nation, the highest per capita deficit in the nation, and our credit 
rating was in the tank. We had just about the worst credit rating 
in the country. 
 
So the member wants to talk about what will happen if this 
government or some other government leaves office and what 
will people be left with. Well I’ll tell you something, Mr. Chair, 
and I’ll tell the member from Moosomin and his colleagues: if 
anyone took over from this government they would be left with 
a fiscal house that was in good shape with credit ratings that are 
back to the straight A’s. That’s what they’d be left with. 
 
And the member from Moosomin can get on his high horse if 
he wants to, and he can presume to lecture the people on this 
side of the House as to financial management, but he is not in a 
position to do so. He knows it and his colleagues know it and 
the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
Because I’ll tell the member from Moosomin something, and 
that is when this government, the New Democratic Party of that 
time, now a coalition government, but when the New 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2000 

Democratic Party came back to office in 1991, what we found 
was that the number of people that would buy the bonds of the 
Government of Saskatchewan had gone from approximately 
120-some investment houses that would invest in Saskatchewan 
down to about 23. 
 
Our bonds were trading . . . having the status practically of junk 
bonds. The pension plan in the city of Saskatoon could not buy 
bonds of the Government of Saskatchewan because the 
Government of Saskatchewan was not considered a good credit 
risk. 
 
Now the member from Moosomin comes in this House and 
talks about who’s doing a good job of fiscal management. Well 
I’ll tell you something, it certainly wasn’t the member from 
Moosomin and his colleague, Grant Devine, and his other 
colleagues on that side of the House. And I’m sorry to have to 
point that out, but when the member from Moosomin talks 
about how a government is going to leave the finances of the 
province, I think it has to be pointed out, Mr. Chair. 
 
And I’ll just say to the member for Moosomin, unlike his 
government that he was a part of, that ran up the debt of the 
province, we’ve been reducing the debt of the province — as 
the member knows and as the public knows, Mr. Speaker — 
and that’s what we’re going to continue to do with or without 
the co-operation of the member for Moosomin and the rest of 
his colleagues on the other side of the House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, if the minister wants the 
public of Saskatchewan to really believe that he’s offered them 
some big bouquet, he just has to look at the headlines and he 
has to talk to people. And the unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, is that at the end of the day someone is going to have to 
address the fact that areas of government expenditure have 
actually grown, because the government hasn’t — hasn’t — 
addressed that. 
 
And it’s very interesting to note that the minister, certainly 
while he condemns the former government — and he loves to 
condemn the former government — but he certainly was . . . 
didn’t condemn the former government when he, when he had 
the privilege of selling off assets of $1.3 billion to assist him in 
reducing his debt. He certainly didn’t, he certainly didn’t say 
that, oh, that was such a bad decision back, back in the ’80s 
when there were these investments made, and then the shares 
were available, and you got $1.3 billion in sales that you could 
put against your debt. That’s something that the government 
just neglects. 
 
And I can’t really condemn the current minister because the 
minister wasn’t here, sitting on the opposition side of the 
House, having to deal with some of the difficulties of the ’80s 
as well. But he certainly had a lot of colleagues here who 
wanted more expenditures in areas such as health and education 
when the farm economy was really struggling. 
 
And certainly we’ll acknowledge, Mr. Deputy Chair, when we 
look at the, when we look at the budget that we’re currently 
dealing with today . . . and then the minister likes to . . . wants 
to brag about the fact that he’s been able to reduce it. He hasn’t 
acknowledged the fact that he should be a little thankful for the 
some of the economy we’ve had. 

And I guess right now we certainly don’t feel . . . I don’t know 
if we should sorry for the minister because certainly the 
economy has been struggling a little bit in the last little while. 
 
And I would suggest that the main engine, economic engine of 
this province certainly isn’t out of the doldrums yet when we 
look at agriculture and we look at what’s taken place in the area 
of agriculture. And I’m sure that must be a concern to the 
minister and his department because agriculture plays a 
significant role in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think as we look through the past few years of fiscal 
management in the province, what has the government done in 
really addressing fiscal management? Now the budget 
document this year is showing that we’re going to be taking in 
about $6.3 billion, I believe, in revenues. 
 
And I remember back in the late ’80s the member currently 
occupying the seat of Premier indicating that he could operate 
this province on $4.5 billion. He could manage it. He could live 
with $4.5 billion and reduce the debt. But we see over the past 
number of years the tax grab in this province is well over a 
billion dollars more since it was in 1991. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, so with some of those avenues that the 
minister has had to work with, he’s had a lot of avenues that he 
can certainly draw on. But at the same time, he’s off-loaded a 
lot of his responsibility onto the backs of the taxpayer. And he’s 
again doing that — even in the budget that they presented. 
 
And while they presented, on one hand, a budget that shows a 
minimal surplus . . . And we’ve had some debate over the fact 
that there’s going to be a new fiscal fund of $405 million and 
whether that’s currently sitting in that fund or whether it’s there 
at the end of the day is a debate that doesn’t really . . . really in 
some ways is irrelevant. 
 
Although the auditor points out the fact that as soon as you 
build new funds, you want to make sure that you are following 
those funds very closely and understand them so that you can 
understand the finances and the fiscal areas of government and 
understand where the province is going. 
 
Now the minister would like to say that the . . . and the 
government has been telling us over the last few days that fee 
increases really aren’t a tax. I have to agree with the Minister of 
the Environment when he basically said that most of the fee 
increases go into the general revenue pool, which if they’re 
doing that — going to the general revenue pool — Mr. Deputy 
Chair, that to me is a tax. It’s a tax. It’s money flowing into the 
general revenue pool. 
 
I think most of the public believed fees were intended to cover 
the cost. And I’m not exactly sure . . . From what we’re seeing 
it’s more than a cost grab, cost return, it’s a tax on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So when the minister talks about the fact that he’s going to give 
the people of Saskatchewan, I believe it’s this year about $120 
more in their pocket, and yet he’s already grabbed some 40 
million, 41, $43 million more as a result of tax incentives . . . 
but he’s already grabbed $40 million as a result of fee increases 
in the areas of Tel and Energy and then the expanded tax load 



April 6, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

that people are going to have to bear as a result of the expansion 
of the PST. 
 
And I believe the minister would have to acknowledge that in 
the Vicq report . . . while the Vicq report did suggest in order to 
reduce personal income tax, you expand the provincial sales tax 
and expand it to a lot more items, it also did recommend that 
you reduce the provincial sales tax. 
 
Now I find it interesting that the minister likes to point out the 
fact that they followed the Vicq report to the letter. Now if he’s 
criticizing us for not . . . for blaming or criticizing him for 
expanding the tax, the facts are, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that the 
Saskatchewan Party did not call for an expanded provincial 
sales tax. In fact it offered a reduction in the provincial sales tax 
as well as a reduction in the personal income tax, Mr. Chair. 
 
And I think at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Chair, what the 
public of Saskatchewan were looking for in this budget was a 
real tax . . . some real tax relief. That’s what they were looking 
for. They were looking for some tax relief, and at the same time 
they were looking for the fact that there would be adequate 
funding to fund the health care, rather than the longer waiting 
lists. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, we just take a look at 1991 and we take a 
look at what has been accomplished through the ’90s and what 
do we have, Mr. Deputy Chair, and what is the minister offering 
us? The minister is trying to tell us that we should be so pleased 
with this budget. Well you tell someone who’s on a waiting list 
that they should be pleased with the budget. 
 
You tell the senior who now finds that half of the drugs that 
they must consume in order to have at least some quality of life 
. . . that they should be pleased with the fact that this budget has 
expanded their costs. And for that senior living on a limited 
income, an expanded sales tax covering non-prescription drugs 
is something that is a cost, is a direct cost to that individual, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. It’s a direct cost to that person that has to deal 
with . . . And no doubt, every member in this Assembly deals 
with that on a daily basis. 
 
We have to deal with that fact that people are coming to our 
offices and basically saying, you know I didn’t see a tax cut 
today. I didn’t find that there’s going to be . . . In my pocket 
there isn’t a tax saving. Actually you know, when I went and 
picked up my prescription and some of the non-prescription 
drugs, I had to dig a little deeper. 
 
And the Minister of Energy and Mines is talking about a tax 
credit. Well whoop de-do. To the minister, by the time that tax 
credit arrives — I believe I heard the minister saying next 
October 31, my feeling . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . October 1, 
October 1 — my guess is that the person receiving that tax 
credit, it won’t quite fill the hole that’s already left by the tax 
grab that has actually taken place, taken place in people’s lives. 
And while the minister says more than fill it, I doubt it. 
 
Yes I think we, Mr. Deputy Chair, we look for . . . we were 
going to wait for that day and we’re going to really find out 
whether or not people will experience any kind of tax relief. 
And that is one of the issues and one of the concerns, and when 
we’re looking at interim supply today, we’re certainly 

concerned about the fact of the expenditures in dealing with 
services and the fact that the budget that was presented, in a lot 
of ways, does not really . . . is not really presenting the public of 
Saskatchewan with that real tax relief. 
 
Ask the students. Ask the students of this province whether or 
not they felt there was some tax relief. The $350 . . . I guess the 
$350 if you find a job in the province of Saskatchewan . . . I 
talked to some students right after the budget debate and they 
said, well the only thing they thought the $350 would be good 
for is because they didn’t expect to find a job. If they couldn’t 
find a job, is the $350 they put it in their pocket, it might buy 
them the bus fare to go to Alberta so that they could find a real 
job, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair, when we talk about tax relief, we talk, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, about meeting the needs of the people of this 
province. We talk about even this interim supply Bill. What are 
people looking for? People are looking for something that will 
give them a reason to look at the province of Saskatchewan, 
what I believe is one of the greatest provinces to live in — one 
of the greatest places to be a part of. 
 
And I still believe in this province and unfortunately, Mr. 
Minister, I’m . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. It being the time of adjournment, 
the committee will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 545 
  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
  Wall ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 
  Harpauer ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 
  Wiberg ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................. 545 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Elhard .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 546 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 546 
  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Eagles ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Wall ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Bakken ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 546 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 
  Weekes ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 546 
  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 547 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 547 
  Wiberg ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 547 
  Hart ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
  Stewart ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 547 
  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 547 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 547 
  Bakken ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 547 
  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 
  Wall ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 
  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 
  Axworthy ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 548 
  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Two New Schools in Saskatoon 
  Jones .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 
 Tartan Day 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 549 
  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 549 
 Parking Problems 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 549 
 SaskTel Youth Initiatives 
  Yates .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 549 
 Carmel Youth Wins Wrestling Competition 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 550 
 Tax Concerns 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 550 
 Saskatoon Women of Distinction 
  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Fees and Service Charges 
  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 
 



 

 Administration Costs in Government 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 552 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 552 
 First Nations Fund 
  Eagles ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 
  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 
 SGI Premiums 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 18  The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 560 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 571 
 
 


