





























































Hansard: April 13, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 695 
 April 13, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of citizens of the Cypress Hills constituency petitioning the 
government to reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a litre. And the 
prayer reads as follows. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the Consul, 
Eastend, and Maple Creek areas. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of the good people of the 
Humboldt constituency and the area surrounding it who are 
concerned about the high prices of gasoline and asking to have 
the taxes lowered. And the petition . . . the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, Lanigan, and Regina and Middle Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as 
well today to stop the municipal reserve account confiscation: 
 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from St. Brieux 
and Yellow Creek. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about enforced municipal 
amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux, Lake Lenore, and Pathlow, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as Melfort. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and this one deals with the 10 cent a litre tax cut. 
Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by 
individuals from the communities of Melfort and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
in regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents per litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And it’s signed by people from Shamrock, Earl Grey, and 
Stoughton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
stand to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the forced municipal amalgamation. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from Annaheim, St. Gregor, and 
Muenster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people in Swift Current and area 
concerned about their hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petition calls 
on the provincial government to assist in the regeneration plan 
for the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
 
And it’s signed by people from the city of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan who are very 
concerned about the issue of amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
I present this on behalf of people from Cupar and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions that I 
picked up at an RM (rural municipality) meeting last night, 
approximately 550. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Abbey, Lancer, Forget, 
Stoughton, Heward, Carlyle, Arcola, Balgonie, White City, 
Edenwold, Pilot Butte. In fact there’s a large number, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Regina Wascana Plains area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on . . . with citizens concerned of the fuel tax . . . 10 
cent a litre fuel tax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures on this petition are from the Indian Head, Moose 
Jaw, and Southey and Cupar area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
reduce the fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the Southey, Earl Grey area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to read regarding the fuel tax. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
The petition is signed by good citizens of Southey, Melfort, and 
Strasbourg. I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
in regards to the reduction of fuel tax. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Cupar and Southey. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I too, Mr. Speaker, have a petition to present on 
behalf of the citizens calling for a reduction of fuel tax by 10 
cents a litre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by citizens of Raymore, Strasbourg, 
Southey, and Shamrock. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also bring a 
petition regarding the reduction of fuel taxes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 
 

And I have petitioners signed from Cupar and Earl Grey. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding enforced municipal amalgamation. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the petition is signed from individuals from Belle Plaine. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition opposed to forced municipal amalgamation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good citizens of Cupar and 
Southey. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To not expand the provincial sales tax; 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current hospital; 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased today to introduce to you and through you to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan some students from the 
schools of Bruno and Cudworth, 38 in total. 
 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that it is indeed a pleasure to have 
these students here today because I hold especially the students 
from Bruno and the staff very near and dear to my heart as I 
worked with special needs children in that school for 10 years, 
and so I’m always happy to have them come to the legislature 
so we can have a chance to discuss the issues of the day. 
 
Accompanying the students, Mr. Speaker, are teacher, Mr. Jake 
Jmaeff and Mr. Brad Hauber, and chaperons, Dianne Lepage, 
Michelle Hoppe, and Rhea Lavoie. 
 
And the students have issued some questions in advance for me, 
questions that they, as the wonderful students they are 
throughout Saskatchewan, and especially from that area, 
concerns about agriculture and taxation and as well as forced 
amalgamation. So I look forward to meeting with you after 
question period and discussing these issues. 
 
Welcome. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 
is my pleasure to introduce some students as well from my 
constituency in Saskatoon Northwest. We have grade 7 students 
in your west gallery from St. George School in Saskatoon. They 
are accompanied by, I think, four teachers: Ms. Troesch, Ms. 
Foster, Ms. Koller, and Ms. Smith. 
 
And St. George School has a total enrolment of 245 students 
with 11 teachers. The principal is Ms. Laura Foley. And St. 
George is a community-based neighbourhood school with 
strong parental and community support. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with the students, as I have in 
the past during the September election, later this afternoon 
where we can share some refreshments and address some of the 
concerns that may have. 
 
And please join with me in welcoming them into the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I also want to join my colleague, the Minister of 
Education, in welcoming this class from Saskatoon. 
 
I want to especially welcome a dear cousin of mine, a family 
member — Dallas. Dallas is here with this class. Dallas, whose 
mother was my first cousin, is now Dallas Gold. But I want to 
extend a very, very special welcome to Dallas. And I really do 
hope that your day at the Assembly here is both pleasant and 
informative. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this 
opportunity again, to you and through you, to introduce in your 
gallery, my brother John and his wife Nora. 
 
John and Nora are here visiting from Manitoba. And it’s a very 
special visit, Mr. Speaker, because my brother John is going to 
be going to Kosovo on Sunday as part of his tour as a member 
of the army. And I want to point out that we’re very pleased to 
have the opportunity to meet with him and spend some time 
with him this morning.  
 
And to also ensure that on your trip and on your tour of duty, 
brother, God be with you, and good luck. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join my colleague in welcoming the students from Cudworth 
and Bruno and the staff as well. I spent about a decade in that 
school division and know the high quality of education that’s 
being presented there to the students. So welcome here and 
have a good time meeting with your MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) at the Dairy Queen. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
give the Assembly a progress report on a very special project 
that is underway in the community of Biggar. The Sandra 
Schmirler Olympic Gold Park. Biggar is the hometown of 
Sandra Schmirler. Last year the community decided to construct 
a park in her honour as a tribute to their hero’s outstanding 
international achievement and Olympic gold medal. Her 
community and province have rightfully redoubled efforts to 
show proper tribute to Sandra after her recent passing. 
 
The community has been fundraising for months and I’m happy 
to report that they have now raised the necessary funds for 
completion of the park. Now is the time to thank some people 
for lending a hand to this valuable project. 
 
I want to pay tribute to all those in the community who are 
working so hard, especially to Judy Redlick and Jerry Besse. I 
also want to thank the many, many individuals who contributed 
money to the project. 
 
Companies which made substantial contributions include 
Prairie Malt, the credit union, UGG (United Grain Growers 
Limited), CN (Canadian National), the UTU (United 
Transportation Union), Westwinds Esso, the Royal Bank, CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), Saskatchewan Parks 
and Recreation, and the Association for Community Living. 
 
The federal government also contributed substantial funds to 
the project, as has the province of Saskatchewan through 
SaskPower, which we just learned today, the final major piece 
in the puzzle is in place. This park, to be officially opened on 
August 6, will be a fitting legacy for a fine person and a clear 
sign of the esteem in which Sandra was held not just by the 
people of Biggar but all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News In Economic Statistics 
 

Mr. Harper: — In Tory land of gloom and doom, Mr. Speaker, 
there comes two more good news announcements from the 
Saskatchewan economy, which should wipe away the crocodile 
tears of the opposition. But I say should because it probably 
won’t, because good news is not in their vocabulary. 
 
First, new car sales. And the opposition says, who could afford 
to buy new cars in Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
according to StatsCanada, 21 per cent more people bought new 
cars in February of this year than February of last year. In fact, 
Saskatchewan led the country in increased new car sales at 21 
per cent, while Alberta was at 10 per cent, where — I’m told — 
there is no sales tax. 
 
Yesterday the member from Regina South told us about the 
natural gas drilling. There is good news in the oil patch as well. 
April sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas netted the 
province of Saskatchewan $5.68 million more in February than 
the February sale. 
 

Most of these sales were in Kindersley, Lloydminster, Estevan, 
Weyburn, the Swift Current areas, and I’m happy to share the 
good news with those members. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in the first quarter of this year 603 new 
wells were drilled — good for jobs, good for the local economy, 
and good for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Report of Children’s Advocate 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Children’s Advocate released a scathing report condemning the 
government’s handling of children in its care. The Minister of 
Social Services responded to this report by criticizing the 
Saskatchewan Party for not raising this issue in question period. 
Of course the reason we didn’t raise it in question period is that 
the report was embargoed until it was tabled in the House after 
question period. 
 
But of course the minister may have forgotten that little rule. 
But even after it was brought to the minister’s attention, both 
the minister and his staff continued to condemn the 
Saskatchewan Party for not raising the issue in question period. 
Obviously the minister is not wanting to let the facts stand in 
the way of his partisanship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, statements made by the minister show a deep 
disrespect for the traditions of this House by a veteran member 
who should know better. I ask that he apologize for saying the 
Saskatchewan Party should have ignored the rules, as the 
Liberal leader did, and broken the media embargo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
many fine and eloquent parliamentary phrases that we in our 
profession never tire of using. They are as natural to the tongue, 
as Hamlet would have said, as caviar to the general. 
 
Undoubtedly one of the most common lines heard daily in these 
corridors and in our offices is this, Mr. Speaker. I can’t find the 
answer to this; somebody call Tim Prince quick. Or variations 
on a theme — call Michele Howland, call Leslie Polsom, call 
Jane Blackett, call Laura Pogue. 
 
These people, as you know, Mr. Speaker, are the information 
geniuses at our Legislative Library, the most visible members 
of the very capable library staff led by Chief Librarian, Marian 
Powell. 
 
We mention them but once a year — which is not nearly often 
enough — on this day because this is International Special 
Librarians Day; a day on which we recognize the contributions 
and the necessity of those who run special libraries — the law, 
medical, scientific, and legislative libraries. 
 
Their theme this year is “Navigating the World’s Knowledge.” 
And they do just that for us. In this world of cyber-saturated 
details, the vast amount of information available to us would 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

not be of much use if we did not have these skilled navigators to 
guide us to our knowledge destinations. 
 
Thanks to Marian and her crew, we get where we’re going and 
in record time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Naicam Army Cadet Corps 
Girls’ Biathlon Team 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cadet program 
offers the youth of Canada many opportunities and also teaches 
leadership, commitment, a positive outlook, and perseverance. 
 
This year I am once again proud to stand in the Assembly and 
congratulate 2815 Naicam Army Cadet Corps girls’ biathlon 
team of Louise Weber, Janel Wilson, Jennifer Griffith; and 
coaches Marie Leonard, and Scott Ponath. 
 
This team, after gaining the provincial title in competitions in 
the army, navy and air cadet corps, represented Saskatchewan at 
the national biathlon competition at Valcartier, Quebec, in 
March. 
 
I am delighted that our Saskatchewan representatives captured 
the silver Overall Aggregate Award, silver in the Sprint Award, 
and gold in the patrol race. Not only did they do well in skiing, 
they also captured the Sports Etiquette Team Award; and their 
coach, Captain Scott Ponath, was awarded the Best Coach 
Award. 
 
Louise also achieved her dream of six years and captured the 
Myriam Bedard Award, which is the highest award to the 
fastest male and female in the cadet biathlon championship. 
 
Louise who also competes with Saskatchewan biathlon stated: 
 

I honestly don’t know what kind of person I’d be if I 
wasn’t involved with sports. Sports have taught me respect, 
not just for others, but also for myself. It has given me a 
positive outlook on life and I’ve reached new heights I 
never thought I could. I have learnt to believe in myself 
and trust I am capable of accomplishing anything. 
 

Congratulations to 2815 Naicam Army Cadet Corps. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we heard 
earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, April 9 to 15 is National 
Volunteer Week. And last night in Regina, there was volunteers 
who made outstanding contributions to the city of Regina 
honoured at the United Way Vital Link Dinner. This event has 
been honouring Queen City volunteers since 1988. 
 
Now time does not permit me to talk about all of their 
accomplishments, but I want to mention the names of the 
recipients and the areas in which they were recognized. These 
names will be familiar, I’m sure, to many people. 
 

Louise Yaremchuk was honoured as a distinguished volunteer; 
Elizabeth Totten for her work with youth; Jacqueline 
Shumiatcher for her contribution to the arts; Sheila Hohne for 
her work in community development; Dr. Eleanor Bujea in the 
category of cultural diversity; Linda McKay for contribution to 
recreation; Judy Lyons, recognized in the special events 
category; Dr. Robert E. Capp for his work in human services; 
and Danita McCormick for her contribution to sports. 
 
All of these volunteers have enriched our city and their 
dedication to hard work has made Regina a much better place to 
live. But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention that their 
recognition is an important symbol of our collective values and 
speaks to the personal attributes that we all strive to achieve. 
 
So once again I congratulate all the recipients and ask you to 
join me in thanking them for their contributions to the 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Samuel McLeod Legacy Award 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 
stand before you and my colleagues in this Assembly to tell you 
about an accomplishment by a resident in my constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year in Prince Albert they host the Samuel 
McLeod awards for excellency in business. And this year, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Ab Pellegrini is receiving the legacy award. Mr. 
Speaker, Ab Pellegrini has been in business in Prince Albert 
since 1963. I must say that’s quite an accomplishment in our 
province which has been under a shadow of high NDP (New 
Democratic Party) taxes for the better part of 40 years; a NDP 
government which forces businesses out of Saskatchewan to set 
up elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ab Pellegrini has also been an active member of 
the community over the years. He’s a member and director of 
the Prince Albert Kinsmen Club, past president of the K-40 
Club, past president and life member of the Prince Albert 
Chamber of Commerce, and a charter member and past 
president of the Downtown Business Association. Mr. 
Pellegrini is also an active promoter and supporter in the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legacy award is a special award which honours 
outstanding Prince Albert business people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join with me in 
congratulating Ab Pellegrini on receiving the Samuel McLeod 
Legacy Award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Children’s Advocate’s Report 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
afternoon we received a report titled Children and Youth in 
Care Review: Listen to Their Voices. To the Minister of Social 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

Services: Mr. Minister, this report is shocking. It raises many, 
many questions, the first of which is a concern in this report that 
early recommendations after the death of Karen Quill have not 
been met, and two and a half years later there has been almost 
no improvement in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what immediate and specific 
actions will you be taking to implement these recommendations 
presented by the child advocate in her report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
hon. member for the question. I want to point out to the hon. 
member and to the Assembly and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we too and the government had questions 
about the foster care system in Saskatchewan. And it’s for that 
reason, Mr. Speaker, that we ask the . . . ask the Children’s 
Advocate, who is an independent member or officer of the 
Legislative Assembly, to undertake an independent review of 
the system. 
 
We appreciate receiving her review. We have made some 
progress, Mr. Speaker, in the last number of years, and she 
points that out in her report. And we look forward to taking her 
recommendations and to making further improvements for the 
system of children in care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
biggest problems highlighted in the child advocate’s report was 
time and work overload. The report says of the files the review 
committee examined, Mr. Minister, it says 73 per cent of the 
cases either didn’t meet the contact standards or there wasn’t 
enough information to determine if the standards were met. 
 
According to this report there was tremendous overload on 
existing workers and they say it is impossible to meet the policy 
standards for client contact. Mr. Minister, as you have been the 
minister responsible for some time now, were you aware these 
standards were not being met? And if you were, Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister: what actions were you taking before this report 
was released to deal with this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I would 
thank the member for the question. I want to point out to the 
member that the Children’s Advocate in her report, in 
commenting on the progress that the department has made 
following her report on the death of Karen Quill which was also 
a commentary on the system of children in care in 
Saskatchewan, she states that the progress that the Department 
of Social Services reported is significant. She also points out 
that the Department of Social Services must be commended for 
the specific work they have done thus far to improve services to 
children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we added significantly to resources in this area in 
child protection services in Saskatchewan. We have made a 
further investment significantly with respect to the Saskatoon 
children’s shelter. The resources in the area of child welfare 
have doubled, Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years. We have put 
many resources into the system and we will look to . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
the minister is aware of the many levels of policy violations in 
his department. Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask the 
minister is he does not talk to his employees. I will read a quote 
from the report. A social workers says, and I quote, page 35: 
 

There’s worry that there could be another death (at) any 
time. There isn’t time to be vigilant about that. There’s a 
mandate that can’t be met because of the lack of resources 
and the overload. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister says, they have put more money 
towards it. Mr. Speaker, the workers are saying there aren’t the 
resources to meet the needs. 
 
Mr. Minister, the case workers in this system are crying out for 
help. Kids in foster care are not being seen by their workers in 
some cases for over a year. Mr. Speaker, to the minister, how 
do you explain that you did not know about the level of the 
problems within the system and in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to thank the member for the question and would point out to 
him and to the people of Saskatchewan that in the wake of the 
Quill report the government moved to add significant resources. 
There is an increase in about one-third of the staffing in the area 
of . . . There is a significant increase in resources, Mr. Speaker, 
of about a third in the area of child protection. We also moved 
to improve our policies, our procedures significantly, our 
training for staff, also improve supervision staff, Mr. Speaker. 
We are confident that those changes will over time see 
improvement in practices as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite 
evident that the minister really has not been following up on the 
concerns in his department, and that’s what this report is telling 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could quote another comment from the report 
coming from a social worker: “Until this province decides that 
children are important, there will be no real change.” This 
worker is saying no real change. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that true — there has been no change? No 
improvement in your department because this NDP government 
believes children aren’t important? Is that true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and I want to point out to him and the 
people of Saskatchewan that the care of children, the safety of 
children, the needs of children, are foremost in our thoughts and 
it’s one of the reasons that the government itself asked for this 
report. Because we wanted an independent third party review to 
help us to identify ways that we can make further improvements 
in the wake of the improvements that we already made 
following the Quill report, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

And I would point out again to the member that the Children’s 
Advocate herself points out in her report that the Department of 
Social Services, Mr. Speaker, must be commended for the 
specific work they have done thus far to improve services for 
children. 
 
Is it enough, Mr. Speaker? No, it’s not. Do we want to do more? 
Yes, we do, and we shall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here are 
some more comments from this same report, and from a foster 
parent and I quote: 
 

The low priority attributed to children and families 
translates into insufficient funding. 
 

From a social worker, and I quote: 
 

The 50 new positions didn’t make any real difference. 
These workers were already there as non-perms. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, another foster parent says and I quote: 
 

Since the Quill report there has been a real emphasis on 
standards and making the paperwork prioritized but there is 
no improvement working with the kids. 
 

Mr. Minister, how do you explain that there has been no 
improvement for the children and the social workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and point out to the member that in the 
advocate’s report that the advocate indicates that there have 
been significant improvements, Mr. Speaker. We asked for this 
report to assist us in further planning for the needs of children 
in Saskatchewan and we look forward to making improvements 
in that system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, you have a foster parent in this 
report saying, and I quote: 
 

The kids in my home haven’t seen their worker in 10 
months. 
 

From a foster child, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Because I never saw my worker, I didn’t ever get the 
chance to ask her, when my foster parents weren’t around, 
if they really had the OK . . . to be hitting me. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, here’s another comment from a foster child, 
and I quote: 
 

Does anyone who works there really know what the rules 
are? Every time I get a different worker, I have to tell her 
what I should be getting. None of the other kids I’ve ever 
talked to were told the same rules I was. Don’t we deserve 

the same things? 
 

Mr. Minister, how do you explain that your own department 
policies are not being followed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is for the reasons 
that the member identifies — the concerns with standards — 
that we asked for an independent assessment by an independent 
officer of the Legislative Assembly, so that someone from 
outside of government could review the system we have, and if 
you like, offer improvements or a suggestion for improvements 
to the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to improve the system — that’s why we 
asked for the report. We are committed to making those 
improvements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the minister that if 
he is not part of the solution, he is part of the problem. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I could go on and on with this report and I’m going to. 
 
This from a foster parent, and I quote: 
 

Worker turnover is so confusing for kids and prevents 
relationship building between kids and workers. 

 
From a social worker, and I quote: 
 

There is a risk to workers when they don’t bring kids into 
care — but it is more damaging to the child to be brought into 
care. 

 
And from a child in care, I quote: 
 

There are some very good workers who do their jobs well, 
and will fight for you. But they (just) don’t last. 

 
Mr. Minister, will you admit the high turnover of social workers in 
your department is due to your shoddy management of the whole 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken the 
point of view as a government that those public servants that work 
for the government need to be supported, respected, and need to, 
need to have the resources to be able to do their work, which is 
why, Mr. Speaker, we moved in the last number of years to 
increase the staff in the child protection area by a third. 
 
We also improved the policies, procedures, the training for staff as 
well as supervision, and the Children’s Advocate recognizes that 
in her report, Mr. Speaker. Is it enough? No, it isn’t. Should we 
be doing more? We will. We shall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, here is a quote from a mental 
health worker: 
 

Children are moved far too often. That’s . . . (the 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

Department of Social Services’) answer to everything. 
 
From a child in care, and I quote: 
 

Moving a kid is almost never worth it. Usually it’s just a 
right-now solution to a bigger problem. 

 
From a social worker, and I quote: 
 

I used to be in favour of long-term orders, but there seems 
to be no planning for these children. It sentences them to a 
life in the system. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, children are being shuttled about the system, 
but then we hear information management is nowhere near 
adequate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this next quote just absolutely blew my 
mind. I’m just appalled at this. Then this is from a foster parent. 
You can joke about this, but I don’t see the way these kids 
being treated as any kind of a joke at all. 
 

We had a baby in our care for two months and hadn’t 
received payment. 

 
And this is on page 44: 
 

When we called to ask about payment, the worker was 
relieved to know we had the baby . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member kindly go 
directly to her question? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — This file had only a birth certificate in it — no 
other information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: this is unbelievable and 
inexcusable. How do you explain that your department is losing 
children in the system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for her question. The Children’s Advocate report is 
interspersed with a number of anonymous quotations, Mr. 
Speaker. We are very concerned . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. Members, order please. Allow 
the minister to respond to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, when we read the 
quotations as the member has now read out to the Legislative 
Assembly, we as a department are very concerned about those 
kinds of allegations. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have asked 
. . . I have asked my department to review with the Children’s 
Advocate some particulars of those allegations so that we can 
see what the circumstances of those are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a government are very concerned about the 
needs of children in Saskatchewan which is why, upon our 
election in 1991, we moved to see if there is better ways to 
focus service for children under the children’s action plan. We 
feel we have made significant strides in that area. We will 

continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
cracks are starting to show in this coalition government. Today, 
the president of the Liberal party is saying the NDP’s plan for 
forced amalgamation could spell the end to the coalition 
government. Greg Gallagher is saying he’s getting phone calls 
from Liberals saying they have to take a stand even if it causes 
the coalition to come unravelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know it’s hard to believe there’s actually 
Liberals left to phone Greg Gallagher but at least he’s listening. 
He knows the NDP plan for forced amalgamation is dead wrong 
and the Liberals should not support it. 
 
To the Minister of Education: who are you going to listen to? 
Your own party and Mr. Gallagher? Or the NDP Premier who’s 
stroking your cheque? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, hon. members. Hon. 
members, this is a valuable period of time and I would hope that 
you would kindly allow questions to be asked and answers to be 
given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
when we talk about consulting with people, when we talk about 
exploring with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) the kinds of directions that we want to go 
collectively with municipal reform in this province . . . It takes 
the wisdom of all of the people who sit on this side of the 
House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this coalition has talked at length, talked at 
length about the importance of rebuilding Saskatchewan, 
providing opportunities in Saskatchewan today so that local 
municipal governments and provincial governments can work 
in harmony and ensure that we have stronger economic 
opportunities and we can develop stronger social policy so that 
communities in fact can be enriched by those kinds of services, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are the kind of things that we’re doing on this side of the 
House. There’s no words on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, about forced amalgamation, unlike what they say over 
there when Mr. Downs . . . Mr. Downs who talks about 
enforced amalgamation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest is supposedly capable 
and worthy of the Education portfolio, I wonder why he can’t 
get up and speak for himself and the Liberal Party. Mr. Speaker, 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

I ask again for the Education minister to answer the question. If 
he’s an equal partner in this government, why can’t he get up 
and speak for himself? 
 
Mr. Minister, your NDP partners are probably already planning 
how they’re going to boot you out of the coalition before the 
next election. Why don’t you beat them to it? Listen to your 
president, listen to your party, listen to thousands of people who 
are showing up at task force meetings, and they’re saying no to 
forced amalgamation. Greg Gallagher is saying no to forced 
amalgamation. Will you stand up for the Liberal Party and 
speak on their behalf and say no to forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
you see a government today that has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that I find it absolutely astounding that we see the 
member from Saltcoats today standing up and talk about how 
you work at booting people out of parties. Because when you 
take a look at the history of this individual here, Mr. Speaker. I 
mean he’s part of the group of people who were working real 
hard at getting rid of the person now who is involved as our 
Lieutenant Governor. He was the leader of that particular 
parade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then he was part of the agenda, Mr. Speaker, that 
proceeded not only to get the new Leader of the Opposition but 
to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that the old Liberal leader wasn’t in 
the Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I’m having a difficult 
time hearing members from both sides when they’re offering 
their questions or answers, as I’m sure the rest of the hon. 
members are, so please — please — keep it down. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well maybe, Mr. 
Speaker, we should let the member for Wood River answer the 
question. I think he still talks for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at least there’s one good thing about this coalition. 
When the Premier and the Minister of Education fly somewhere 
together, they only have to buy one ticket — the minister 
qualifies as carry on baggage. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to stand up and do something 
useful within this government? Now’s your chance. Why don’t 
you stand up to this Premier, listen to your party, listen to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, put a stop to forced amalgamation? 
Will you get up and do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — On this side of the House, I want to say to 
the member opposite that we’ve had a lot of discussion about 

the restructuring and reorganization of this province with 
SUMA and SARM in terms of reform; we’ve had lots of that 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve said that we’re going to do 
that in a collective manner, and we’re going to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, in a consultative manner. And we’re going to do that 
to ensure that Saskatchewan people and the province continues 
to grow and thrive. 
 
Unlike, Mr. Speaker, what happens on that side of the House. 
On that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we hear on a regular 
basis that party talking about forced amalgamation, and that’s 
the only part of the province that we hear it. We hear it from the 
Saskatchewan Party talking about forced amalgamation. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, this is the voluntary 
amalgamated party on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the Minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, for months, Mr. 
Minister, we’ve been saying that your no-fault insurance review 
is a sham. The legal community is telling you it’s a sham. 
Accident victims are telling you it’s a sham. And now the head 
of your own review committee bails out on it. He must think 
something of similar ideas. Justice Thomas Wakeling is used to 
working independently as a judge; but because of your 
meddling in that particular review committee, Mr. Justice 
Wakeling has quit. 
 
Will you scrap this review and start over? Will you hold a truly 
independent review, one that doesn’t set restrictions on the 
committee so it can do its work the way it wants to do it and the 
way it should do its work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The legislation 
related to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act sets out a 
mandate for a review of the personal injury protection plan. We 
have appointed people to do this task and unfortunately the 
Chair has resigned as of yesterday. But the people that we have 
arranged to do this work are very capable people who will listen 
to all of the things that happen within that program. 
 
The mandate is as set out in the legislation. It says that it should 
. . . we can deal with all matters relating to this plan. That 
includes a comparison of what we had before, what we have 
now; it also includes a comparison with other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very good insurance program in this 
province for personal injury in automobile accidents. We are 
going to work to improve it with the assistance of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
obviously there’s a problem between you and this review 
committee because you don’t seem to be on the same page.That 
may be because of the way you arranged that committee and its 
content as you said. Maybe if you left them alone and not try to 
meddle with it, they’d be doing what they ought to be doing. 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

The bar association, the Legal Aid Commission, and Justice 
Wakeling all feel that your review system has gone off the rails 
— the coalition of no-fault victims — these are all boycotting 
your process, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can’t you see something is seriously wrong here? You need to 
scrap the whole review, to start over, remove the restrictions, 
and make sure that everyone that wants to participate in this 
province can participate. Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I reiterate again what I said when the 
committee was appointed in December, what I said yesterday, 
what I’ve said today — this committee does not have 
restrictions on what it’s supposed to do. Its job is to improve the 
system in Saskatchewan so that we have the best insurance 
system in North America. 
 
We know that we have very good rates for all of our citizens. 
We know that we have very good coverage for most of our 
citizens. We also know that there’s some things that we can do 
better. And we’re going to work hard to make sure we have the 
best system in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 232 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that in 
reference to Bill No. 232, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 that it be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Certified Management Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, The 
Certified Management Accountants Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
wonder if I could have leave of the Assembly to make 
introduction of guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the 
House, a long-time friend of mine and a friend of many people 
in education and certainly somebody that many people in this 
Assembly already know. And that’s . . . in your gallery, we see 
our visitor Mr. Stirling McDowell — Dr. Stirling McDowell. 
 
Dr. McDowell served as the general secretary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation for many years — at the 

time when I was there. And more recently of course served to 
chair the commission that set our pay and rations right here in 
the House, Mr. Speaker, a thing known as the McDowell 
commission. I welcome Stirling back to the House for the visit. 
I hope you enjoy your afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. I would like to join with my 
colleague in welcoming Dr. Stirling McDowell to this 
Assembly. He has indeed had an illustrious career, and he has 
many items of note and import on his CV (curriculum vitae). 
But one of the things that members of this Assembly may not 
know is that he is a constituent of mine in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
I don’t know if he’s one of the 38 that helped get me elected, 
but I think he’s a fine gentleman, and I welcome him here to 
this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Local Improvements 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
proposed changes are intended to Bill No. 22, amendments to 
The Local Improvements Act, 1993, the changes are intended to 
clarify the procedures for appeals of special assessments to the 
local board of revision and to the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board. 
 
These housekeeping amendments will do three things, Mr. 
Speaker: improve the appeal rights of landlords; will make the 
local boards of revision more accountable for their decisions; 
and will provide a consistent approach to handling appeals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the urban, rural, and northern municipalities Act 
have been recently amended to provide for an improved 
property assessment appeal process. Amending The Local 
Improvements Act, 1993 makes this appeal process consistent 
with the improved provisions of the municipal Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have expressed concerns when they 
must follow different legislative processes for similar functions. 
And therefore a consistence approach . . . a consistent approach 
to handling appeals should be welcome. 
 
Appellants should also welcome these revisions as appeal 
processes for all of the related Acts will now become consistent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 22. 
 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments before I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
22, The Local Improvements Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure whether government 
members are actually that concerned about the appeals process 
or they’re aware of the many concerns that have been raised. I 
would have to guess that the minister is just as aware of the 
concerns in regards to property assessment and appeals as my 
colleagues are on this side of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the appeals process needs 
to be reviewed. In fact, as MLA from Moosomin, I’ve been 
calling for this process for a number of . . . period of years. And 
why have we been suggesting that this appeals process be 
reviewed? Because of the fact that under the current 
mechanism, Mr. Speaker, it puts communities and local 
businesses and local landowners at odds because they’re 
basically dealing with the very individuals and the 
governmental sources that they have to work with on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
And as an MLA having dealt with businesses and dealt with 
individuals who are concerned about the assessment, especially 
as the assessment has changed . . . and over the past number of 
years, we’ve seen some significant changes in the assessment 
process and in the assessment mechanism and how assessments 
are set. 
 
And for many people whenever there’s an assessment change, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much consternation amongst individuals, 
concerns about the fact that if the assessment changes and the 
assessment increases, will that assessment reflect the reality and 
the true value of the property I have? And at the end of the day, 
will that mean that I will have more taxes to pay? Will I be 
paying my taxes fairly, Mr. Speaker, or am I going to . . . is my 
business going to be gouged in regards to the assessment and 
the taxes that I will then be paying? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what my colleagues and I have been calling 
for, we’ve been calling for an appeals mechanism that really is 
outside of and more far-reaching, that has more authority to sit 
down and look very closely at properties and determine whether 
or not the assessment is a fair assessment on the property so that 
landowners, business owners, and communities, local 
governments feel that the assessment certainly meets the need 
. . . meets the target that’s been presented to them. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think what we want to do 
is certainly take a very careful look at this piece of legislation to 
determine whether or not The Local Improvements Amendment 
Act, 2000 indeed meets the concerns that have been brought to 
our attention by landowners and businessmen and women 
across this province over the past number of years. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be facing another assessment in the near 
future. And as individuals who have served on local councils, 
while we as former councillors are aware of the fact when an 
assessment takes place and when an assessment on a piece of 
property increases, most councils to my knowledge then just 
reduce the mill rate to reflect the change in the assessment. 

However, just reducing the mill rate doesn’t necessarily mean 
that your taxes will hold the line or may go down in some cases. 
Most cases, I think, many property owners feel that any time 
there’s an assessment review and a change in the assessment, 
they end up being hit much harder for taxes on that property. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this piece of legislation 
is here today is something that my colleagues and I want to take 
a very careful look at to review. And certainly as we get into 
further debate on this piece of legislation, we will be raising a 
number of questions that are being brought to our attention, 
areas that we feel maybe the legislation does not quite meet the 
need that is out in the community. 
 
But certainly we want to commend the government as well for 
taking a look at the . . . how appeals, the appeal process is put in 
place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to further debate on the 
question. We look forward to debating this question with the 
minister, and to determining what’s the fairest method of an 
appeal mechanism that indeed recognizes the needs of not only 
the local property owner but local governments as well, and 
treats every property owner and landowner fairly. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move now to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 23 amends The 
Planning and Development Act, 1983. The current Act provides 
for the framework for municipalities to manage the fiscal 
development of communities. Municipalities and others have 
suggested a number of ways that the Act could be improved. 
 
These amendments reflect our commitment to responding to the 
needs of local government. The amendments, Mr. Speaker, 
include five . . . the amendments include: 
 
The correcting the definition of conseil scolaire and adding a 
cross-reference to this term to conform to The Education Act, 
1995; 
 
Secondly, allowing major telephone and fibre optic 
transmission lines to also be considered as essential public 
services; 
 
Thirdly, giving greater discretion to local development appeal’s 
boards and the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in deciding 
greater appeals or certain appeals; 
 
And fourthly, allowing the creation of a local commission to 
provide advice in the planning areas in northern Saskatchewan; 
 
And finally, allowing the services of certain types of 
subdivisions . . . decisions to be made to the subdivision 
appellant by personal services as well as by registered mail. 
 
These amendments will contribute to simplifying the land use 
planning process for municipal councils and the public. 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are evidence 
of our commitment to maintaining a legislative framework for 
effective land use management which serves the public interest 
and responds to the changing needs of Saskatchewan 
communities. I would now urge each of the members on this 
side on the House to support this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of Bill No. 23. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 23, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand the minister, the minister is telling 
us that this Act is going to simplify a number of areas in regards 
to municipal governments and how they undertake fiscal 
development within their, within their areas. And the minister, I 
believe, if I’m not mistaken, I heard the minister say that they’d 
been listening to a number of the concerns of local government. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, if that’s what I’ve heard the minister 
saying, and this piece of legislation is indeed addressing areas 
of concern, areas that have been almost served some constraints 
in the manner in which local governments can govern 
themselves, can certainly address the fiscal areas of 
responsibility that they have within their jurisdiction, then we’re 
pleased to hear that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you as well that we 
would be more than pleased if the provincial government would 
also give the same ear to the current debate that is taking place 
in this province in regards to amalgamations. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe the minister mentioned in his second reading speech, 
talked about areas where local governments wanted to have the 
opportunity . . . and in fact, I think the five points the minister is 
talking about will allow local governments some of those 
opportunities to continue with the local amalgamating of 
services that this government seems to want to refuse to listen 
to when it comes to the overall picture as we have it in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have and what this Bill is basically 
speaking about, laying out a cornerstone for it, is laying out a 
cornerstone to address some of the irritants that are currently in 
place within the municipal Act that restricts rural governments 
— would be they RMs or be they small local communities or 
even hamlets — in the way they address appeals and whether 
the way they address even the Education Act. 
 
And I believe the minister talked about The Education Act, 
1995 that basically says to local governments that when you 
receive any sort of tax level of taxation . . . or payment of 
taxation, that according to the 1995 Act you must submit that 
percentage off of that amount that has been paid to the local 
Education department of . . . or Board of Education. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the fact that around this 
province even today, even despite the budgetary address that 
was presented by the Minister of Finance, despite that and the 
commitment to $25 million to offset education taxes, that there 
are ongoing meetings in regards to a revolt, a tax revolt in this 
province, and a tax revolt that is coming about as a result of the 
tax on education — education tax on properties. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that there isn’t any 
one member in this Assembly that doesn’t understand what the 
individuals are talking about who are going around and talking 
about the tax revolt. Because we’re all aware of the fact that 
when we pay our taxes, we go to pay our tax, almost two-thirds 
of what we’re paying in is going to fund educational services 
within our local communities and our local school districts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can understand why so many people are 
becoming irritated by the fact that the off-load on education. 
And so it will be interesting to see the part of the Act — I 
believe it was point no. 3 — and what really is the significance 
of that point in regards to The Education Act of 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at the . . . as I begin to look at the piece 
of legislation, we want to take a close look at exactly what is in 
the legislation, why the legislation is here, is it necessary, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been discussing forced amalgamation for a 
good period of time in the Assembly. In fact there are meetings 
again today in the province of Saskatchewan in regards to 
forced amalgamation of local governments. And I guess the 
concern I would have is the legislation we have — Bill No. 23 
that is currently before this Assembly — is this Bill going to be 
irrelevant in the near future? 
 
If the minister comes in, as we hear the minister indicating that 
he is going to be making a decision regarding the larger scheme 
of forced amalgamations, whether or not the minister should 
have taken some time rather than bringing a piece of legislation 
and asking the Assembly to join with him in passing it, then 
finding that it’s irrelevant because he’s come in with another 
piece of legislation on the broader picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will be taking a very diligent 
time to look at this piece of legislation to assess what the 
minister is attempting to do, what this government is attempting 
to do in regards to the planning and development of local 
governments. We want to take the time to review it and indeed 
see whether or not the legislation meets the current needs and 
requirements of local governments that have been brought to 
our attention. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
be able to address some of the concerns that I’ve found in this 
particular Bill. 
 
I’ve looked over this Bill at some length and I’m finding that in 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

fact that there is some very positive things that this Bill puts 
forward, and I think some of those things need to be supported 
and we would certainly agree with them. But there are some 
concerns that I would like to bring to the attention of this 
Assembly with regards to this Bill. 
 
First off, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about how 
important it is that we look at these amendments very, very 
carefully. In fact, we are looking at the children of this 
province. It’s an asset that . . . It’s very important that it’s an 
asset that we have to make sure that we protect, and it’s our 
responsibility here in the legislature to be able to do just that. 
 
How it affects the children is doubly important for somebody 
like myself who has had the opportunity to raise children, who’s 
had an opportunity to see them grow and prosper and in fact to 
see them remain here in this province. And I think that’s an 
objective that we would like to make sure we can pass along in 
fact to their children as well. 
 
Also as part of the concern, and my personal concern, is in fact 
the opportunity I’m having now of experiencing grandchildren. 
The grandchildren that I’m so very proud of are spending a 
great deal of time in the care of others during the working day. 
 
Unfortunately, unfortunately, it has to be that way in many, 
many cases and in many, many families. With the economic 
conditions that we are now experiencing, with the time 
restraints that parents are certainly under, it is doubly critical 
that the care of these children, in others’ care, be looked at as a 
very important issue. 
 
I look at the future of the province, and of course we have to 
look at these children, and how these children are reared is very 
important. Traditionally, as you well remember, the rearing of 
children was very close to home in a, what we would call, a 
traditional family environment. And those are important times 
for growing children, making sure that these children 
understand the values that are passed on to them by parents and 
certainly other members of the family. And it’s clearly an 
important part of our future, making sure that those values are 
passed along to our children. 
 
With the economic environment of today and with the time 
restraints placed on parents, it is critical that we’re finding . . . 
and maybe unfortunate . . . maybe it’s an opportunity but the 
reality of the day is that both parents very often are out of the 
home, both earning a living, and both pursuing their careers. 
And I believe that’s important as well. 
 
To facilitate that kind of change in the nurturing of our children, 
I think it is very timely that this Act be looked at. And certainly 
some revisions need to be put in place. 
 
As we shift away from this traditional family value, we have to 
make sure that we have confidence in where these children are 
going to be supervised. And I’d like to take a moment and a few 
minutes to further my concerns in the objective of confidence, 
by not only the parents, but the community generally. 
 
I guess, as I mentioned, we’re very pleased to see that the 
government will be amending some of these provisions in this 
Act. 

One of the provisions that I noticed was the restriction of child 
care services to a primary resident. And I think that that is a 
provision that is rather restrictive. And I see that some of the 
amendments that are being put forward will try and address this 
a little bit further and expand the location — allowable location 
— for child care in this province. I think that has a positive 
aspect, and that should be commendable. 
 
(1445) 
 
In the minister’s second reading of the speech, he brought up a 
very important point, and I think it has to be addressed in these 
amendments. And I’m glad to see it’s there, and I want to 
reinforce how important I think it really is. His point being that 
the farm families are also in a very changing time in terms of 
their ability to traditionally supply the support the urban and the 
rural areas of Saskatchewan. This I think is another example of 
the inconsistency that we’re experiencing. From my earlier 
career as a teacher I noticed that there was a different 
opportunity for children in our schools between urban and rural. 
 
It was always a struggle to maintain the rural schools and the 
schools in the small towns. To maintain the numbers, to 
maintain the curriculum that was needed, and it left little time 
for enrichment of that curriculum. 
 
As opposed to in the cities, that was a different environment. 
And rural children adapted accordingly. And I think under . . . 
and should be congratulated for being able to adapt to that 
inconsistency. 
 
We’re also seeing inconsistency in other areas of things like 
recreation facilities; different opportunities are present for our 
children in the urban versus the rural. Even there’s difference in 
opportunities for cultural involvement, certainly part of the 
upbringing and care and nurturing of our children. 
 
I mention these things just as a comparison to what we’re 
experiencing in child care. When you compare the child care 
opportunities in the city, they are certainly different than child 
care opportunities in the rural communities. 
 
Even in the urban communities where we normally think of 
child care, some of these amendments I think are very 
appropriate, overdue, and again as I mentioned, very supported 
by this particular side of the House. 
 
But when it comes time to compare child care opportunities, 
rural and urban, I think a very stark difference very quickly 
arises between those two. As you can understand from what we 
would assume as the traditional family upbringing of children in 
the rural, where very often both the father and the mother, 
although both being involved in the farm, one or the other often 
was available to spend a lot of time in that very formative years 
of child rearing. 
 
And I think that was one of the major assets . . . or one of the 
major benefits that we experienced in the rural areas as our 
children were raised and became very productive parts of our 
society. 
 
But that too is changing in the rural area as you know. There 
has been an extensive change in the focus of the farm 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

community — a very extensive change in the focus of how 
farms in fact are existing. We are trying desperately to sustain 
these farms. It seems to be an uphill battle. There’s a lot of 
problems associated with the farms these days in terms of 
commodity prices; certainly the depopulation of the rural areas. 
Those kinds of things are bringing a crisis to farms that we’ve 
never seen before. 
 
As part of the consequence of that farm crisis — and maybe not 
well understood, but very, very vital — is the fact that children 
are being raised in that particular environment and continue to 
need the care and the nurturing that is so important in the 
formative times of their life. 
 
One of the consequences of course is that both parents — both 
the father and the mother — who have always been very 
involved directly in farming now have to become even more 
involved and more intent on actually performing the operations 
of the farm. There isn’t any cash left over or budget available 
for hired help or for contracting out and we see both the mother 
and the father becoming so very involved that we often fear that 
the children are going to be neglected. Fortunately, I think some 
of these amendments are pointing in the direction to give 
assistance here. 
 
We also see that because of this farm crisis that we’ve been 
discussing for a long period of time, we also see that it is 
necessary for both parents not only to work on the farm, but 
very often one, or both in fact, Mr. Speaker, have to leave the 
farm to try to earn enough money for the . . . to sustain the farm 
in its present form. 
 
These people should be commended. They’re trying their very 
best to make a very tough, difficult situation palatable. It’s a 
family farm, it’s their way of life, and they should be, as I 
mentioned, be encouraged to do whatever they have to do to 
maintain this. Maybe it’s our job to try and set the parameters a 
little bit differently, but they’re experiencing the real world and 
they’re going to have to try and adapt. There’s another reason 
that we see that there is a need for child care from the rural 
point of view — just because that way of life has changed so 
very, very much. 
 
So I’m very pleased to be able to support anything in these 
amendments that will address and help satisfy that need for 
daycare in the rural . . . 
 
Because it’s such a busy, busy time of the year, in particular in 
spring and again in fall, it is maybe even more difficult to 
understand that the farmers need more and more help at that 
particular time, which is a very awkward time because there is 
less and less opportunities for child care in those particular 
times. 
 
But these amendments, to some extent, take the pressure off 
parents during those busy times so that they in fact don’t have 
to be so concerned or the concern is all-consuming, so that they 
can be comfortable that they are dealing in the world of the 
farming needs. They’ll be able to focus on what they’re doing 
without having to think peripherally of where their children are 
and how they are being cared of. I think that’s a very important 
part of the rural life as we now know it. 
 

I guess what I’m looking at in these amendments, Mr. Speaker, 
are some of the things that cause me a little bit of concern. And 
I want to move away from the reasons why I think that these 
amendments are so important in terms of urban and rural, and 
so important in the rural. 
 
I see where traditionally there was always the child care, but up 
to a certain number . . . the number I believe is a number of 
eight. And there could be further limitations by some age 
restrictions. But I see now the amendments are moving forward 
to involve what is called group family child care homes. 
 
And I think that is a very useful and a very good move which in 
fact allows to have several children maybe from the same 
family that wouldn’t have the opportunity to attend the daycare 
during the day. It gives them the opportunity to in fact go to the 
same daycare and be able to associate with their siblings as long 
. . . as well as some of the new-found friends that they’re I’m 
sure going to find at the daycare. 
 
I guess the problem that I might have here, Mr. Speaker, in this 
area, and we have to be very, very careful about this, is some of 
the concerns that we’ve already experienced and stated publicly 
about the ability of government to actually put the correct 
legislation in place, and then in fact to make sure that the 
government has the ability to monitor what is going on. Or we 
have to be comfortable, we have to be confident that the 
legislation that is contemplated here, when it is enacted, in fact 
is going to serve the right purpose and will in fact meet the 
objectives that I think all of us agree need to be, need to be met. 
 
That whole aspect of confidence gives me some concern, and 
particularly the confidence right now because of the report of 
the . . . the child’s advocate report that was tabled yesterday. 
There’s a lot of really major concerns expressed in that report, 
and it’s concerns about the ability of this government to 
monitor what is happening to make sure that what they have put 
in place actually is what is needed and is actually doing the job 
that is intended under the general objectives of that legislation. 
 
Some of the things that bothered me when I was reviewing the 
aspects of this legislation focus again like I mention on the 
confidence that parents have to have in the system, because they 
are entrusting their children to care providers in an environment 
that is away from the traditional family environment. And so 
that confidence is very important, not only confidence from the 
parent, confidence from grandparents like myself, but 
confidence from the community generally that those objectives 
are in fact being met. 
 
But it bothers me when I read headlines that I see in the last day 
or two — in fact just this morning in The StarPhoenix, there’s 
comments about the review that was put forward yesterday. 
And when I read those kinds of headlines and some of the 
statements in those . . . in the paper, I start wondering now, will 
those same kinds of things start applying or same concerns or 
lack of confidence? Will those apply to the new regulations or 
the new amendments to daycare? 
 
One of the things and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things 
that bothered me as I was trying to extrapolate to the daycare, 
came highlighted from this work in social . . . the report in 
Social Services. The statement that I would like to quote out of 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

this Saskatoon StarPhoenix just this morning, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, goes like this, and I quote: 
 

Some Saskatchewan foster children who say they’re 
neglected or abused never had their complaints 
investigated because social workers are too busy, says a 
disturbing report into the province’s foster care system. 

 
Now I know that that is not a direct application to what is 
happening here, but I am speaking to confidence that parents, 
grandparents, and family members have to have in the system. 
And I can’t emphasize enough that these amendments have to 
focus on putting that confidence in place. Without it, it is going 
to lead us down maybe into the same kind of problems as we 
were experiencing here with this foster children review. 
 
And again I quote from the same paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The agency is either unwilling or unable to follow its own 
regulations in placing and monitoring the majority of 
(these) children . . . 
 

Again it’s not a direct correlation but in fact it does lack . . . it 
gives me a sense or a lack of confidence that the overall 
objective, which was likely very positive and praiseworthy, has 
in fact been neglected and has slipped by the general objectives 
that was needed. So we need to make sure that those kinds of 
confidence levels are maintained. 
 
(1500) 
 
I talked a little bit earlier . . . again talking about the vision of 
this particular legislation and about the confidence needed. And 
again when I read in the Regina Leader-Post, again of today’s 
issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see this quote, and if I could, I 
quote: 
 

Social Services Minister Harry Van Mulligen said he was 
unaware that there were such high levels of policy 
violations in his department . . . 
 

Those things, those kinds of reports in our paper certainly don’t 
help the confidence in the public that’s needed in a system that 
is going to be even more regulated. And again, it is so critical 
because these children are so vulnerable and need our 
protection. Not only the protection and confidence of parents, 
grandparents and community, but it is our responsibility here as 
legislators to make sure that the objectives, as good as they are 
and as admirable as we think they have to be, is carried through 
so that people will in fact feel comfortable in allowing their 
children to attend. 
 
I mentioned earlier a bit of a problem about the things faced on 
the farm, and unfortunately, it’s a fact that children are the ones 
through no fault of their own often become victims of 
circumstances. And because the farming situation becomes so 
stressful, there is concern that the children are picking up those 
stress levels and acting out of ordinary. They’re doing . . . or 
behaving differently than they would if things had been going 
as smoothly or as they had in the past. 
 
Fortunately, at my time, when I was an active farmer, things 
were much more positive on the farm and I felt real proud that 

we were able to contribute to the upbringing of my children. 
And hopefully through them, now to my grandchildren, some of 
the values that we need to pass along to them from our 
traditional family viewpoint. 
 
But again, this crisis on the farm does, in fact, spill over, and 
that’s why it is so critical that the children have an opportunity 
to go to daycare in the rural areas as well as in the urban 
centres. I quote now from an April 4 edition of The 
Leader-Post. They talk about the farm crisis may hurt children, 
and I quote: 
 

The effects of the agricultural crisis on farm children may 
be showing up in the disruptive behaviour in small-town 
schools (or in the rural areas) . . . 

 
And this is a quote by a rural education director. And I think 
that sums it up very, very nicely. We have to make sure that 
there is opportunity and, with this legislation, the confidence 
that in fact we can supply our children with the care and 
nurturing while we are so very, very busy and preoccupied with 
our lives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as legislators and parents, again it’s really 
our duty, as I mentioned, to ensure that these very vulnerable 
members of our society do have every protection that we can 
offer. And that’s why it’s so important for these amendments to 
be considered very, very carefully. 
 
Some of the advantages that we can offer in daycare . . . And 
I’m witnessing those kinds of things from my grandchildren’s 
upbringing and some of the things that they are now 
experiencing because they are full-time attendants of daycare, 
and I really believe that the daycare is a very positive influence 
on their lives. And I think it’s important that we ensure that. 
 
Some of the very positive advantages that they can get in these 
daycare centres is the social interaction that they experience 
with other children and certainly with somebody other than 
their parent. I think that’s a very important item. They learn to 
play, they learn to share, and they learn to co-operate with other 
children. And I think they become much more adaptive to an 
environment when they finally get to situations, for instance, in 
school where they will have to interact with other children. 
 
I think they’re learning under new circumstances, and I have to 
commend the daycare workers that I’m familiar with that they 
in fact are very professional, they’re very conscious of what 
they are doing, and they in my experience with my 
grandchildren are performing excellent tasks and opportunities 
for these children to learn. 
 
And I think if the objective is to go down that particular lane 
and to expand those opportunities for the children in the 
advantages that I’ve just stated, I think that is a very 
commendable thing, and we want to make sure that those are 
included in these amendments. 
 
We want to give our children and our . . . and the parents that 
are responsible for raising them . . . that there is hope in the 
future. We don’t want to continually keep telling them that 
there is no hope for them in this province. We want to make 
sure that they do in fact have both opportunity in this province 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

as they grow up. And the foundation for all of that future hope 
is in fact in the upbringing as we have the opportunity now to 
ensure in these amendments. 
 
I guess I see . . . and I raise that particular point, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the context of my environment which is living in 
Lloydminster, as you know, and in this border area. And I’m 
not reluctant to bring that area up again because I think that 
there is a micro-climate right there of economic activity where 
we see daily, graduates from our schools moving away out of 
our province. 
 
And an objective of all of ours is to make sure that the 
opportunities that we have remain right here in this province, 
and make sure that we can try to put greener pastures in place, 
so that three out of four of our graduates do not leave after 
graduation. That hope and confidence is really the basis of child 
care. It starts at that level. 
 
I find it a little disconcerting, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we talk about the things that are proposed in this 
legislation. 
 
One of the things that I’m concerned about is the section 3.2. 
The paragraph states that: 
 

A person may operate a family child care home either with 
or without a family child care . . . licence. 
 

That is a bit disconcerting because the children that will be 
attending those daycares are again so vulnerable that I think that 
we need a way to be able to monitor what is happening there, 
and to make sure the objectives are being met. 
 
Without a licence, we would have no authority on behalf of the 
province, there would be no authority to actually review what is 
happening in these homes, in these daycare centres. So without 
a licence, I raise that as a red flag in that I think it’s an 
important aspect that should be considered I think when these 
amendments continue to be reviewed. 
 
I think it also should state in these amendments, how the action 
— what actions need to be taken and how the objectives are to 
be played out. I don’t see that in the amendments. And in my 
quick and brief review of the Act, I think that’s a bit lacking. 
And I hope that in the regulations that will hopefully come 
along and be developed on the basis of these amendments, that 
there is some kind of a response, some kind of a plan, and some 
kind of an action plan that we can follow to see if there is 
consistency from one child care facility to another, and in fact if 
these objectives again are being met. 
 
Some of the difficulties again that I referred to earlier in some 
quotes really talk about abuse — in that case of foster homes. 
But abuse is always a huge, huge consideration when we’re 
talking about children, but especially children of the child care 
age. That is very, very alarming to me how, how some of those 
things in care foster homes has been allowed to proceed. And I 
surely don’t want to see those kind of things perpetuated into 
daycare. 
 
And without the proper licensing and without the proper action 
plans and checks and balances, I’m not sure how that will be 

performed, but it is very, very critical. And I would certainly 
encourage those aspects to be either put into the amendments, 
added to them, or certainly developed in the regulations that 
will be coming from those. 
 
All in all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have to say that this is a 
pretty good piece of legislation. I think its objectives are just 
fine; they’re right on the mark. I do think that we do need to 
spend just a wee bit more time in talking to some of the people 
that are involved in daycare, getting some more of their input. I 
know I would like to have a little bit more time reviewing some 
of the background to this. 
 
I think the minister should be complimented and acknowledge 
. . . I’d like to acknowledge that some of the things that he has 
contemplated here for daycare, especially in the rural areas, 
making it easier and more accessible for farm families, I think 
is very commendable, if the conditions and the constraints are 
in place. 
 
Having said those remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I 
would like to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 18 — The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, public pensions are indeed a very, very important part 
of our society and need to be reviewed from time to time to 
determine exactly whether or not they’re operating in the 
manner that they were prescribed in the first place and in the 
manner in which people expect them to be operating. That is 
why it’s not unusual for the government to be presenting 
amendments from time to time to correct some of the 
deficiencies in the pension programs when they are discovered. 
 
I guess the thing you have to be somewhat concerned about 
though is whether or not the changes that are being made 
actually serve the best interests of the employees that are in the 
pension plan or are they designed to serve the best interests of 
some other group. 
 
We believe that the pensions that are in place for our public 
service should be there to serve the interests of the employees 
— not to serve the interests of the government, not to serve the 
interests of the investors, but to serve the interests of the 
employees that have invested in these particular pension plans. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with this in mind that we are interested in 
debating and discussing these particular plans. This amendment 
seems to bring forward a change that would make the pensions 
more flexible, more useful to the people who are involved in 
them. 
 
And there’s approximately about 35,000 people that are 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

involved and enrolled in these plans and this plan holds about 
$2.2 billion. $2.2 billion, as you’re well aware, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a lot of money. And the fact is that’s equivalent to 
one-third of the entire budget of the province of Saskatchewan. 
The province’s budget this year is $6.3 billion and this pension 
holds $2.2 billion. 
 
I guess one of the questions that should be raised on this Bill is 
whether or not that entire $2.2 billion is in fact actually in place 
or is this part of the unfunded pension liabilities that the 
government has accrued over the last 50, 60 years since the first 
pension plan went into place for people on the taxpayers’ roll, 
that being the teachers’ pension plan. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, most of this money is in place. We’d 
certainly be hopeful that it is because if it isn’t, then it’s a 
liability on the province’s roll and is of concern, I would think, 
to everyone in the province, particularly those that are enrolled 
in this pension plan. I’m sure they would feel much more 
comfortable knowing that the money that they have invested 
themselves in this pension plan is secured and that it is indeed 
protected through the system. 
 
The employees enrolled in this, Mr. Speaker, which will make 
voluntary contributions to this pension plan as of January 1, 
2001, it would seem that they will be able to withdraw their 
voluntary contributions upon retirement and not have to rely on, 
as in other cases, Mr. Speaker, that it be paid out as part of their 
pension plan over a longer term, but that they will be able to 
access these monies directly. 
 
Which is certainly of benefit to them, because when you retire, 
a good many people in this province, when they do retire, pack 
up their bags, sell their home, and move. Now they may move 
from let’s say Regina to the cottage out at Echo Lake, or they 
may move to Christopher Lake or some place like that. 
 
Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, too many of the people, 
when they do retire, move to be closer to their grandkids. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, too many of those 
grandchildren are not in Saskatchewan any longer; they are in 
some other part of Canada, primarily in Alberta. 
 
That does cause some problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
that means that the energies that these retirees could be putting 
into building our communities, to volunteering in our 
communities, is lost to Saskatchewan and is of benefit to 
someone else. The expertise they have built up over their lives 
now serves some other community other than our own. 
 
And it would be much, much more appreciated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if those energies could be kept here in Saskatchewan 
to build our own communities. But those individuals have the 
right to make their own choices and to go to wherever they wish 
to. 
 
In this change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the retirement age has been 
lowered from age 55 to age 50. And that is a very, very major 
change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you’re doing actuarials, 
when you’re looking at the amount of returns that you can get 
off of your pension plan, withdrawing early from a pension plan 

seriously decreases the value of your pension plan. 
 
It does though allow a person who is retiring from a profession 
to gain access to their pension money and perhaps at age 50 to 
start a new career. I can certainly see how that might be 
financially beneficial for them, providing, let’s hope, that 
they’re starting that new career choice in Saskatchewan where it 
continues to benefit this province. 
 
There also is some changes to the spousal benefits. The current 
legislation says that spousal benefits cannot be less than 60 per 
cent. This has been changed with the percentage being set in 
regulation and the percentage is to be 60 per cent. The only big 
change here is that with old Act, one could assume the benefits 
would be greater than 60 per cent because it says, cannot be less 
than 60 per cent. With this change, now there is no opportunity 
for it to be greater than 60 per cent. It’s limited to 60 per cent. 
 
I’m not sure that that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a beneficial 
change. It certainly makes things perhaps cleaner for the 
pension fund. They know exactly then that employee A’s 
pension is $1,500 a month and their spouse will receive 60 per 
cent of that, so $900. Because at some point in time they may 
have had other circumstances that allowed for that to be 
increased beyond that 60 per cent point, and now those 
opportunities will be lost. 
 
Another change moves this Bill into sync with the federal 
Income Tax Act, that the maximum age for members to make 
contributions has now been reduced to 69 from 71. I guess, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what they’re trying to do here is move people 
out of the workforce to a certain extent, by limiting their 
contributions up until the age of 69 and not beyond that. 
 
You know there are people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are very 
long-lived. There are people who, as they reach the higher ages, 
are in very, very good condition. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
one of my neighbours . . . I’ll tell you a little story. 
 
This lady was at this time about 83, 84 years old, and she still 
put part of her pension money aside, her Canada pension, for 
her old age. At 83 she was not yet old. And indeed, this 
particular lady, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is currently 94 years old 
and still not old . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes and the 
member from Meadow Lake speaks up, he says and you, Mr. 
Member, still look like you’re 29. And indeed, Mr. Member 
from Meadow Lake, I still am. Well thank you, members 
opposite. 
 
One of the things that we need to take a very serious look at 
though, with any changes to the public pension, public service 
pension, is how is it affecting those members that have come 
into the pension plan since its inception. 
 
We have had some concerns raised with us by people who were 
in the pension plan prior to 1981. There were changes made at 
that point in time under the NDP government of Allan 
Blakeney, that were not well explained to the people in the 
pension plan at that time. And some of the options that they had 
available, they missed out on because the plan was not 
explained to them properly. They didn’t access them in the 
manner that they should have done so. 
 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

In fact, this has led to some very serious concerns by the unions 
involved in representing those particular employees, those 
pension members. And indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m told 
that they are now in court to try and settle the difficulties that 
have arisen with these changes. That people have been denied 
some of the benefits they should have been entitled to, and it is 
going through the court system. And that the government is 
arguing — and I’m not sure that it isn’t partially a valid 
argument — that the unions had some responsibility to explain 
to their membership exactly what the benefits that they had 
negotiated with the government of the day, the Allan Blakeney 
government, what those benefits in that pension plan were. 
 
But the lawsuit is arguing that those benefits were not explained 
to the pension holders, and that because they were not 
explained, they were denied some of the opportunities they 
should have had. 
 
What the pensioners that have held this are arguing is that they 
should be allowed to buy those pension years back in again, so 
that they would have received the benefits that they would have 
accrued had it been explained properly to them in the first place. 
 
And I guess we’ll have to wait and see exactly what the courts 
decide on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I think it’s very critical 
that when these kind of changes are made to an Act, that they’re 
made in such a manner as they serve all of the people in the 
pension. That those that are currently in the pension have the 
entire changed structure explained to them, so that they know 
clearly, exactly what is available to them when they are in the 
pension and when the changes take place. 
 
Again I would like to mention the unfunded pension liabilities 
that are held by the province, and have a concern whether or not 
this particular pension is part of that. 
 
The teachers’ pension plan certainly is, but that does not cover 
the entire amount of the unfunded pensions which the 
Provincial Auditor says is $3.7 billion. Three point seven billion 
dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a significant amount of money. 
In fact, it’s almost 25 per cent of the money that the government 
holds in general debt of $11.2 billion. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people with the pensions need 
to be reassured by this government that their pension money is 
indeed safe, that it will be paid out as it becomes due to them. 
Because I know that I’m sure that you’re as concerned about 
your future financially as any other person across 
Saskatchewan, as any person involved in this pension plan 
would be. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are quite a few people across 
this province that are concerned about the pension plans that 
need to have an opportunity to have a look and see exactly what 
these changes entail, what they mean, and how they’re going to 
affect their life today, and how they’re going to affect their life 
in the future. As you can tell, it’s a fairly substantive piece of 
legislation that deals with a lot of very technical terms. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move at this time that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 14 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you very 
much. 
 
I’m delighted today to stand and talk about the film 
employment tax credit. We’re talking about movies; we’re 
talking about actually culture and having fun here in 
Saskatchewan. And that doesn’t happen very often in this 
province. Anytime the government talks about doing something 
that’s fun in this province they usually find a way to tax it. 
 
So when they talk about tax credits for the film industry, I think 
that we’re delighted that this government is saying the film 
industry, we’re having a chance to develop our potential and 
culture, that’s absolutely great. 
 
In 1998 the film employment tax credit was introduced, to find 
a way to grow the film industry in Saskatchewan. Now this was 
probably . . . I know that this is a competitive industry. Right 
across Canada there’s always . . . the provinces are trying to 
attract the industry from the States, so Saskatchewan introduced 
this tax credit. 
 
In a nutshell the film producers receive a tax credit from 
Saskatchewan government for employing people in their 
production. So that means people in Saskatchewan get a chance 
to be in the movies, and I think this is something that was 
heralded across the province as something that was going to be 
a real winning idea. 
 
The theory is that it will cause more television and film 
productions to be shot in this province. The film industry has 
run where there’s a lot of competition between provinces. 
Americans have taken a great interest in producing films here in 
Saskatchewan because of the difference in dollars. 
 
I know that for years we all have watched the Academy Awards 
and watched the movies that are produced right across the 
world, and the incentive to come up to Canada actually 
increased a lot when we started to see a difference in the 
Canadian dollar. 
 
The tax credit seems to be paying off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
although it’s still fairly early in this game. But we have learned 
lately that the film production has doubled to just over $50 
million annually. And I guess the question is how high can it 
go? Maybe it’s going to be the backbone of this province before 
we know it. 
 
The Bill that we have right now before us alters the definition 
of the eligible employees and residents it requires in order to get 
a tax credit. Actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to want 
more details on this to ensure that we aren’t just putting jobs for 
current Saskatchewan residents on the wings and allowing more 
people to come in that aren’t Saskatchewan residents. 
 
As well the reporting mechanism in this Bill appears to have 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

changed at the request of those involved in the industry. The 
added procedure is also being taken into consideration in the 
amendment, and actually they’re saying it’s just going to bring 
it into line with other provinces. 
 
Such reporting is needed to ensure that eligible requirements 
aren’t being skirted since the tax credits are based on the 
number of employees hired. Smaller production companies 
have found the requirement for a complete audit is very 
expensive, and I know that small businesses — no matter which 
business it is — can’t afford the cost of a full-blown audit. 
 
(1530) 
 
They’re implementing a three-tier system with only those 
productions over $500,000 needing a full audit; those under 
$200,000 will simply have to sign an affidavit; and between 
200,000 and $500,000, they’ll require a review engagement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it seems that whenever there is a good idea 
brought forward in this province, someone is going to be a 
winner and someone’s going to be a loser. It’s clear from some 
of the numbers the government has thrown out in a few 
instances, that this isn’t good for the economy. This tax brace 
will be good. 
 
And I want to make it clear from the onset, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we support the concept of tax credits or tax 
incentives to expand the economy and in creating jobs — it’s 
great, it’s a good idea. And that includes the film industry. 
 
But what we really do object to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this 
NDP’s government continued desire to pick winners and losers. 
Whenever you decide that some group of people is going to get 
a tax credit, then you have to decide somebody else is not going 
to get a tax credit. And those who don’t get the tax credit are 
going to pay for the other people. 
 
So how do you decide? How do you sit around a caucus table 
and say this is an industry I think should succeed, this is an 
industry that shouldn’t succeed? That’s not the job of 
government — is to decide which business is going to be a 
good one in this province and which one isn’t going to be. 
 
A few years ago we had this government deciding that the hog 
operations were the only way to go. And before you knew it, 
the industry actually went into a tailspin. I’ve had a number of 
my constituents say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that whenever the 
government gets involved in something, it’s a sure sign you 
better get out because it’s not going to last very long. 
 
I think the producers around the Outlook area can tell you the 
same thing because last year we found that SPUDCO and the 
whole potato industry went into a tailspin because of this 
government’s insistence of getting involved in business. I don’t 
think there was . . . The real producers out there, the ones that 
were making their living and gradually growing the industry 
and they had seen over a number of years how they could 
actually make a difference; they knew that they could count on 
their suppliers and they could sell, they had markets for the 
products that they were selling. 
 
And all of a sudden this government comes and gets involved 

and they say, you know what, if a little is good then a lot should 
be a whole lot better. But they had no idea how to make it work. 
You can’t all of a sudden decide that I’m going to expand the 
market by 400 per cent without figuring out what’s going to 
happen on the other end. But this isn’t something that this 
government has figured out — is that there’s always a result to 
your actions, especially when you’re in government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the one thing that I think this government 
can take credit for is letting anybody believe that business 
people know and have any faith in this government. They don’t 
have a clue how to make a business run. And I think you can 
see that in every detail of this government’s work. 
 
Actually CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) 
did a very good report not too long ago and they were talking 
about things like the small business corporate tax rates. 
Effective January 1 of this year, Saskatchewan’s rate is 8 per 
cent — 8 per cent for the small business corporate tax rate. And 
you know what that is? It’s the second highest rate in Canada. 
That’s not a good incentive. That’s not a way to encourage 
people to start a business in this province. Given announced 
reductions in small business corporate tax in Ontario and BC 
(British Columbia) and Manitoba, people that are planning to 
either start a business or expand a business will not be looking 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that this government doesn’t understand that you 
have to have faith in people. You have to know that they know 
how to make the business work and you don’t have to tax the 
living daylights out of them just to make sure that they can stay 
in this province. 
 
Over 80 per cent of the CFIB members agreed the government 
should reduce and eventually eliminate Saskatchewan’s small 
business corporate tax rate. We believe that. The Saskatchewan 
Party said that in their platform. They knew that to encourage 
businesses and to get the economy moving in this province, we 
had to remind people that profit isn’t a swear letter . . . swear 
word, it’s not a four-letter word. We actually have to allow 
people to make some business and to create some money so that 
they will stay in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the commercial property and business tax 
in Saskatchewan is the third highest tax concern of 
Saskatchewan small businesses. It’s a strong concern for firms 
in the retail and the service sector. Sixty-four per cent of 
members agree that the education component of local business 
taxes has to be . . . is causing a huge concern. 
 
Over 60 per cent of the funding now for education in this 
province comes from property tax owners. If you own a 
business in Saskatchewan, you’re going to be paying on your 
property, on your personal property, and you’re going to be 
paying on your business as well. Businesses are saying, how 
much more can I stand. The education portion of this business 
tax and property tax in this province is hurting businesses badly 
and it’s encouraging people to leave as quickly as they can. 
 
The profit incentive nature of property taxes creates hardship 
for very many small businesses. The CFIB members are saying 
that they have to remove education components from local 
businesses to make Saskatchewan more competitive. 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992, when this government came into power, 
they knew that they had to develop, or they believed they 
should develop some sort of a plan to get this economy moving. 
And I think it’s very interesting when they developed what they 
called A Partnership for Renewal and they set out a number of 
objectives that they wanted to reach in five years to see if they 
could get the province moving. 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want you to know that I 
believe in this province. I love it, I’ve lived here all my life, 
I’ve never moved, and I’ve fought hard to make sure that the 
economy can survive. In fact one of the reasons why I ran, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is because I thought maybe somehow we can 
get an idea of what it takes to run a business if we could get 
somebody into the legislature who’s actually been there. 
 
So I looked at this Partnership for Renewal, and I thought okay, 
some of these ideas aren’t even bad. 
 
One of the ones . . . The third objective that the then Minister of 
Economic Development brought out in 1992 was to ensure a 
competitive tax system for business. And they were supposed to 
have a supportive, specific strategy by saying we’re going to 
review the tax system to ensure that it supports productive 
investment to contribute to economic development and 
employment creation. And they said that was underway. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s look at that. How many people 
are . . . have left the province since 1992? We have the same 
number of people overall in this province that we did 10 years 
ago. Well a lot of those people are either under the age of 15 or 
over the age of 55, but not the ones that are working everyday 
to try and get this economy moving. 
 
And I’m sure that it’s a . . . The number of businesses that 
talked to us since the budget are saying, this is not . . . the 
budget is not something that’s going to make me stay in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to . . . the fourth goal that was set 
up by this government in 1992 was to move towards equitable 
regulations for businesses. This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
laugh. Any person that tries to operate a business in this 
province is saying the rules and regulations and red tape in this 
province will choke you. Every time you turn around, you need 
another permit or a business licence or some kind of a 
regulation this government sets up, and there’s no end to it. 
 
We see the occupational health and safety standards boards that 
are set up, and they’re within small businesses that actually cost 
the administration a lot of money. 
 
I think the one thing that this government doesn’t recognize is 
that employers in this province treat their employees very well 
overall. Most people know that you cannot keep a good 
employee if you don’t treat them well. We always . . . There 
seems to be this feeling that employers don’t like their 
employees. They say . . . every time I see this government talk, 
they talk about employers as if they’re the bad people. 
 
I’ve never figured out why we have to have a Department of 
Economic Development and a Department of Labour in two 
different ends of a page. It’s the same people we’re talking 

about. Everybody has the same goals — they want to have a 
good job, and they want to have some money to take home at 
the end of the day. It’s not going to happen if you’re going to 
try and create a barrier between those employers and 
employees. 
 
The regulations this government brings forward creates a lot of 
problems when it comes to businesses. 
 
The next goal that this government had is one that I’m very 
concerned about now . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I just wish to remind 
the hon. member that the Bill before the Assembly is The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000. I’ve been 
listening very carefully and it has been some time since I’ve 
heard a reference to the film tax credit Act, the Bill before the 
Assembly, and I know the member will want to tie her 
comments into the Act before the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m sure that . . . I apologize, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m sure that I was talking about how we wanted to 
create a business environment in this problem . . . in this 
province — this problem, all right — in this province, and that 
though we agree with the fact that the film industry can be an 
important asset and an important part of this province’s 
economy, how can we do that when we’re picking winners and 
losers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the type of thing that’s happening: we 
have a government saying the film industry is a great one; we’re 
going to give it a tax credit; we’re going to help the industry get 
on its feet. And yet on the next hand we’re thinking, how are we 
going to pay for this. Who is actually paying for this tax credit? 
That tax credit is coming from the pockets of every one of us 
who aren’t in the film industry. 
 
As soon as you choose to give some person, some group of 
people, a tax incentive, somebody else is going to lose. And this 
province has been doing it for 10 years. You decide to pick 
winners and losers. The film industry is a winner right now. 
We’re pleased. Everybody’s happy. But who’s the losers? 
 
And what I’m telling you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there’s 
reasons why this province has got one of the poorest rates of job 
growth. We have a large number of our educated children 
leaving the province as soon as they get their education because 
there’s incentives in other provinces that’s going to let them go 
ahead as individuals. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a business person in this province, 
whether you’re in the film industry or whether you’re in any 
other business, you know that one of the biggest problems you 
have is the tax burden. Now the property taxes in this province 
have risen substantially and the education portion of it has more 
than doubled in the last eight years. And businesses, whether 
it’s the film industry or manufacturing, business is feeling that 
very hard. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the regulations again . . . And I’m sure 
that the film industry is feeling the pinch of them as well, 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

because every time you turn around, there’s another rule and 
regulation you have to deal with in this province. 
 
Some of the business people that have phoned me and said, 
have you talked to this government about the labour laws. I’m 
sure that all of us are well aware of the certification that went 
on for a union in my area. And I wonder, are industries like the 
film industry going to have to be dealing with these union rules 
and labour laws that are very, very restrictive and make it very 
difficult for businesses to determine if they should actually start 
in this province or if they should intend to expand. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about how we’re going to 
pay for this tax credit, today in the legislature we had a report 
from the Children’s Advocate on the social welfare system in 
this province. 
 
And I think it was, no matter which side of this House you’re 
from, it was very disheartening. It was something that made all 
of us uneasy. None of us were proud to see that report. Whether 
you’re opposition or whether you’re in government, that was 
the kind of report that it doesn’t make you proud and it doesn’t 
make you happy to know that your province has that kind of 
problems. 
 
So, you know, the question always goes back to, why isn’t it 
different? And one of the reasons it’s not different is always the 
lack of money. So when we have a government deciding that 
they’re going to pick winners and losers in businesses and 
we’re going to have tax credits given to different people, we 
wonder, could that money be better spent some place else? 
 
Why would we have the social . . . the welfare workers working 
in this province tearing their hair out trying to figure out how 
they’re going to meet the demands in that system, how they’re 
going to look after the children under their care, when we have 
on the other hand millions of dollars given out to a business. 
We don’t have to give businesses tax breaks and incentives if 
we actually have an environment for them to succeed without a 
tax credit. The money can then be spent on things like social 
services to ensure that our children are looked after. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other group of people that I think are 
probably wondering if they have the time today to be watching 
this legislative session, is the farmers in this province who’ve 
tried desperately this winter and probably for a year now to get 
this government’s attention about how desperate their needs are 
for money and how they are so pinched. We know that a lot of 
them are on bankruptcy or in dire straits right now wondering 
how they’re going to put their crops in. 
 
And they see the $5.2 billion . . . or $6.2 billion that the 
government is going to spend this year in the budget. And they 
look down the row and say, where’s the money going for me? 
Or where is the government going to spend all of this money? 
And they see how they’ve changed priorities since 1992. 
 
We saw how much money was being spent on agriculture in 
1992 compared to today. I don’t have the exact number in front 
of me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know if you compare what 
number was spent for the film industry in 1992 compared to the 
film industry today, it would be considerable different. 
 

So a decision is being made by a number of people on that side 
of the House — 31 people, I guess it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
how to spend that $6.2 billion. They didn’t choose farmers to be 
at the top of the priority list, they didn’t choose the social 
workers to be at the top of the priority list, and they haven’t 
seen education to be at the top of the priority list. But we have 
decided that there are a few million dollars we should give to 
the film industry. 
 
(1545) 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to ensure that people know 
I’m a moviegoer — I love them all — and there’s been some 
great productions that have been put out of Saskatchewan. I 
think that we’re all proud to go to these productions and see 
them. But what we have to say, is that the best way to spend our 
dollars? Is that really a good way to spend our dollars? 
 
And so I think in times right now when we have the report that 
we saw today talking about children that were in danger in this 
province, how much . . . I mean those million dollars could be 
spent in other places. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that when we look around this 
province, we know that there are other areas, other businesses 
that would like to be starting up, and they are saying, I wonder 
how you get to be at the top of the government’s priority list so 
that you can get a tax break. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that Saskatchewan has the second 
highest small-business tax. And since the disaster at the polls in 
Saskatchewan last year, we heard this government talking about 
reducing taxes, but we’ve yet to really see any results. Even 
with the supposed reduction in our personal income tax this 
year, after all the information that the opposition has brought 
forward, we know that at the end of the day there’s people who 
are going to have less money in their pockets now than they 
were last year at this time. 
 
General tax relief for all employees would give positive 
impacts. They can’t deny that since they seem to embrace the 
concept in the film industry. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s obvious 
from the minister’s words when he introduced this Bill that 
there was . . . they could see that there was a reason and there 
was some positive things happen when there was a tax break. 
The film industry saw that happen. They over doubled their 
sales in the last two years. 
 
But what would happen if we could do that to all industry in 
this province, not just the film industry? What happens if 
everybody would be given the same chance and we wouldn’t 
have to be picking winners and losers, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Instead of tax relief, businesses are fearful of tax increases, 
especially those just outside of Regina and I would think just 
outside of Saskatoon as well. My office has been inundated 
with letters from businesses from the RM of Sherwood, which 
employs thousands of Regina residents, who fear that the 
government’s plans for forced amalgamation because they think 
their property taxes will skyrocket. And they say that that’s 
going to be enough to make . . . (inaudible) . . . This is another 
case of winners versus losers in this government’s grand 
scheme of economic development. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

So, Mr. Speaker, although the film industry is one industry that 
we can see is growing in this province, we understand why it’s 
growing. We understand that the tax credit is one of the reasons 
why it’s growing. What we have to ask the government is why 
they don’t think that other industries in this province deserve 
the same recognition and the same help? 
 
So we’re going to be consulting with more people in this 
province to talk about what they think would be the right way. 
And we would ask at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d ask to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 3 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
on The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment 
Act, 1999. 
 
This Bill simply extends the provisions of the health 
reorganization passed in 1996. It seriously reduced the number 
of bargaining units in the health care profession in this 
province. 
 
This reorganization was commonly known as the Dorsey 
commission. The number of bargaining units were reduced 
from 538 to 45. The SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union), usually a stance supporter of the 
NDP, was upset in particular about the changes made since 
many of its members were moved to other unions. In total, it 
lost about 3,500 members. 
 
This Bill was supposed to make labour negotiations more 
manageable. It is ironic then that we’ve had so much labour 
strife in the health care field in the last years. 
 
In reality, this Bill did little to calm labour problems because 
the government has done nothing to improve working 
conditions. We still hear from nurses and other health care 
workers constantly about the working conditions in our 
hospitals. 
 
While reducing the number of bargaining units did make sense, 
the heavy-handed approach the government took in 
accomplishing this was typical. If we are to attract health care 
professionals to Saskatchewan, especially nurses, we’re going 
to have to do a whole lot more than tinker with how the unions 
operate. 
 
We’ve heard over and over this government’s commitment to 
hire hundreds of new nurses in Saskatchewan who are 
desperately needed, but we don’t seem to be making progress 
very fast. Instead of tinkering with the health care unions, let’s 
get on with the job of improving the health care system. 
 
I’d like to quote, Mr. Minister, from the Hon. Minister of 
Education, from an article that he replied to in 1996. And I 

quote Mr. Melenchuk: 
 

Most health research in Canada has emphasized local 
control over health delivery . . . But that’s not what has 
happened under the NDP health reform . . . 
 
“It is a sham board controlled by the provincial 
government,” he said. “They’ve destroyed local control.” 

 
Mr. Melenchuk . . . or the Minister of Education continues: 
 

“We have a level of bureaucracy. We have a huge Health 
Department,” he said. “We have more money going into 
our Health Department now than we did four or five years 
ago and our service delivery has decreased. To me, that 
indicates a problem.” 

 
And further on that, I’d like to quote from Mr. Duane Adams, 
who at that time was the deputy minister of Health. And he 
says, Duane Adams says: 
 

reports of a health-care crisis in Alberta and Ontario have 
fuelled fears here. But he says it’s wrong to make such 
comparisons. 
 
“We didn’t start out to slash the budget,” he says, noting 
(that) Saskatchewan is the only province where health 
spending is about the same as when reform started. 
 
“We set out to offer new services that would be sustainable 
for the future and provide a better quality of life for (our) 
people.” 
 
“We’re so far ahead of every other place in Canada and 
even world-wide that maybe we’re too far ahead for some 
of the Saskatchewan public,” he said. 
 

Well, I think the people of Saskatchewan would be a little bit 
disturbed to hear that this was what he was talking about in 
1996 about the future of wellness, and to see what has happened 
in the last four years in this province. 
 
Mr. Adams further says: 
 

“We borrowed everything that made sense and applied it to 
the Saskatchewan situation, and then looked down the line 
20 years and said . . . this (is) what’s needed for the 
future?” 
 
The “hard part” — reorganization of services and putting 
the brakes on increasing costs — was expected to take four 
to six years. A key step was local governance of health 
care through (the) creation of 30 district health boards. 
Hastened by (the) federal transfer cuts, most of this work 
has been completed. 

 
I further quote, and this is from the Premier, the member from 
Riversdale: 
 

“The majority don’t come into contact with the system so 
they base their opinions on public debate. This sounds like 
I’m being critical of the media. I’m not, but it is easy to 
arouse emotions on isolated examples, which is what we 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

get in the news, instead of the reality of the day-in, day-out 
functioning of the system.” 
 
People have lost their jobs and their lives have been 
disrupted as a result of reform, . . . (the member from 
Riversdale) admits. “They don’t like it and they talk about 
it. 
 
“But that will quiet down as the current insertion of the 
philosophy of wellness becomes more or less complete . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
Mr. Elmer Henderson, former deputy fire chief, city of 
Saskatoon, and currently involved with the Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association here in the city having meetings today, 
and I would ask everyone to join with me in welcoming Mr. 
Henderson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the labour front, 
let’s bring fairness back to our trade union laws. Just as it is 
wrong not to allow someone to form a union, it is also wrong to 
force people to join unions. It is wrong to make it nearly 
impossible to decertify even if a majority of workers want that. 
 
We should have a system in place that is fair for both employers 
as well as employees, or we are going to start losing more 
people in this province. 
 
The major problem in our province is the heavy hand of unions 
trying to organize in workplaces where they clearly are not 
wanted. We have owners of businesses in many cases and 
majority of workers in their shop who do not want a union, but 
the union is allowed to go in and use the heavy hand and use the 
labour laws of this province to disrupt the workplace and to put 
a union in places where they are not wanted or needed. 
 
It’s the same type of approach we saw with the creation of 
health districts themselves and what we will probably soon see 
with the NDP’s drive to amalgamate municipalities. And like 
the amalgamation of health care unions, there will probably be 
very little consultation in the areas of municipal amalgamation 
either. And what consultation there is will likely be ignored as 
the province moves ahead with the legislation. 

As is the case with municipal amalgamation, we were told at 
the time of the Dorsey report that these changes would make 
labour negotiations more smooth and make the system better. 
Well what did we see with the health districts? What we see 
mainly was the loss of local control. We seen services cut. We 
seen the cost in health care continue to rise at the expense of 
services being lost. 
 
This government went in and confiscated assets, they 
confiscated property, they confiscated reserves of the people in 
the health districts that they had spent lifetimes saving and 
keeping for the day when they would need a new hospital or an 
ambulance. And this government took them. They even so 
much as took furniture out of buildings and it was never seen 
again. They took equipment. And then they wonder why the 
people of this province are concerned about amalgamation and 
what is going on in the RMs today. They do not trust this 
government and they have full reason not to trust them. 
 
And then we were faced with the nurses’ strike last year. 
Clearly amalgamation in the health care sector did not cure the 
real problems, just like the government’s plan for forced 
amalgamation will not do anything to improve the lives of those 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When the original Dorsey recommendations were put in place, 
not only were some union members angry, there were plenty of 
non-union workers who were angry to find themselves being 
forced to join the union. This is typical of the NDP labour 
policy. We’ll soon see the same thing in the construction 
industry, where the government plans to force non-unionized 
employees into unions where they want not to be. 
 
The other issue that we are . . . the union employees are very 
concerned about, and need be, is the recklessness of this 
government. When they decided to close the Plains hospital 
they had total disregard for the people of this province and the 
health care that they would receive. They also had total 
disregard for the people that worked in the Plains hospital and 
they disrupted the nurses and this has never been corrected to 
this day. 
 
We were guaranteed in this province that we would not lose 
beds, we would not lose any level of health care, and we have 
seen what has happened in this province. 
 
At that time the people of this province held meetings all across 
southern Saskatchewan pleading with this government to leave 
the Plains hospital open. They did not listen. At that time we 
had the Minister of Education who went out to these meetings 
who actually was the ringleader of these meetings and he had 
great credibility at that time. He said he would chain himself to 
the Plains hospital. Where is he today? Is he speaking out on 
behalf of the people of this province to guarantee that they 
receive adequate health care? 
 
What the people of this province want is health care that is 
timely and where they can be guaranteed that they can receive 
the service when they need it. We haven’t. The NDP, instead of 
giving us better health care by closing the Plains which was 
promised . . . we will not lose any of the service, we’ll get as 
good a service in the other two hospitals in Regina, there won’t 
be any problems. 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

What they did is that they spent $100 million or more to close a 
hospital and to give us less services. This is what the NDP's 
idea of wellness is. 
 
And certainly the issues were brought to a boiling point last 
year when the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses engaged in a 
strike in an attempt to improve the conditions in the workplace, 
in an attempt to make sure that the issues of recruitment and 
retention were going to be sufficiently addressed. 
 
And everyone in this province will remember how absolutely 
convinced the nurses are that these issues are fundamentally 
important to improvements in the health care delivery system in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it sort of strikes me as bizarre, but in many 
instances where this government seems to lose track of the 
connections between what’s happening in the workplace and 
health care and about some theoretical model such as the 
proposed Dorsey report. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens in many instances is there is simply 
no understanding at all of what front-line care workers are 
attempting to do and what they struggle with day after day as 
they try to provide first rate service in a system that is entirely 
under pressure and in many instances, badly underfunded. 
 
I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from some of the issues that have 
been brought up at the SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) 
convention that is currently being held in Moose Jaw. We have 
the president of the SUN, Rosalee Longmoore, stating, Mr. 
Cline . . . or sorry, I’ve got the wrong one, wrong page . . . I did 
have the right page. 
 
I quote Rosalee Longmoore: 
 

Mr. Cline in this province says that the health budget is 
almost 40 per cent of the provincial budget. He does not 
tell you that the way they calculate that figure is by taking 
our total reserves, subtracting the payment on the debt 
which is significant, and then saying that health care costs 
are about 40 per cent of the remaining revenue. 

 
The announcer then continues to say: 
 

Longmoore warns delegates that health districts will have 
much tighter budgets this year because the government has 
cut back funding and it will have a negative effect to say 
the least, on Saskatchewan nurses. 

 
And then I quote from some of the nurses that were in 
attendance at this meeting. And they’re very upset about their 
leadership supporting the government of this province and 
helping them with their fundraising. 
 
Kathy Abel, a nurse from Saskatoon, and I quote: 
 

Some of us feel that we all need to be getting the same 
message. I believe SUN still has a policy that we don’t 
affiliate with any political party but we’re receiving mixed 
messages. And if I’m going to lobby the government and 

tell them that they’re inappropriate then I want my leaders 
also to be giving the same message. And sometimes I don’t 
think that message is very clear. 
 
When our leaders went to the NDP fundraising banquet, 
the Premier’s fundraising banquet in November, six 
months after that man legislated us back to work, I find 
that shocking and appalling and so do the members, 2,400 
strong, in my district. 

 
Again I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from Bev Hondros from 
the Saskatoon Health District. 
 

Regarding this being at the Premier’s dinner, I realized that 
it was an opportunity but I don’t know if you read the 
editorial that came in the Saskatoon paper shortly after 
that. Basically they made fun of us that we condemned the 
government while we were on strike. We basically said 
they don’t have a clue what’s happening. They’re not 
listening to us. 

 
And then the president and the executive director were at a 
fundraising dinner. Would they be at fundraising dinners for the 
other two parties? And I know it’s a balancing act of this as an 
opportunity; do we use it? But I think this was in bad judgment 
just because of the timing. 
 
And then I’d like to quote from Garry Reid from local 75 who 
said: 
 

I just wanted to add to the discussion about attending the 
Premier’s dinner. I felt like I’d been kicked in the stomach 
when I read in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix the editorial 
about your attendance at that function regardless of what 
the SFL’s (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) intent 
about an opportunity to build relationships. I think SUN 
should have declined, given our policy that we don’t 
affiliate with political parties, and we think we need to give 
our heads a shake in the future for thinking about doing 
this. 

 
And this is how the members of the SUN union feel about this 
government and about their leadership attending events, that 
they do not support and they do not want to have any part of. 
 
This morning, or yesterday morning I believe it was, on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, they also 
interviewed a nurse, Corinne Slobodian. And when she was 
asked by the reporter . . . (inaudible) . . . they were talking about 
the nursing strike in Saskatchewan, and it lasted 11 days before 
the government legislated the nurses back to work. Well that 
may have been a year ago, but as Sharon Durrand reports, it’s 
still fresh in the minds of many nurses. 
 
And the reporter, Sharon Durrand, continues on and says: 
 

Saskatchewan nurses are still singing the same tune. They 
say they’ve come a long way since last year’s labour 
dispute, but it’s obvious that many issues still haven’t been 
resolved. Corinne Slobodian works in a nursing home and 
health care centre in Cudworth. She says many nurses are 
disheartened. 

 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

And I quote from what . . . and Corinne Slobodian who then 
replied to this question said: 
 

The bottom line is they are still working, going to be 
working in those extra hours without extra time off and it’s 
really hard to stay positive in knowing that you’re there in 
the public’s best interest and you’re there to provide safe 
nursing care. 

 
And when asked by the reporter about the plans include more 
cuts, she compared these cuts to what the government did to 
health care in 1992. Bev Crossman, the SUN executive director, 
and I quote. This is from Bev Crossman who is the executive 
director of SUN, and she said: 
 

Louise Simard’s 52 hospital closures could pale by 
comparison of the impact of this budget. 
 

And then the reporter replied: 
 

Crossman believes all signs point towards privatization, so 
she urged SUN members to fight to keep health care 
public. The union’s meeting will wrap up on Friday. This 
is how the people that are employed by the SUN union in 
this province and who are members of the executive feel 
about this government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think is important to 
recognize is, all across this province every single day, literally 
thousands of nurses and licensed practical nurses and front-line 
care workers that belong to other bargaining units are working 
diligently 8 and 12 hours a day and sometimes into overtime to 
try to provide the very best health care that they’re capable of 
providing. They’re the unsung heroes in the whole health care 
field that are toiling under some pretty diverse, adverse 
conditions, in many instances, to see that health care is 
delivered properly and effectively in a caring and 
compassionate way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite often what happens is that instead of 
the government assisting that process, in many instances they’re 
part of the problem rather than being part of the solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many, many concerns, and we’ve had the 
privilege of talking to many of the health care providers in this 
province over the last few months. And there’s grave concern at 
all levels in the hospitals — from neonatal for concern about an 
inadequate level of staffing; nurses being asked to work in 
different departments where they’re not properly trained, but 
yet they’re needed, and so they come in to relieve. 
 
Many nurses are working overtime hours simply because they 
know that if they don’t go in to work that their colleagues will 
be short staffed. They know the patients will not get the proper 
care. And so they go in day after day after day to provide care 
for the people of this province. 
 
They are what are holding the system together. And if it wasn’t 
for the nurses in this province and their support staff, we would 
be in graver shape than we are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Bakken: — We now have some wind in . . . some rumours 
in the wind about how we might have to cut some support staff 
in order to balance the budget, especially in the Regina Health 
District. I had the privilege of speaking to a nurse who works in 
the Regina Health District. She works in emergency, and she 
said that there is grave concern about this, that this might 
happen — that they might lose some of their support staff. 
Because she said it is the support staff is the only thing that 
keeps them going day after day and night after night. And if 
they lose their support staff, the system will fall apart. 
 
She said that there are unit clerk nurses. They coordinate the 
ward. They are the lifeline. They’re the ones that when the 
emergency nurse needs a doctor called, they go and call the 
doctor. 
 
There’s an admitting clerk. They cannot do without the 
admitting clerk to handle the paperwork. 
 
There are porters. The porters have many, many functions, but 
one of their most important functions is to transport blood and 
make sure that they have the supplies that they need when they 
need them in the emergency department. 
 
There are LPNs (licensed practical nurses) who assist the RNs 
(registered nurses) many times having to take over and watch 
their patients when they have a really critical issue come into 
the ward. 
 
There are lab techs that they can not do without. 
 
There is the security guards. They cannot do without the 
security guards because many times they have people that are 
admitted that need someone to watch them. And the main thing 
about the security guards is the condition that these nurses put 
up with day after day when they have to get to and from their 
cars in the parking lot, and they need that security. 
 
I would like this government, Mr. Speaker, to tell me which one 
of these support staff are they going to eliminate and still keep 
this system functioning in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Further the nurses work as a team. This is not a 
game of pitting one against the other; they are all needed and 
they are all needed to give adequate care in our province. And I 
would hope that this government would look at this very, very 
closely before they make a decision to cut support staff in our 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote — just in closing I’d like 
to talk about the nursing home situation in Saskatchewan — I’d 
like to quote from the minister from Saskatoon . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Northwest — Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Saskatoon Northwest, in an article from 1996, 
and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has more nursing home beds than the 
national average which is about 129 per a thousand seniors 
over the age of 75. The province now has about 142 beds 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

down from 150 beds for every thousand seniors over 75. 
But if you need a nursing home bed you should have 
access to one. The bed should be open. It shouldn’t be 
taken by someone who doesn’t need to be there. 

 
And he continues on to say: 
 

Despite all the squawking and complaining 80 per cent of 
the health funding is still spent on institutional care. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the major issue is here now the 
Government of Saskatchewan has decided to increase the fees 
on nursing home beds and is going to make it very difficult for 
some of these seniors to be able to afford this care. Not only do 
they have to pay their . . . for a monthly fee for their nursing 
home beds, but they’re also now asked to pay for everything 
else that they need in the nursing homes. 
 
And to think that a senior that is making $28,000 a year in 
income is somehow considered rich in this province and can 
afford to pay the high-end scale of the fee is absolutely 
ludicrous. And I think that it’d be hard pressed for anyone in 
this Assembly to be able to live on 28,000 a year and to pay . . . 
immediately to be given . . . said, well if you want to retain your 
place of residence, you’re going to have to pay upwards of 4 to 
$500 more a month to do so. 
 
And I think that this is putting a great hardship on the seniors of 
our province who have saved all their lives so that they could 
look after themselves when they became in need of home care 
. . . of nursing home care, and now we’re asking them to pay 
more and more. And it is certainly and is simply not acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at that point, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I understood the member adjourned debate. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I would like to say that I was not to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to rise and participate in the debate on The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
But if I could beg your indulgence for just a second before I 
proceed. Today is a very important day in my son’s life and I’m 
not there, so I’d just like to take a moment and wish my son, 
Tyrrell, a happy 10th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we are 
aware, Mr. Speaker, this is basically an extension of the 
legislation that was passed in 1996. The intent of this legislation 
was to bring peace and harmony when it came to labour 
relations within the health care system. 
 
But the legislation has had a rather bumpy road right from the 
beginning, originally when it was challenged in court by the 
SGEU, and basically on the right of people to choose their 
union and to determine whether they should be unionized at all, 
or not. And this is a major civil right that I think was denied a 

lot of individuals in that process. 
 
Consequently I think a lot of what we’re seeing today, and a lot 
of the difficulties that people are experiencing in the health care 
system, may in fact be related directly to the origins of this 
legislation. What was supposed to bring peace and harmony 
into the health care system, in fact appears to have caused far 
more disgruntlement and dismay and concern out there than 
what there ever has been previously. 
 
I can think of numerous different situations that I have been 
made aware of recently that I think reflect very well the degree 
of concern and the degree of upset that there is. And not only, 
as the government would like us to believe, on the part of 
people receiving service in the health care system; but on the 
part of the people providing that service as well. 
 
(1615) 
 
A lot of the employees, a lot of the personnel directly involved 
in health care in this province, are very, very disappointed. 
They are having a harder and harder time getting up every 
morning and going to work. And this is because of a lot of the 
arbitrary decisions that are made about the way that they do 
their job, about the way that they live their lives everyday 
where they feel that they no longer have ownership. 
 
There are individual situations. I can think of a situation in a 
community close to ours where a nurse couldn’t, wasn’t feeling 
well enough to go to work one morning but was called in . . . 
Actually, she hadn’t been scheduled to work that day anyway, 
but was asked to come in and work. She told management that 
she wasn’t well, and that she didn’t feel she could do her job 
very well, being ill. They left her no choice. It was either come 
in or not have a job. 
 
Well, very difficult, very difficult for that kind of an individual 
to do that job when they’re being forced to do it where they 
have very little confidence in their ability to do it. 
 
And how about the confidence of the people that are receiving 
the service — that that individual is receiving. There are the 
individual stories such as that. Then there are the stories as they 
affect entire communities. And the community I’m of course 
the most familiar with is the community of Carrot River. 
 
Interestingly enough, this is a community that has taken health 
care in their community very responsibly. They’ve always 
contributed or attempted to contribute to any decision-making 
processes that were made with respect to services in their 
community. But time and time and time again they have been 
overruled, intimidated — whatever the case is — into accepting 
the kinds of things that they know probably aren’t in the best 
interest of their community but are the kinds of things that 
they’re told they won’t get the service unless they abide by 
them. 
 
I think back to originally when the hospital was built in Carrot 
River. And this was under the previous NDP administration. 
The community very much wanted a hospital that was built 
adjacent to their nursing home. This was probably a community 
on the leading edge because what were they talking about? 
They were talking about an integrated facility. Now that’s 17, 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

18 years ago that these people were talking about wanting to do 
that because in that community that’s what made the most 
sense. That was what they seen the most effective way of 
meeting the needs in their community and of delivering service 
in their community. 
 
But what happened, Mr. Speaker? The Department of Health 
came along and said, sorry, but you can’t do that. It makes no 
sense to put a hospital next to a nursing home —makes no 
sense. So they ended up having to agree to a location that was a 
couple of hundred feet away from that nursing home if they 
wanted to have their new hospital built. 
 
Actually, interestingly enough, the department wanted them to 
originally build it about 13 blocks away, which is about as far 
away as you can get in Carrot River, but they did get them to 
within a couple of hundred feet of the nursing home. 
 
Well they thought that at least by doing that they may very well 
have had gotten partially what they needed. There might have 
been efficiencies that they could have gained by being together, 
by being that close, but that’s where their hospital ended up. 
 
Well time went by and then we got into health care reform and 
the wellness model. Well interestingly enough . . . And once 
again I think this is contrary to the opinion of the members 
opposite. Somehow they think the people in small communities 
can’t make decisions for themselves, that they can’t think for 
themselves. 
 
The community of Arborfield, just a few miles down the road 
from Carrot River was approached by the Department of 
Health. The Department of Health said, well, we’re going to be 
looking at the way we deliver service in this province. We have 
this thing called the wellness model that we would like to 
implement but that means that your hospital in Arborfield is 
way too close to Carrot River, it costs too much money, and it’s 
too old. Would you consider closing the hospital? 
 
Well that argument made some sense to the people of 
Arborfield. They agreed — they had an older hospital. There 
was a hospital that was outliving its usefulness. They were 
fairly close to the community of Carrot River, they were fairly 
close to the community of Carrot River, and they were quite 
confident in the health care services in Carrot River. So they 
said, okay, we as a community we will agree that our hospital 
be closed. 
 
And in return for that they got from the people of the day that 
they were working with, a guarantee that because they had 
expressed and displayed such a reasonable approach, that the 
hospital in Carrot River would remain open for them for as long 
as they . . . as the community of Arborfield needed it. Well 
that’s the second time that the community was let down. 
 
Now the third time is that not very long ago the government 
announced that they were going to close the hospital 
completely. The community, as I am sure everyone is aware, 
protested and was very determined in making their feelings 
known about the loss of their hospital. 
 
I think they actually did get the attention of the government and 
within a short while there were some Department of Health 

officials out in Carrot River speaking with town council, RM 
council. But what they delivered them was in essence was an 
ultimatum. It was take our new plan now or lose everything. 
 
The community at this very point is having a debate with itself. 
They have to decide amongst themselves whether what is being 
offered in the ultimatum will meet their needs and will be what 
they need for the future. Very obviously, it’s not going to meet 
all their needs and very obviously there are going to be some 
very serious shortfalls in health care in Carrot River. 
 
But the really interesting thing to note, Mr. Speaker, is that — 
after having been let down originally when the hospital was 
built and not being allowed to go the route of an integrated 
facility; after having lost the hospital in a neighbouring 
community and being promised that theirs would remain to 
service that community, then being issued an ultimatum, the 
interesting thing to note is that the community, in order to get 
the kinds of services that are contained in that ultimatum, now 
has to come up with $255,000 of its own money. So promises 
have been made; promises have been broken. 
 
And now, after all of that, to maintain some meagre form of 
health care in their service . . . in their community, I’m sorry, 
they are going to have to pay again to the tune of in excess of a 
quarter of a million dollars. After, as the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy noted, they as a community — as many 
other communities in this province have done — they’ve 
responsibly managed their funds. They have set their funds 
aside. They have established reserves. They had trust accounts. 
They have done all of these things because health care was 
something that they wanted to be able to provide in their 
communities. Something that they wanted to feel that they had 
some ownership of. But now that sense of ownership is fast 
fading. 
 
No longer do communities feel that they have that ownership. 
Their ability to be able to control whatever health care services 
in the community of their own has been completely stripped 
from them. The control is . . . has been relocated 100, 200 miles 
down the road or more in some cases. Their trust funds have, 
have now got someone else in charge of them. The very monies 
that they scraped to put together in order to be able to guarantee 
themselves a future has been, has been confiscated for all 
intents and purposes. 
 
And yet now, and yet now, when they want to maintain the 
most meagre of basic services, they are asked to pay again. And 
in the case of Carrot River, what are they going to do? The RM 
and the town are going to have no choice but to go back to their 
ratepayers. 
 
They’re going to have no choice but to go back to the very 
people that have been paying disproportionately education tax 
on their property tax. The very same people who have been so 
frustrated with the whole issue of education tax on the property 
tax that there have been property . . . Our part of the province, 
the northeast part of the province was one of the very last areas 
of the province to start with the tax revolt meetings. The 
member from Indian Head-Milestone has the honour of having 
had I think the first seven or eight in the province. But we were, 
we were one of the last areas because people, people will try 
and grit their teeth, and they will try and get through. They will 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

try and deal with, with things no matter how tough it gets. But 
as the pressure increases and as it gets tougher and tougher to 
make ends meet, and then you add financial burdens like 
another quarter of a million dollars being required on the part of 
municipal taxpayers, then they start to lose their patience. Their 
patience wears thin. And that’s when you start to see the tax 
revolts. And I think that’s why we’re starting to see more and 
more of those kinds of things happening in our part of the 
province. 
 
The issue of ownership is not a small one, Mr. Speaker. And I 
met with the Minister of Health a number of months ago and we 
talked about health care services in the community of Porcupine 
Plain. And I think that it’s difficult for a lot of people to 
understand just how important it is for people to have 
ownership — ownership of their destinies, ownership of their 
services — to feel like they’re a part of something. 
 
When they no longer feel that they have that ownership, when 
they no longer feel that their contributions are valued, that’s 
when the system starts breaking down. And no longer do people 
feel like they have ownership in the health care system. 
 
And that’s not just the communities; it’s not just the individuals. 
Those are the people that are actually employed in the health 
care system. That sense of ownership, that sense of loss, has 
gone. 
 
An example that I think about quite often is a situation that we 
had in my home town of Porcupine Plain. As long as we . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I would be more than pleased to let 
the member know exactly what it was. 
 
We had a community that was very aggressive. And I think in a 
lot of ways we are still aggressive in terms of wanting to 
provide the best that we can for a community. So when it came 
to the provision of health care services, people were prepared, 
through health care auxiliaries, service clubs, whatever the case, 
to do whatever it is that they had to do — to fundraise, to 
volunteer their time, their work, their services, the services of 
their businesses, whatever it took — to be able to provide the 
best health care that they could in their community. 
 
Well with health care reform, the ownership started to ebb 
away. And more and more people felt distanced from the 
decision-making authority — felt distanced from their ability to 
be able to change the course of events. But even so, Mr. 
Speaker, they still felt it was important, they still felt it was 
important, they still felt it was very important to do what they 
could when they could. 
 
And I think of the particular situation in Porcupine when the 
district health board came to our community, and they said, we 
can’t afford to buy a fetal heart monitor for your hospital in 
Porcupine Plain but we would very much like you as a 
community to join together, fundraise, whatever it takes, 
purchase this for use in the hospital in Porcupine Plain. 
 
(1630) 
 
Well what did our community do? They did exactly what I’m 
sure everyone else, as the member opposite just indicated, what 
everyone else would do. They joined together. They fundraised. 

I belong to the Lions Club in Porcupine Plain. We contributed; 
purchased the fetal heart monitor. The fetal monitor is put in the 
hospital. 
 
Now we feel like we’ve made a contribution. We will benefit. 
There’s a tangible benefit to us, the community, to ourselves, to 
our children. 
 
But interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, we find out a few short 
months later that all the while that we were doing that, that we 
were fundraising for that fetal heart monitor, we find out that 
there was a plan afoot in our community — a plan to eliminate 
obstetrics in our community. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how can one continue to have faith 
and how can one continue to contribute and to want to do what 
you can in order to build and make a community better when 
you find out that the decision-making authority, which is so far 
removed from you, is undermining the very efforts you are 
making? 
 
Eliminating obstetrics in Porcupine Plain would have meant 
that that fetal heart monitor, not very long after the community 
had raised money for it, after they had made all sorts of 
contributions, put in all sorts of work and effort, would have 
been moved off to probably Tisdale. Betrayed. 
 
And I think that’s not too strong a word for the way that people 
felt because now all of a sudden this effort has been completely 
undermined. There is no tangible benefit. The very thing that 
they worked to be able to put into that hospital is being taken 
away from them. It’s being removed. That’s community funds. 
Those are community people, you put that effort into it. 
 
Now I don’t think, I don’t think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
One of the members opposite is saying that this is irrelevant to 
this Bill. Well I guess I would strongly object to that statement 
simply for the fact that in our community our health care 
workers are as much a part of our community as anyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they belong to those very same service clubs that 
raise the money for that fetal heart monitor. They belong to the 
town councils and the RM councils. They see what’s 
happening. They understand how those kinds of things are 
going to affect them, and what it’s going to do in terms of 
undermining their efforts. 
 
I mean the whole issue of ownership — whether it be with an 
employee, whether it be a community, a service club — is the 
very thing that has sustained our communities and has sustained 
this province for almost the last hundred years. And now that is 
being removed from us. 
 
The other issue, in terms of employees and the effect on them, 
health care reform has resulted in some rather tragic stories in 
our community in terms of individuals and the way their lives 
have been affected. And one — actually it’s a little humorous 
— that I remember probably the best is an individual that, after 
the reorganization and a lot of the consolidation, the 
amalgamation, ended up being a victim of some of those efforts 
on the part of this government to eliminate the services in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

Actually this lady, I met her in the hospital waiting room one 
day and she was crying. And I went over — I’ve known her for 
a long time — and she had worked with the home care system. 
And I went over and I talked with her and she said something to 
me that appeared to be very poignant — a little humorous but 
very poignant. 
 
She said, Carl, I don’t understand this. She says a hundred years 
ago we killed off all the buffalo and we built railroads. She said, 
today we’re tearing up the railroads and we’re bringing back the 
buffalo. In her estimation, Mr. Speaker, that sort of epitomized 
health care and how she felt about it as someone who had 
contributed her entire career to it, who had attempted to do the 
best that she could because she was part of the community. She 
felt ownership in what she was doing. 
 
She wanted to do the best that she could because it affected all 
of the people around her — her family members, her 
community members, the people that she went to school with, 
the people that she went to church with. And this is the degree 
of disappointment that this lady exhibited about the . . . the 
degree to which we have deteriorated in our communities and 
the degree to which we have lost our sense of ownership. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Dorsey report was supposed to have 
brought, as I indicated earlier, peace and harmony to the health 
care system. But I’m having a very difficult time finding where 
that peace and harmony is today. 
 
I just spoke with a nurse today and, between the stresses of the 
job, the working conditions, and all of the other issues that the 
nurses have so eloquently stated, in this hospital, this nurse and 
the nurses that work with her are facing a situation right now 
where they don’t have any ability at all to book holidays. They 
are just terrified that someone might become ill and why? 
Because they are so short of nurses right now that they aren’t 
even able to staff what they have to by using everyone to the 
maximum degree that they can. 
 
Now I might add that this in Porcupine Plain and the nurse I 
was talking to today made an interesting observation. And she 
said, how is it that with all of those pressures and stresses, the 
fact that we can’t fill our shifts, the fact that we have to cancel 
our holidays, the fact that we can’t . . . It’s scary if someone 
gets sick. How can all of that be when not too far down the road 
in Carrot River nurses have just been laid off? 
 
Well as I understand it, Mr. Speaker — and I’m going to be 
looking into this a little more because I find this a very, very 
curious thing — and as the nurse in Porcupine I was speaking to 
today understands it, there’s a number of different provisions 
within the agreements and then within the termination 
agreements of the nurses in Carrot River that would obligate the 
Pasquia Health District to pay them time and a half or double 
time if they came to work in Porcupine Plain, which is 
absolutely ridiculous. 
 
You’ve got nurses that have just been laid off — they have no 
jobs. But they, because of the various and sundry terms of the 
different agreements that are included in the terms of their 
separation, would cost the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Exactly. One of the members asked, where’s the common 
sense? A good question. Where is the common sense in that? 

How can you have nurses in one community terrified that 
someone is going to get sick and that they will not be able to 
provide the service working under the conditions that they do, 
and yet a number of nurses in a neighbouring community, who 
it is absolutely cost prohibitive for them to bring in and to be 
able to work in that hospital? It does make absolutely no sense 
at all. 
 
The other issue, and this relates back to ownership, and 
ownership . . . And I wish the members opposite could grasp the 
importance of that concept of ownership at the community 
level, because it is vital to the success of any policy, of any 
legislation, of any management strategy that one can even 
possibly think about — whatever it is that you do. 
 
And I think about the hospital in Hudson Bay. The Leader of 
the Opposition and I, during the election, we were able to tour 
the hospital and it’s a relatively new facility. It looks pretty 
good. But when you get into it and you talk to the staff, they 
shake their heads — they shake their heads. They can’t believe 
the way that this building was designed. There’s a phenomenal 
amount of wasted space in this building. The space that is 
needed for the important tasks isn’t sufficient. 
 
And when I asked the staff, I said did we . . . did anyone ask 
you for your input? Were you given any type of opportunity? 
As a result of this happy new situation that you have as a result 
of the Dorsey report, did anyone approach you? And did 
anyone, did anyone ask for your input into the design of this 
facility and how perhaps it could be made to work the best for 
you? Absolutely not — no one approached them. 
 
So what they have now is a huge amount of wasted space — 
great, big, long bowling alleys. But I think, more importantly, in 
terms of the staff themselves . . . I mean everyone’s very well 
aware that in a hospital setting, on occasion, you can become 
involved with behaviour difficulties and other issues and the 
safety, the safety of staff is paramount. 
 
It is important to consider the safety of staff when you’re 
designing and building these kinds of facilities. Staff cannot 
have blind spots where they can be surprised around a corner. 
Staff cannot have to leave stations where they have very 
important jobs to do and where they are observing people in 
critical situations. They can’t leave their stations to look at 
what’s happening elsewhere. They have to be able to have clear 
lines of sight. They have to be able to be aware of who’s 
coming towards them. They have to be aware of what their 
environment is around them. 
 
And when you talk to the staff in Hudson Bay, they’ll tell you 
that’s not the case. Because no one consulted with them. No 
one. No one allowed them any ownership in that process at all. 
 
Interestingly enough, the Dorsey report and the subsequent 
legislation and this amendment are analogous in a whole lot of 
ways around the issues of ownership, and some of the other 
issues that I talked about, to the proposed amalgamation of 
municipalities. 
 
These are a lot of the very same kinds of things that we’re going 
to deal with in that whole issue. And yet, somehow the 
recognition that ownership in all of these processes, the ability 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

to be able to self determine, the ability to be able to determine 
whether you want to join a union or not, the ability to determine 
which union you want to join — no one seems to respect that 
ability to be able to take ownership for those decisions. 
 
Those decisions can’t be decisions that are made arbitrarily on 
the part of the government just with the view, as my colleague 
says here, to control. The dependence that I think this 
government would like the communities and the staff within the 
health care system to have on them won’t succeed. It won’t 
succeed at all. 
 
Because if people don’t feel ownership, if they don’t feel that 
they are a part of the decision-making process, if they don’t 
have the right to self determine, then any effort, any initiative, 
is doomed to fail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think we’ve seen a really good example of that in the 
health care system over the course of the last number of years. 
We’ve seen it more and more. We’ve seen people lose that faith 
in their ability to be able to contribute to it. As they see the 
decision-making process moving farther and farther away from 
them, they are starting to feel like it’s more and more hopeless 
all the time for them to be able to self determine. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I guess it’s really interesting that somehow the members 
opposite are the government and they represent the party that 
. . . I mean for years we were told: these were the people — 
these were the people — that advocated for the underdog; these 
were the people with the great social policies; these were the 
people who were interested in making sure that everyone got 
their fair share. 
 
Well what a contradiction, Mr. Speaker, because the reality of 
what’s happening in health care today is completely different 
than that. The local ownership isn’t being respected. The local 
ability to be able to contribute is not being respected. 
 
I mean people need to have the ability to be able to feel like 
they’re part of something. And we see the issue around health 
care reform, and as I was indicating a little earlier, we’ve got all 
of the issue around municipal amalgamation now. I think that 
more and more we’re going to see people losing faith in the 
system as it exists. 
 
Some of this can’t be cured by a single Act. There isn’t any 
other kind of immediate individual sort of action that has to 
occur. With that, Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 
disappointed to hear the end of such a great speech. And I was 
really enjoying what the member from Carrot River had to say 
because I think he was really dealing with the issue of The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
1999. 
 
And I think he was touching on a lot of areas that I think I’ll be 
touching on as I go through my time remaining. And I really 
appreciate some of the things that he was saying. 

The SGEU usually is a staunch NDP . . . supporter of the NDP, 
which was upset in particular about the changes since many of 
its members had to move to other unions. In total it lost about 
3,500 members, which is really kind of ironic that that’s what 
the NDP was promoting. 
 
This was supposed to make labour negotiations more 
manageable. It is ironic then that we’re not . . . that we had so 
much labour strife in the health care file this last year. And we 
did have a lot of strife, and some of that came very close to 
home. 
 
With the latest strike that happened last year, the nurses walked 
out and were out for a number of, well, a number of days. I 
think they would have liked to have seen the process work 
through, but of course it didn’t work through because of this 
government forcing them back to work. Which was really kind 
of ironic from a government that is supposed to be labour 
friendly. And they forced them back to work. 
 
I had the opportunity to go to a couple of the rallies that were 
held around the province during that period. And the one I 
remember going to at the Regina Centre of the Arts where there 
was literally thousands of nurses stomping mad over the way 
this government was treating the labour and the nurses — the 
front-line workers, I guess. And it was just amazing to see the 
emotion that was involved in that room, and everything else. 
 
I didn’t see very many government members there. In fact I saw 
no government members there. The friends of labour, of course, 
but I didn’t see many of them there. 
 
I also had the opportunity of talking to a number down in the 
Weyburn area, girls that I know very well, that were having to 
walk the picket line. And they were forced back to work when 
they felt it was unnecessary. 
 
And you know, I really . . . It’s ironic again, like I said, that this 
party which is standing up for labour relations is forcing nurses, 
front-line workers, women, back to work when they were just 
trying to exercise their right which Bills like this is trying to 
promote. And it’s just amazing. 
 
In reality this Bill does little to calm labour problems because 
the government has done nothing to improve the working 
conditions. I’d like to talk on the working conditions for a 
second, because again this comes very close to home. Cindy, 
my wife, is a registered nurse and works in the operating room 
of the Regina General Hospital, had worked in the operating 
room of the Plains hospital. Remember that Plains hospital? I 
don’t know if any of you remember the Plains hospital. I sure 
remember the Plains hospital. 
 
I also remember the so-called Education minister chaining 
himself to the Plains . . . to the doors. Now he seems to be 
chained to the Premier. It’s kind of ironic. He’s into chains I 
guess. 
 
But the Plains hospital was a great hospital. It had a lot of 
things going for it, had a real good working atmosphere in it. 
And then along comes the government and closes them down, 
forces them over to the Regina General Hospital. And now 
things are getting better but it’s been a long, long period. 



April 13, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

There’s been a lot of trouble. 
 
And this is supposed to make things work better and the 
conditions better. Well I can tell you right now, that this has 
done nothing to improve conditions. You can juggle it. It’s a 
little bit like the budget where you take people from one . . . 
money from one spot, put it into the other and you say you’re 
doing wonderful things. And it’s just a juggling act, and that’s 
all that this did with the unions. It juggled the unions around 
and did absolutely nothing to improve working conditions on 
the hospital floors. 
 
You know, and the ironic part was is, the government comes 
along and says we’ve got to close this Plains hospital — not 
when the General is ready to go; oh, no, they wouldn’t think 
about waiting until the General was perfectly finished and ready 
to go — we’d have to close it by, remember the date, October 
31; had to have the Plains closed by October 31, had everything 
moved over to the General. 
 
Well you can imagine how working conditions improved, when 
working conditions improved when you got jackhammers 
operating right beside the operating room. Now that’s really 
improving conditions for the front-line workers. Not only do 
you have jackhammers working beside the operating room, you 
don’t have enough people in the operating room to man them 
properly. You know, and how is that ever going to, how is that 
ever going to improve the working conditions? 
 
We still hear from nurses and other health care workers 
constantly about the working conditions in their hospitals. And 
it’s not just in the Regina, it’s not just in the Regina General 
Hospital, but it’s in hospitals throughout the province. 
 
Well, I heard people mentioning earlier, and I, and I know this 
happens because it happens right here, right at our own home, 
where perhaps — whether it’s stress, whether it’s a flu, whether 
it’s kids or whatever — that maybe a day off would be good, 
and it’s really tough to get into work. But there is no way that 
that nurse — and my wife being no different than any of the 
other ones — would take that day off because you know that 
there’s not enough people there to fill the bill. And as soon as 
you take that day off, you put twice as much pressure and twice 
as much stress on everybody else in that hospital, you know. 
 
So this is supposed to, to ease that problem and improve 
working conditions, and it’s done absolutely nothing, nothing to 
do with that very thing. 
 
While reducing the number of bargaining units did make sense, 
the heavy-handed approach that this government took to 
accomplish was very typical. It’s typical with the 
heavy-handedness of the government. 
 
You know we’re talking about rural amalgamation and it’s, we 
know best. As government, we know best what’s for you and 
this is the way it’s going to be. Don’t, don’t worry about 
anything. We’re government and we know best. And I really 
question that whole philosophy. 
 
I know of a number of people obviously in the health care 
business, industry because as I mentioned earlier that my wife is 
a registered nurse, an operating room nurse. 

I know a number of friends that are LPNs, LPNs that really, 
really question the whole purpose of this process. They got put 
into a union where perhaps it had nothing in common with 
anybody else in that union. But that’s where they were going to 
be. It was just driven from top and they had so very little to say 
about it. 
 
Another area, if we are interested, if we are to attract health care 
professionals to Saskatchewan and especially nurses, we’re 
going to have to do a whole lot more than tinker with how the 
unions are operating and how the unions are organized. We 
need some things that attract nurses. 
 
And I look, you know, at that last year when the strike was on 
and how the NDP was spinning it that the nurses didn’t care. 
All it was — and I quote right from a Government of 
Saskatchewan full page article, full page ad bought by 
government, put through the whole province — it says, this 
dispute is about, this dispute is about money. Only about 
money. And that’s what they put in the papers. They advertised 
it from one end of the province to the other that this was purely 
about money. 
 
And you know when we got to the election on September 16, 
and we saw that, oh maybe they’re not their friends. When they 
took quite a kicking and almost a complete kicking, then maybe 
when they think about putting ads like this in — this dispute is 
all about money. Well believe me, it wasn’t all about money. 
 
Other quotes: 
 

Nursing union officials walk away from the contract offer 
that would have solved many of the workplace issues 
nurses say are important. 

 
I find that really, really hypocritical. That they would put a 
full-page ad in the newspaper and they would say that they 
walked away from the bargaining table because the nurses say 
these . . . they say they’re important. As if they don’t know 
what is and what isn’t important at the workplace. They’re the 
ones in the workplace. They’re the ones doing the work. I think 
they know what issues are important. 
 
And I don’t think they need the government going against them, 
taking full-page ads in every provincial paper accusing them as 
if they don’t know the issues in their workplace. And I think it’s 
an absolute shame. 
 
And so when you talk to the front-line workers and they say, 
what have you done, what has the government done to attract 
workers into this province, well I can say that I know of a 
number of nurses that came in — I know them personally — 
that came in from New Zealand, that I got to know through the 
Christmas season, through whether it was a Christmas party or 
just a house social, that I got to know. 
 
And they came in from New Zealand on good faith that they 
were going to help out in the system. But I’d be very interested 
to find out the statistics from the government opposite, from the 
members opposite: how many of those people are still here? 
How many people are there still here? 
 
Because, you know, I know of three out of the few that I met 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2000 

that have gone back simply because the agreements were not 
kept. They try and attract and they got them here, so for the next 
time they go try and recruit nurses from around the world, i.e., 
New Zealand, how many people are going to believe what the 
government said. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who trusts these guys? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Exactly. So you know, as far as attracting 
health care workers to the province, they’re a long ways from 
doing it because some of the articles they take out in full page 
newspapers, some of the agreements that they’ve made that 
they haven’t kept and sent them back to their homes. Of course 
when they go to recruit the next time, I’m sure the word gets 
around. 
 
It’s kind of like the term that I used to use an awful lot and it’s a 
term in traffic safety — ABS — anti-lock brake system. But in 
this case it’s anywhere but Saskatchewan — anywhere but 
Saskatchewan. And that’s not because of reshuffling the labour 
Act, it’s because of the heavy-handedness of the government 
opposite. 
 
I think what we need to do is let’s find out a way to make the 
jobs of those working in the health care tolerable once again. 
This will make it better for the workers but it will also make it 
better for the patients. I haven’t talked to a health care provider 
in the system that that isn’t their first and foremost priority — is 
to make the stay for the patient as nice and as comfortable as 
possible. But it’s impossible. They just can’t do it. 
 
You know, there’s a huge part of the nursing curriculum that 
talks about compassion and dealing with the patient. And they 
just don’t have the time to do it. And I know they don’t have the 
time to do it. They are running from one spot to the next spot 
and for the first, I would say, three and a half months at the 
Regina General Hospital they were running from one spot to the 
next spot just trying to find what spot they were looking for. 
Because it was a maze from one spot to another. And I think I’ll 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being 5 p.m. this House 
stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard.................................................................................................................................................................................................. 695 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 695 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................... 695 
  Wall...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 695 
  Bakken................................................................................................................................................................................................. 695 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................696 
  McMorris ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 696 
  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 696 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 696 
  Wiberg................................................................................................................................................................................................. 696 
  Hart...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 696 
  Allchurch............................................................................................................................................................................................. 696 
  Stewart ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 696 
  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 697 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................697 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................697 
  Melenchuk........................................................................................................................................................................................... 697 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................697 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................697 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 717 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park 
  Hermanson.......................................................................................................................................................................................... 698 
 Good News In Economic Statistics 
  Harper ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 698 
 Report of Children’s Advocate 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................698 
 International Special Librarians Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................698 
 Congratulations to Naicam Army Cadet Corps Girls’ Biathlon Team 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................699 
 National Volunteer Week 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................699 
 Samuel McLeod Legacy Award 
  Wiberg................................................................................................................................................................................................. 699 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Children’s Advocate’s Report 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................... 701 
 Municipal Amalgamation 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
 Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 232 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2000 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 Bill No. 27 — The Certified Management Accountants Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 22 — The Local Improvements Amendment Act, 2000 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Bill No. 23 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2000 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................705 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................706 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................706 
 Bill No. 18 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................710 
 Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................712 
 Bill No. 3 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 
  Bakken.................................................................................................................................................................................................716 
  Kwiatkowski .......................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  McMorris ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
 
 


