





























































Hansard: April 27, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 881 
 April 27, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
present a petition to this House opposed to forced consolidation 
of municipalities, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the forced consolidation of municipalities. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by the residents of Eastend 
including, I might add, a former candidate for the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Party in the election of several years ago. 
 
I so do present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a 
petition dealing with the government’s ill thought-out budget, 
and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 
 

And this is signed by the good people from Debden, Canwood, 
and that part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today against forced municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the unfairness of the PST 
(provincial sales tax) on used vehicles. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
thereby providing those dealers the opportunity to pass the 
savings on to their customers. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents per litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures are from Unity, Meadow Lake, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand today to 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned 
about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Estevan, Lampman, and North 
Portal. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province who are upset 
with the fact that there is no tax exemption on used vehicles. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
the savings to their customers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is from Saskatoon and area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition concerning lack of proper health care in Blaine Lake 
and area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 
permanent physician with consistent hours and days. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
reduce fuel tax. The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal, provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents 
a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Constituents . . . petitioners have signed from the towns of 
Bladworth and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition on the reduction of fuel costs. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly pray. 
 

The petitioners are from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to the private sale exemption of $3,000. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 
customers of this province whether they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 

The signatures are from Swift Current, from Carlyle, and from 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to the fuel tax. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of Prince 
Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned about the high taxes on 
fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 

governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens of Nipawin 
and Love. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding the grandfathering of dealers’ used car 
inventories. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day 
therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 
savings to their customers. 
 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Wynyard and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too to 
present a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

The petition is signed by the good citizens of Arborfield, 
Nipawin and Carrot River, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To provide a $3,000 exemption of the PST for dealers; and 
 
To grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, as Chair of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures, presents the first report of 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and appointed Mr. 
Kowalsky as Vice-Chair. 

 
Your committee considered its terms of reference as well 
as proposals from the government and opposition caucuses 
with respect to the rules and procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
A subcommittee on agenda and procedure comprising of 
Mr. Speaker as Chair, together with Mr. Kowalsky and Mr. 
D’Autremont, was appointed by your committee to 
establish a business agenda for subsequent meetings. 

 
In consideration of proposals for changes to rules and 
practices, your committee considered certain issues a 
priority and makes the following recommendations for 
immediate implementation: 

 
Use of laptop computers in the Legislative Assembly. Your 
committee recommends that the use of laptop computers be 
allowed in the Legislative Chamber subject to the 
following restrictions as interpreted by the Chair: 
 
(a) they must operate silently; 
(b) they must not be used by the member who has the floor 
or is involved in the exchange of remarks. 

 
Secondly, substitution of membership of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. Your committee 
recommends that rule 94(4) the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan be amended to 
add the words the “Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts” to the list of committees authorized to allow 
substitution of membership. 

 
And finally, beverages in the Legislative Assembly. Your 
committee recommends that non-alcoholic beverages be 
permissible in the Chamber at all times in discreet 
containers as approved by the Speaker. 

 
It is your committee’s intention to monitor these changes 
to the rules and practices if implemented. It is also your 
committee’s intention to continue meeting and to prepare a 
substantive report at the beginning of the next session of 
this twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
Signed Hon. Ron Osika, Speaker and Chair of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Further to that report, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the modifications and amendments to the practices of 

the Assembly with respect to the use of laptop computers 
and beverages in the Legislative Assembly, as 
recommended in the first report of the Special Committee 
On Rules and Procedures, be approved and adopted to 
come into effect immediately. 
 

And further, 
 

That with respect to the substitution of membership for the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, the following 
rule be substituted for that of rule 94(4); and 94(4) reads: 
 
That the membership on the Standing Committees on 
Non-controversial Bills, on Crown Corporations, on 
Constitutional Affairs, and on Public Accounts, other than 
that of the Chair, shall be transferable by written notice 
signed by the original member and filed with the Chair of 
the Committee. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and to the members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce in your gallery, Rob and Carla Zadorozniak and their 
three sons Ryan, Dylan, and Brennan. The Zadorozniaks are 
from Foam Lake and they’re here to witness the proceedings 
and I’d ask all the members to welcome them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly two special guests seated 
in the west gallery. One a good friend, a constituent, Warren 
McCall. Warren would you stand up and be recognized, past 
president of the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats. 
 
As well, Adam Angus who is employed for one of our MPs 
(Member of Parliament), popular MP, Lorne Nystrom in 
Ottawa. He is the son of Iain Angus, a former Member of 
Parliament for Thunder Bay from 1984 to ’93. I want all 
members to join with me in welcoming both of our friends here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
very special people in my life that are seated in your gallery. 
I’m pleased my family could join me for a couple of days in 
Regina during the Easter break. 
 
And please join me in welcoming my wife Cindy, daughters 
Lacey, Alexandra, son Marshall, and Lacey’s friend Mallory 
Antonenko. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly seated in 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

your gallery, some visitors from Dalmeny and they are seated 
beside my assistant Marv Schultz and they are visiting. It’s Mr. 
Randy Bitner and his daughter Raelyn. And the Bitners are 
visiting the city with Randy’s wife, Roxanne, who is attending 
the spring council of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 
And all members please join with me in welcoming the Bitners 
to the Assembly this morning . . . or this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming our two guests 
seated in the west gallery. I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for a 
period of nearly three years of being a colleague of Warren’s in 
the same operation, having worked in Lorne Nystrom’s office, 
and I want to welcome Angus from Ottawa down here, and I 
hope he enjoys visit to Regina, the visit to Saskatchewan, and 
visit to this legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is rumoured that when I left Lorne 
Nystrom’s office to take my seat here in this House that the IQ 
(intelligence quotient) level in both operations increased 
significantly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to the Assembly, Martin Boser, who is sitting in your 
gallery. Martin Boser has showed a great interest in politics for 
a number of years. One of the thousands of young 
Saskatchewan people who have supported the Saskatchewan 
Party, he was our candidate in the Saskatoon Idylwyld riding, 
and did extremely well in the last provincial election, has laid 
the groundwork to win that riding in the next election. 
 
Currently Martin is working in Lloydminster but he’s here in 
the Assembly with us today and let’s give him a round, warm 
welcome to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 
today behind the bar is a gentleman whom all of us know very 
well and have very fond and warm regard for, Mr. Walter Jess, 
former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Redberry. Walter is a gentleman who survived a tractor accident 
and survived eight years in the NDP caucus, and I ask all 
members to warmly welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Increase to Rail Transportation Rates 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the crow 
has finally come home to roost. As the member from 
Kindersley is fond of saying, there are benefits to losing the 
Crow benefit. Well today we learned what one of those benefits 
is. 
 
Unfortunately, the benefit does not go to prairie farmers. No, 
Mr. Speaker, it goes to the long suffering railway companies. 

The Canadian Transportation Agency has just announced a four 
and one-half per cent increase in the maximum rail rates for the 
2000-2001 crop year, right after the railway companies 
announced record profits. 
 
This is Ottawa’s idea of the quote, “long-awaited reforms to the 
Western grain transportation system.” With that kind of reform, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we could wait a little longer. 
 
CTA (Canadian Transportation Agency) says that rate increase 
is necessary because of high fuel prices — just as the fuel prices 
are coming down. This rate increase comes at a time when the 
railroads have passed on to grain producers only one-half of the 
$9 per tonne in savings from rate deregulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers cannot bear a four and 
one-half per cent increase to rail rates. They need an 18 per cent 
decrease. Consequently, before orders of the day, government 
members will be moving a motion for an emergency debate 
urging that the federal government stop this totally uncalled-for 
freight rate increase. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
acknowledge today that Redberry Lake is now part of the 
UNESCO(United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
Organization) Biosphere Reserves. At the recent meeting in 
January of this year in Paris, France, the Bureau of International 
Co-ordinating Council of UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere 
Programme approved Redberry Lake as one of the 11 
worldwide new biosphere reserves. 
 
The people of Hafford, Saskatchewan and the people of 
Redberry Lake RM (rural municipality) are to be congratulated 
for their achievement. A news release from the Man and the 
Biosphere Secretariat reads: 
 

Nature Saskatchewan’s community conservation plan for 
Redberry Lake and its watershed is now complete. The 
plan complements the actions outlined under the 
Biosphere Reserve goals, with a vision “. . . to implement 
management strategies and infrastructures to advance 
(our) conservation of birds through maintaining an 
ecosystem that nurtures the quality of life for its people 
and its wildlife together. 

 
Redberry Lake previously received international recognition as 
a globally significant Important Bird Area joining Bird Life 
International’s global network of IBA (important bird areas) 
sites. The Canadian Important Bird Areas campaign is part of 
global initiative of Bird Life International and its partners to 
protect the critical areas of bird habitat worldwide. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the people in the Redberry Lake area for 
their achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

Training for Forestry Jobs 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to bring to the 
attention of this Assembly more good news for northern 
Saskatchewan coming from our government’s recent budget. 
 
A new education and training strategy will allow Saskatchewan 
workers, especially northern people and northerners to take 
advantage of job opportunities in the provincial forest, in the 
North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are big changes going on in the forest industry. We are 
applying technology, Mr. Speaker, to grow forest, to harvest 
forest, and to do value added. And all of these require attention 
to increased skills and safety procedures. 
 
The $1 million training initiative will help provide trained 
workers to meet the needs of the expanding forest industry in 
the province. Training is being planned and delivered in 
partnership with industry, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), regional colleges, 
Aboriginal institutions, and others. 
 
This forestry initiative is an important example of this 
government’s commitment to provide jobs and skill training 
that benefit Saskatchewan people. This also supports the goals 
of the province’s northern strategy, diversifying the northern 
economy with the full participation of northern people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Junior Hockey Player Receives Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
am pleased to recognize Prestin Ryan a member of the Estevan 
Bruins hockey club. Prestin is 19 years of age and hails from 
Arcola. Last season with the Bruins, Prestin helped lead the 
team to its first SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) 
title in over 14 years and then helped to lead them to the 
ANAVET Cup championships where they defeated the 
Manitoba representative from OCN. 
 
From there it was on to the Royal Bank Cup championships in 
Yorkton. However, Mr. Speaker, Prestin saved his best for this 
season. He was again named to the SJHL all-star team and 
during the Christmas break he was a member of the SJHL 
Viking Cup all-star team at an international tournament in 
Camrose, Alberta. Prestin was recognized by his peers, league 
coaches, and the media as the SJHL all-league first team all 
star. 
 
This past weekend in Humboldt at the first ever awards banquet 
he was awarded the SJHL’s top defenceman. Prestin served as 
assistant captain for the Bruins during this past season. If the 
past is any indication of Prestin’s potential, look for him to rise 
to the top in any of his future endeavours. 
 
Prestin is billeted with my CA (constituency assistant) and her 
husband, Shelley and Andy Schroeder of Estevan. So I 
congratulate Prestin. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pak-Wel Produce Buys Potato Plant 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 
minister responsible for Sask Water turned over the keys for the 
Lucky Lake potato plant to Pak-Wel Produce. Today’s great 
news for Lucky Lake and area is more than ceremony — there’s 
more than 30 jobs involved. It’s another sign, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan’s potato industry has in fact rebounded. 
 
The future is bright thanks to many people who never gave up. 
The future is bright because the minister responsible for Sask 
Water believed in rural economic development and in the 
people of Lucky Lake and the Beechy area. The province 
invested in these potato storage facilities with these very people 
in mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The official opposition has criticized the government for 
helping to develop the potato industry. There have been some 
difficult choices made that have not always enjoyed popularity, 
but economic development is yet to be perfected. 
 
I am very proud, Mr. Speaker, of our Premier, the minister 
responsible for Sask Water, and everyone who stood by the 
people of the Lucky Lake and Beechy area. Today’s 30-plus 
jobs are great economic development news in the Leader of the 
Opposition’s constituency and over his repeated objections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in rural Saskatchewan. 
We’re there every day helping to make it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Book Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
remind my colleagues that April 27 has been designated Canada 
Book Day. It is a day when we are reminded of and encouraged 
to read some of the wonderful literary accomplishments of 
Canadian authors. 
 
And indeed there have been many accomplishments. Canadian 
authors are some of the most critically acclaimed in the world. 
With authors such as Margaret Laurence, Margaret Atwood, 
and Michael Ondaatje, who would not agree that Canadian 
authors are incredibly gifted at their craft? 
 
Among our country’s best are authors from Saskatchewan. 
Maria Campbell’s work has become a mainstay of Canadian 
literature. Saskatoon’s Guy Vanderhaeghe has received 
international attention for The Englishman’s Boy. And as 
mentioned a few weeks ago, Regina’s own Gail Bowen has had 
her mystery novels turned into television movies. The sheer 
number of excellent authors speaks to the richness of Canadian 
culture. 
 
But besides being a day for celebrating the incredible depth of 
Canadian literature, National Book Day is a day to celebrate the 
importance and the joy of reading. The ability to read is often 
taken for granted, and we must remember that it is one of the 
greatest educational tools at our disposal. It is one of the best 
ways to learn about history, human nature, and the world 
around us. 
 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

So on this year’s Canada Book Day, I encourage you to 
celebrate Canadian authors and to celebrate reading. Buy a 
book, and buy Canadian, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Sciences Month 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For years 
Saskatchewan has been a leader in agricultural technology and 
research. This international reputation is very well deserved. 
Our new innovation, research, and ideas are influencing 
agriculture around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is why it pleases me that the Deputy Premier, 
the Minister of Agriculture, has proclaimed April Agricultural 
Sciences Month in Saskatchewan. Research in the agricultural 
sciences area continues to be the foundation for Saskatchewan’s 
success in agriculture. 
 
To ensure continued research and achievements in agricultural 
sciences, I am pleased to say that the Saskatchewan Agriculture 
Development Fund has invested another $3.1 million in 41 
research projects. Projects include the mapping of native prairie 
plants by the Saskatchewan Native Plant Society, and the 
development of a needle-less vaccine for pigs by the Veterinary 
Infectious Disease Organization. 
 
The largest amount of funding for this round of projects went to 
the department of plant sciences at the College of Agriculture. 
The almost $800,000 will fund a number of projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the variety of projects mentioned, we can be 
assured that Saskatchewan will continue to be an international 
leader in agriculture. The innovation of our researchers and the 
dedication of the ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) to 
research bodes well for the future of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Premier’s Plans for the Future 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, 
well, well, well, Mr. Premier. We knew it was going bad for the 
NDP, but we didn’t know it was going this bad. The headline in 
today’s paper says the Premier is considering a move to the 
Liberals. 
 
Mr. Premier, has it really come to this? Are you thinking of 
abandoning ship and bailing in with the Liberals? Has your six 
months in bed with the Liberals really had that much of an 
affect on you? 
 
Mr. Premier, I know it’s looking pretty grim over there, but are 
you really thinking of joining the Liberals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that unlike 
the Leader of the Official Opposition in this Legislative 

Assembly, at least I’m being written about in a somewhat 
positive fashion compared to the absolute ignoring of him and 
his Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But for over 20 years now, and I might add prior to the 1999 
provincial election, thanks to the Saskatchewan Party, I think at 
some point or other I was going to be the Lieutenant Governor 
of this province, the Governor General of Canada, a senator, a 
diplomat, an ambassador, a studier into medicare. And now I 
have a new list which is to be a federal Liberal. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, here I am, Leader of the 
NDP and Premier of the government today, and I continue to do 
this job and I intend to continue this job. And it gives me a great 
deal of satisfaction, Mr. Speaker, to be able to say that I have 
outlasted Conrad Black in my job . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, I predict I’ll outlast 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Actually, 
Mr. Premier, we’re very glad to hear that you’re sticking 
around. We want you to lead the NDP into the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we’d actually like to see this 
election sooner rather than later. The Premier says that he’s 
going to stay on as long as the people of Saskatchewan want 
him to. But I’d say the Premier’s logic is a little flawed. 
Because about two-thirds of the voters told him in the last 
election they didn’t want him to stay on any longer. 
 
And I’m sure he’s seen the polls since then and they’re not 
getting any better are they, Mr. Premier. So, Mr. Premier, we 
want you to lead the NDP into the next election. We just don’t 
want you to get cold feet and go past four years like you did 
prior to the last election. 
 
Mr. Premier, after question period, after question period I will 
be moving a private members’ Bill to make sure you don’t drag 
your term past four years again. Will you support this Bill? Will 
you really be a democrat and support my private members’ 
Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am not only a 
democrat but I am a New Democrat. And I think in both 
philosophic terms and in other historic terms in Canada, it’s 
probably a lot fresher than the Leader of the Opposition 
represents, who I might add, while being mildly critical or at 
least humorous in an attempt to be humorous about this story, 
speculative story about switching, has himself switched 
political parties, from the Reform Party to the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
So when he tenders his Bill, let him tender his Bill and allow 
the legislature to dispose of it. And I can tell you, after 33 and 
34 years of fighting for the best interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Canada, I think, immodestly 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

speaking, trying to do something which we all try to do to 
benefit the society, my record stands pretty clear. I don’t think I 
need to explain it to him any further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Issues 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, we all know the 
problems people are having with the province’s health care 
system. Our office receives call after call and letter after letter 
from people facing long waiting times from surgery, from 
people wondering whether treatment or a drug is covered by 
Saskatchewan Health, people complaining about the system in 
general, and people not getting a response to the written 
concerns from their health district or from your office. 
 
And as you know, your office gets these calls I’m sure, and 
these letters as well, and they go largely unanswered. 
 
Madam Minister, I will be introducing today an Act of 
legislation entitled the health ombudsman Act, legislation that 
would give people with concerns about the health system in this 
province, an avenue for expressing their concerns and a way of 
holding the system accountable to the people of this province. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you: will you be supporting this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, obviously before I could indicate the 
government’s intent in terms of the legislation, we’d want to see 
the legislation. 
 
I can tell the member that my office and the Associate Minister 
of Health’s office receive literally hundreds of calls each day as 
well as, you know, dozens and dozens of letters. And we know 
that health districts receive that kind of feedback as well 
because they have quality of care coordinators in each of the 
health districts. 
 
We try to respond as quickly as we can. Oftentimes, we need to 
seek information from the health providers or the health 
districts or the departments, but we try and be as responsive as 
humanly possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
April 11, young Ryan Zadorozniak had his adenoids and tonsils 
removed at Yorkton health centre. The procedure went as usual, 
however, two days after Ryan had been sent home, his recovery 
was not progressing and he was having a great deal of difficulty 
breathing. He returned to the doctor’s office and then the 
emergency ward where they suctioned his nose to remove any 
possible blood clots. Again, he was sent home and told to take 
ibuprofen. 
 
But Ryan continued to struggle breathing and spent most of his 
time sleeping until two days later when he coughed up a ball of 

gauze which had obviously been left in him during the surgery. 
Madam Minister, his family has expressed their concerns to 
your office, to the Premier’s office, the district health board and 
many other officials, and they’ve received no response. 
 
Madam Minister, a health ombudsman would give this family 
somewhere to turn to make sure that the system is held 
accountable to the people that it’s supposed to serve. Will you 
support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
extremely sorry to hear about Ryan’s experience with his 
surgery. We do understand that he is feeling better. 
 
I did receive a copy of a letter. I understand that the letter was 
sent to many different agencies as well as individuals. The 
district, the East Central Health District, received a copy of the 
complaint on April 19 and I understand that they’re following 
up on the complaint. 
 
I would say this, that there is a professional organization that 
governs physician services and that’s the college of physicians 
and surgeons. I would suggest that a formal complaint could be 
left . . . or sent to the college — I know the letter has been sent 
— and the college could conduct a formal investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister. Madam Minister, you don’t seem to understand 
that ordinary people, real people in this province, do not have 
all the information available to them as to where they should 
turn when this type of event happens. These people responded 
as appropriately as they could, and what they need is a 
single-desk place where their concerns can be addressed. 
 
Hence our call for a health care ombudsman — someone who is 
beyond politics, who isn’t going to an apologist for the medical 
profession or the health districts or for the department; someone 
that is accountable to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you meet with the Zadorozniaks, and will 
you apologize and will you assure them that you will seriously 
consider the implementation of a health care ombudsman in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, or two days 
ago, the Canada health information was released to this country, 
the CIHI (Canadian Institute for Health Information) information. 
And what was so phenomenal about the information is that 
Canada and this province of Saskatchewan has the finest 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care system in the 
entire globe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, why is that? That is 
because in 1962 the people of this . . . 
 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And Mr. Speaker, why is that? It is 
because in 1962 the people of this province decided to bring in 
a publicly funded medicare in this province. And then the 
Liberal government of the late 1960’s decided to fund . . . to 
assist the provinces in funding health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when public surveys are taken, the vast majority 
of people who actually use the health system are pleased with 
the health system. Mr. Speaker, there are occasions, like in 
anything, there are occasions when the system does not meet 
our expectations and does not live up to the quality of care that 
we expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are regulatory bodies that investigate various 
professions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Madam 
Minister, the Canadian Institute of Health Information that 
released its report yesterday also identified many problems in 
the system. One of the big problems in the system that was 
identified is that there’s a lack of information about the 
effectiveness of procedures and processes in the system. 
 
One of the reports co-authors, Steven Lewis of Saskatoon, says 
he doubts putting more money into the system will 
automatically translate into better health status. But, Madam 
Minister, you’ve been calling on the federal government to put 
more money into the system incessantly. 
 
In light of this report which indicates that a more thorough 
investigation is needed and that Steven Lewis’s comments that 
more money isn’t automatically the answer, isn’t it time that 
you accepted the Sask Party’s recommendation for an audit of 
the system and do a complete review of the Saskatchewan 
health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is well known that 
items like a job, like access to a good quality education, good 
housing, water and sewer, a decent environment, and health 
services, all add to life expectancy. And that our ability to 
provide those public services enhance our ability to provide 
good health services to the people that we all serve in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true that I have been calling on the federal 
government to share in the cost of our publicly funded health 
care system. And the reason, Mr. Speaker, is that I do not want 
ever to see this country move to the kinds of things we’re 
witnessing in Alberta with Bill 11 where they’re going to allow 
private surgical clinics and overnight stays in that province. 
 
I know the members over there support that from a policy point 
of view, but our party and our coalition government does not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

the minister is aware, the Saskatchewan Party has repeatedly 
been calling for an audit of the health care system. The minister, 
you yourself have been dropping hints that a complete review is 
needed. And the Premier has said that if the federal government 
doesn't undertake a review nationally, then we should do one on 
our own here. 
 
You now have a national report that indicates more information 
is necessary to pinpoint the strengths and weakness of the 
system in Saskatchewan and across the country. You have one 
of the authors of this report saying that more money isn’t 
automatically the answer. 
 
What more do we need, Madam Minister? Will you commit 
today, Madam Minister, to discuss with the Saskatchewan 
Party, the official opposition, the terms of references that are 
needed to have a complete review of the health care system in 
Saskatchewan? And will you commit to this review today 
instead of dropping hints about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
answer this question on behalf of the government because the 
member alluded in his question to the Minister of Health and to 
myself. 
 
The government has, as the Minister of Health has very 
accurately described, been advocating a two- or three-part 
strategy. And let me outline this to the hon. member. 
 
First of all, money is a very important factor and we have been 
arguing that there needs to be more money from Ottawa to the 
provinces. In that regard, all the provinces remain united. 
 
We do not believe, however, that money alone is the answer to 
the 21st century health care system. We do not believe that it is 
the answer alone, nor is other provisions of health care the 
answer alone. We need to take a look at the 21st century future 
of health care to make sure that it’s publicly administered, that 
it is owned by the people of Saskatchewan and Canada, that it is 
not privatized. 
 
Now what the hon. member opposite there says, do it. What he 
wants is us to do the Saskatchewan Party thing . . . is a 
Texas-style audit or an Alberta Bill 11. And we’re not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Freight Rate Increases 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Transportation this afternoon. Mr. Minister, your Premier’s new 
party, the federal Liberals, have just slapped farmers in the face 
one more time. 
 
This time it amounts to a 4.5 per cent increase in freight rates. 
That’s a $25 million attack on Saskatchewan farm families. 
And that came just days after CN (Canadian National) Rail 
announced a 41 per cent increase in their profits. Now, Mr. 
Minister, as you know, this is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Immediately after question period today, the Saskatchewan 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

Party will move an emergency motion calling on Ottawa to 
rollback this unfair cash grab. Mr. Minister, will you support 
this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, as minister 
responsible, we also intend on moving a motion in that regard. 
 
But let me say that the province of Saskatchewan has been 
calling for some length of time for a full review of the Canadian 
Transportation Agency. And also the Canadian Transportation 
Agency’s own studies have shown that there are certainly 
excessive revenues to the railway. So we’re extremely 
disappointed, along with the member, that the 4.5 per cent 
increase comes at a time that precedes any ruling around the 
Canadian Transportation Agency. 
 
So obviously we agree on this specific point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday the member for Thunder Creek pointed out that your 
government was actually supposed to be doing more to deal 
with input costs. The Throne Speech said, and I quote: 
 

My government will work with producers and suppliers to 
find ways to reduce the high input costs facing . . . 
 
We will introduce a farm input costs monitoring program. 

 
Mr. Minister, where is this program? What steps have you taken 
to reduce input costs as was promised in your Throne Speech? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as of yesterday a 
special adviser as we have announced in terms of giving us 
assistance, especially in the area of international trade, has been 
announced. You will know that a $25 million reduction in 
property tax was announced. 
 
We also now have no fuel tax — no fuel tax for farm fuels used 
on farm this year. And it continues on with a new forage 
program for next year that has been announced. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, when you include the 
elimination of all fuel tax for farmers, a tax reduction on 
property tax of $25 million, the announcement that we are now 
looking in the area of monitoring and making sure that the 
productivity of farmers and the competitiveness is in place, that 
farmers are, I think, in a better position to face the big problems 
that farmers across Canada have with input costs here as well as 
in other provinces across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
government has not done enough to reduce input costs. And 
now we see a $25 million increase in freight rates. Now this 
single increase by itself completely wipes out the modest 
property tax relief that was indicated in this year’s budget. 

Mr. Minister, your Throne Speech promised to find ways to 
reduce farm input costs. You promised to introduce a farm 
inputs monitoring program, yet we see no evidence that you 
have done that. Instead we get hit with a $25 million freight rate 
increase and that’s on top of the expanded PST, on top of the 
utility rate hikes that we have seen, on top of the increases now 
to Crown grazing leases. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about farm input costs, 
and why have you not kept your promise made in the Throne 
Speech? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I wish to answer 
this question on behalf of the government by reiterating, as I did 
with the Minister of Health, what the Deputy Premier has just 
told the members opposite. 
 
The commitment is to monitor. And we are in fact working 
toward establishing the appropriate monitoring of the input 
costs. But the specific issue which prompts this question is 
going to be the subject of an emergency debate, either of our 
resolution or your resolution. 
 
This increase of 4.6 per cent on the freight rates is a decision 
taken by an agency of the federal government. This agency’s 
decision is wrong. The farmers cannot afford it. They should 
not be asked to pay for it. And we’re going to call for — during 
the course of the debate — that the federal cabinet in Ottawa, as 
it has the power to do, overrule immediately and revoke that 4.6 
per cent. 
 
Let’s keep our eye on the ball on today’s crisis of the many 
crises which face farmers. And that is to roll back this unfair, 
usurious gouging of freight rates by the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Information Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister responsible for the Land 
Information Services Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, on January 10, you announced the formation of 
another Crown Corporation. This one was set up by the NDP to 
automate the land titles system in Saskatchewan. When the 
announcement was made, the NDP said a Crown corporation 
was the most efficient way to handle land titles. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is simple. How much money has the 
NDP spent to date establishing this new Crown corporation, the 
Land Information Services Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
that the computerized land titles system that Saskatchewan has 
been developing, first within the Department of Justice, and 
then as the member properly points out through a new Crown 
corporation, is amongst the most advanced systems in not only 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, but the world. 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

And this system is a system which is of interest to those from 
all across the world. We had last week, we had last week 
members from Albania, funded by USA (United States of 
America), looking at our personal property registry, another 
world-leading computerized infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, good news 
for the residents of Saskatchewan; and the member opposite 
should be proud of the development that has taken place, first in 
the Department of Justice and then in this Crown corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
has told us what he considers good news; however, he missed 
the question. The question asked how much his government has 
spent. And I’ll give him an opportunity to answer that in a 
minute. So let’s get that first of all. We want to know how much 
you’ve spent, not your personal point of view on the issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s understandable that the government would be 
looking for a better way of handling land titles. The Regina 
Chamber of Commerce has complained for a long time about a 
huge backlog in that system. According to the chamber, it takes 
two days to register in Alberta, three weeks in Saskatchewan. 
The chamber says this delay adds significant cost and makes 
Saskatchewan companies less competitive. 
 
Again, Mr. Minister, how much money has the NDP 
government spent to date on the new Land Information Services 
Corporation? When will that system be in place? And how 
much more money do you expect to spend before it’s fully 
implemented? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, it is 
important that the member mentions Alberta, because Alberta 
actually — as the member may know, Mr. Speaker — is 
looking at the very system that we have developed for adoption 
in its system, as are other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have, Mr. Speaker, a world-class process here that we 
have developed by expertise within the province. Mr. Speaker, 
the implementation date begins in Moose Jaw next year. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s on schedule. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I should say it’s 
ahead of schedule and ahead of budget. That’s what the member 
should be interested in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve been 
told it’s a world-class operation, but it doesn’t work yet. Then 
we asked how much it was going to cost and he hid behind 
Alberta. Next thing you know, he’s going to hide behind Texas. 
 
Mr. Minister, we need to know what the cost of that is going to 
be. And again we’ll repeat that: how much money has the NDP 
government spent to date on that new system? And how much 
more money do you expect to spend before it’s operational? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me state again that 
this is an institution, a service, a facility that everyone in the 
province should be proud of, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
something that is being looked at by everyone across . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, far from hiding behind 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, it is Alberta which is looking at our 
system to adopt theirs. That tells you how good it is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the computerized 
land title system is to be implemented . . . it will be in place 
next year. It will, Mr. Speaker, speed up the process of 
transferring property. It is a system, Mr. Speaker, which is 
supported by the bar society, Mr. Speaker, the lawyers in 
Saskatchewan, and by the real estate profession, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is good news for Saskatchewan. It’s time to recognize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 203  The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move first reading of Bill No. 203, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 210  The Health Ombudsman Act 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 210, The Health Ombudsman Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule no. 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the minister kindly explain the reason 
and the urgency for the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Certainly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 
response to yesterday’s announcement by the Canadian 
Transportation Agency, and certainly the terrible grain 
transportation service provided to prairie farmers in the winter 
of 1997, the Saskatchewan government demanded an entire 
review of the grain handling and transportation system being 
undertaken. 
 
The call for a review was wholly supported by the four Western 
provinces and Justice Willard Estey was appointed to conduct 
that review, Mr. Speaker. And in light of yesterday’s ruling, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the Canadian Transportation Agency 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

and the 4.5 per cent increase, I would seek leave to move a 
motion in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Freight Rate Increase 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we need the federal grain 
transportation review legislation now and we’ve been pressing 
the federal government for this for some time. We all remember 
the winter of 1996-97 where the grain handling and 
transportation system failed us. We saw a record snowfall and 
considerable problems moving grain. The ports were backed up, 
grain was sitting in the bins forever, and this cost farmers some 
$60 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Premier played a key role in getting the whole review 
process going on grain handling and transportation so that 
would not happen again, Mr. Speaker. We had the support of 
the Western provinces and the stakeholder groups — SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), Keystone 
Agricultural Producers, the Wild Rose Agricultural Producers 
— they were all on board then. And they’re on board now too, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an important issue to Saskatchewan. We ship nearly 20 
million tonnes of grain and grain products out of Saskatchewan 
each and every year. That costs producers some $700 million a 
year in freight rates. 
 
Now we’re talking about another increase — another 4.5 per 
cent. That could be as much as $25 million or about $1.45 per 
tonne. Farmers cannot afford another increase, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a farm crisis out here on the Prairies but Ottawa just 
does not seem to understand. 
 
This increase announced by the Canadian Transportation 
Agency does not have to be implemented. There are options 
that the federal government could consider. They can suspend 
the CTA recommended increase altogether, or they can accept 
the recommended increase but they could assume the increase 
and pay the railways directly. They’ve done that before back in 
the late ’80s. 
 
The last option, which is what we’ve long been calling for, is 
that the federal government can introduce its entire grain 
transportation reform package to benefit farmers. This package 
must include an immediate adjustment in freight rates to 
account for railway productivity savings over the past eight 
years and address the mechanism to ensure sharing of future 
productivity savings; an effective role for the Wheat Board 
which supports its marketing function, including a role in the 
transportation of grain, in mechanisms that enhance 
competition, such as open access. 
 
The concept of open access would enable a bona fide railway to 
use the railway tracks of any other railway to transport its 
products. We feel this will enhance competition and benefit 
shippers. 

And of course we need an improved branch line abandonment 
process. This would enable the development of short-line 
railways where a viable operation can be sustained. Without 
this improved process, we will continue to see more elevator 
closures and rail-line abandonment because the two really do go 
hand in hand. 
 
And that will mean more grain on the road instead of on the 
rail, and I don’t have to tell you that our highways cannot 
endure this kind of traffic, Mr. Speaker. The roads are already 
taking a terrible beating and we are hard-pressed to maintain 
them in the way that we would like to. 
 
(1430) 
 
The federal government has indicated cost reductions in the 
neighbourhood of 12 to 18 per cent would be part of any reform 
package. That comes to about $150 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re asking the federal government to move on that 
immediately so that the 4.5 per cent increase will not be felt by 
farmers come August 1. The position of the Prairie provinces 
has always been that any changes to the system must benefit 
producers first. 
 
That’s what we’re pressing for in the Estey process and again in 
the Kroeger process. It’s now up to the federal government to 
implement the reform package to benefit farmers. The 4.5 per 
cent increase is a consequence of the federal government not 
acting on the grain reform package. This is not acceptable. 
 
I have written the Hon. David Collenette, Minister of Transport, 
this morning, asking for the federal government to immediately 
implement the western grain transportation reform package. At 
the same time the Canadian Transportation Agency is 
recommending a 4.5 per cent increase, there are 
recommendations before the federal government to reduce the 
rates by $150 million. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to call on the House for its 
unanimous support of our motion requesting the federal 
government to immediately suspend the April 26, 4.5 per cent 
rate increase announced by the Canadian Transportation 
Agency. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move, seconded by 
the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 
immediately suspend the April 26, 4.5 per cent freight rate 
increase announced by the Canadian Transportation 
Agency. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The decision 
announced by the Canadian Transport Agency earlier this week 
allowing a maximum four and a half per cent increase in rail 
freight rates for the upcoming crop year is a complete and total 
travesty. 
 
Once again Saskatchewan farmers are being compelled to bear 
the burden of costs which are beyond their control with no 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

appeal and no recourse. Saskatchewan’s farmers are once again 
the victims of an antiquated system filled with regulatory 
overkill and numbing mindlessness with no thought ever given 
to the consequences or the debilitating effects on the last person 
in the lineup, which in this case is the farmer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall the huge debate surrounding the removal 
of the Crow rate. The federal government advocated in 1994 
that the Crow rate, a long-standing and historical agreement 
with farmers of Western Canada, be removed and, in lieu of the 
payment that the Crow rate provided, the subsidy of 
transportation costs that particular agreement provided, we were 
told that we would see some very specific and important 
improvements to the grain transportation industry and to the 
bottom line of farmers in Western Canada. 
 
In return for the removal of the Crow rate, we were to see 
greater efficiency, greater competition, and reduced rates. 
Looking at that list of promises, we’ve missed two out of the 
three for sure; and if you listen to the farmers out in the rural 
parts of this province, we may have missed the mark on all 
three of the promised benefits. 
 
What have we got to show for the loss of the Crow so far? 
There is talk of some improved efficiencies, and no doubt if the 
efficiencies have accrued they have accrued to the operators of 
the railways. The efficiencies have not accrued to the producers 
in this province. And unless efficiencies do accrue to farmers, 
unless they can see the benefits of this particular agreement 
coming home, unless they can see the benefits on their bottom 
line, there is not much benefit at all to the removal of the Crow 
rate. 
 
I think that farmers were hung out to dry, frankly, by the federal 
government. I don’t think they ever planned to see the 
efficiencies that they promised arrive at the door — at the farm 
gate — of the individual producers in the Western provinces. 
 
I believe that the efficiencies we have talked about have created 
a windfall profit situation for the railways — if anybody. And 
as far as the competition element of that agreement was 
concerned, or the equation was concerned I should say, we 
haven’t seen any improved competition at any level by any 
railway operator. 
 
We know for a fact that in order to achieve the third level of 
promise in that agreement — reduced rates — we have to have 
considerably improved competition. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
simply has not happened. Instead of competition we have seen 
consolidation in the rail business, and it has not produced the 
desired effect whatsoever. 
 
I refer to a newspaper article that appeared in The Leader-Post 
on April 27 in which the Canadian Transportation Agency is 
referred to as having studied railway profits and freight rates 
from 1993 through 1998. And in that study the railways 
apparently passed along to producers only about one-half of the 
$9 per tonne savings that they got from rate deregulation. 
 
Well that is unconscionable in this day and age, especially when 
the very people who are most dependent on the railways — the 
people who are keeping the railways in business in terms of 
grain transportation — are suffering at increasing levels each 

year. And every time an increase comes along, it is passed to 
the last person in the line. — that’s the farmer. The squeeze that 
they’re under now will not accommodate any more of these 
kind of cost increases. 
 
And if efficiencies have produced $9 per tonne in savings, I 
think the farmers deserve to see more than the pittance of that 
amount that they have seen to date. 
 
I’d like to quote here from Jim Riegle, the CTA spokesman 
when this particular report was referred to. And he said that 
although reforms to the transportation system are outside of 
their jurisdiction, the CTA must establish the rate scale 
according to current formulas based on labour, fuel, material, 
and capital cost. 
 
What this last rate increase suggests frankly, is that the cost to 
the railways have gone up significantly due to increased fuel 
costs. But if we use the same formula to determine what the 
price of a farmer’s product ought to be, we wouldn’t be able to 
afford to buy bread. If we could get the same formula in place 
for farmers, which considered the cost of labour, fuel, material, 
and capital cost, not only would bread be out of the reach of the 
average consumer, so would any other item grown on a farm. 
 
These kind of formulas, created in a vacuum, do not work very 
well in situations like we have existing in agriculture today. 
And I believe that for the CTA to have made the decision 
they’ve made, and not take into consideration the bottom line 
impact a decision like this would have on the producers that are 
affected by it, is simply unconscionable. It’s too roped. It’s too 
mechanical. And it seems to have been arrived at in a vacuum. 
 
The statistics or the information they’re operating with might 
justify what they’re doing, but the consequences are 
unjustifiable in the agricultural community. 
 
Everybody knows that the grain transportation system and 
marketing system is in a state of flux, and in some cases, a state 
of chaos. Everybody knows that there’s problems there. But 
unfortunately, it appears that we have decided that we can name 
the problems, but we cannot work effectively to achieve 
solutions. There are too many sacred cows in the system that 
cannot be addressed. And everybody has their own favourite 
one. 
 
I’m reading, just now, from an article that appeared in The 
Western Producer, the March 16, 2000 edition. And it was 
written by Mr. Ray Foot who is the Canadian Pacific Railway’s 
assistant vice-president of grain. 
 
And he is saying in this article that: 
 

No one will argue that the grain transportation and 
handling systems need fixing. No one will argue that any 
changes that are to be made to the system need to make the 
system more accountable. No one will argue that the 
system should be more responsive to shippers’ needs, but 
first the system has to work for grain producers. Any 
savings found in a deregulated system have to go to grain 
producers first. 
 

I find it ironic that a senior administrator for the railway would 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

make those kind of comments in an open forum in a letter that 
could be read far and wide, and yet we have the Canadian 
Transportation Agency, which is a government agency 
mandated by the federal government, could come out with a 
ruling that would just pass costs on automatically to the very 
producers that need protection under the current set of 
circumstances that faces the agricultural sector today. 
 
Because of the constantly increasing costs of operation of which 
transportation is one of the highest, many farmers have taken 
very conscientious steps and made significant efforts to 
diversify and to move into crops that aren’t going to require 
nearly the amount of transportation cost that standard grains 
like wheat and durum and barley and some of those types of 
grains has accrued to their operation in the past. 
 
They’ve diversified. They’ve moved into crops that they can 
market themselves, that can be hauled with short hauls and save 
freight that way. They’ve moved into specialty crops that can be 
processed right close to home. They’ve moved into canola and 
other types of oilseeds that shouldn’t require the amount of 
freight that regular grains have cost in the past . . . have cost 
their bottom line in the past. 
 
But with this change in the freight rate that has been approved 
by the Canadian Transportation Agency, those costs are going 
to be applied to many of the crops that the farmers have been 
growing to avoid that very problem. And I think that once again 
the farm initiative shown by many people in our farm 
community, the very diligent efforts made by those people to 
help minimize the costs of transportation to their bottom line, 
are going to be whipsawed even greater by this particular 
freight increase. 
 
The other thing I want to note is that this increase, although it’s 
been approved, is a maximum and apparently will not come into 
effect until August 1. But by that time it’s quite possible that the 
fuel — the formula has said is the main factor in these increases 
— may well be on its way down by that time. And for the CTA 
to rush into a decision allowing this kind of an increase without 
tracking where the fuel costs are going, I think is inappropriate 
as well. 
 
We have seen these kind of decisions far too frequently in the 
agricultural sector made by people who are beyond the reach of 
the average producer. Decisions made to which there seems to 
be no appeal. And I feel that under the circumstances, we can 
do nothing more, or less, frankly, than to unite in this House in 
this motion that has been presented by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation and ask that we deal with this 
motion in an unanimous way. Again, in complete agreement on 
both sides of the House, in a spirit of co-operation, recognizing 
the significance of working together for the betterment of the 
farm community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I guess 
it saddens me to have to enter into this debate because it 
saddens me to reflect on the announcement by the federal 
government yesterday of increasing the freight rates to our 

farmers here in Saskatchewan. At a time when the farmers and 
the farm economy of this province is under pressure as a result 
of low commodity prices. We’ve experienced that and seen it 
first hand throughout this winter. 
 
And I’ve had the opportunity over the long weekend to revisit 
my old stomping grounds, the Pelly constituency, or the former 
Pelly constituency I used to represent, and had the opportunity 
to talk to many farmers out there who are going into spring 
seeding. But they’re doing it, Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of 
difficulty. They are experiencing cash flow problems simply 
because of low commodity prices. 
 
(1445) 
 
But as is quite normal for farmers in the springtime, if not year 
round but particularly in the springtime, there’s always the 
hope, optimism of a better year next year. They were certainly 
looking forward to that this year. But once again, Mr. Speaker, 
the announcement of yesterday certainly pulls down their 
desires and their hope for the future, and their positive outlook I 
guess you would say, with the further announcement of 
increased costs to them. And probably a great reduction in their 
ability to continue to survive in the farming industry. 
 
And it’s sad, Mr. Speaker that this came about. But we must I 
think look at the history of this. With the loss of the Crow, then 
we certainly should have anticipated that this would happen. It 
saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to think that there are members in 
this House who are today suggesting that they are supporting 
the farm situation and they are supporting the farmers in their 
time of need, when they have quite a track record of being in 
favour of reductions of farm subsidies such as the Crow Rate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to suggest that the Leader of 
the Opposition when he was an MP in Ottawa was one of those 
that stood first and foremost in favour of encouraging the 
federal government to continue a program of the reduction of 
farm subsidies. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I will quote to you a comment made as 
recorded in House of Commons Hansard March 30, 1995 when 
the Leader of the Opposition then Member of Parliament said, 
and I quote: 
 

For years farmers have been saying they do not mind doing 
their share and losing the rail subsidy. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me that elected people who 
suggest that they represent farmers, represent Saskatchewan 
people, have undermined . . . undermined the efforts of many of 
those who are involved in the farm political issues to try to 
sustain a level of support for farmers that would ensure the 
survival of farmers and ensure survival of the family farm — 
the way of life that has built this great province of ours. 
 
And yet people from this province, Mr. Speaker, when given 
the opportunity to represent farmers in Ottawa actually 
undermined that and worked against him. 
 
It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that we have to deal with that 
because in a united, concerted effort from all political parties 
and all political stripes of this province we could stand united 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

and work with the federal government to introduce programs 
that would ensure the survival, the strengthening of a farm 
economy that is so very vital not only to Saskatchewan, but to 
all of Canada. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t been the experience of the past. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to have to actually be involved 
in this debate, because as I said earlier, the farm economy has 
been under some tremendous pressure. Farmers having to 
endure commodity prices, the lowest since the 1930s, while 
having to deal with the modern day cost and prices of things. 
 
And we haven’t seen, Mr. Speaker, any support in a real 
meaningful way over any period of time from those in the 
opposition benches. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we see here 
today I believe is nothing more than political posturing, an 
attempt to use the situation of the recent announcement of 
yesterday to try to win some short-term political brownie 
points. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know that the many farmers in 
Saskatchewan who have followed this whole process of the 
agricultural . . . the politics of agriculture certainly realize that 
the Saskatchewan Party and their representatives, and the 
Reform Party and their representatives in Ottawa have been 
anything but supportive of the family farm concept. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy here of the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald dated June 2, 1995, where it says the 
Saskatchewan . . . And I quote, Mr. Speaker, the second 
paragraph of this articles where it says: 
 

Saskatchewan Reformer Elwin Hermanson has asked the 
House of Commons agriculture committee to vote for an 
additional $63.6 million (cut to agriculture subsidies for 
Saskatchewan) . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just find it quite interesting that we have 
today the Leader of the Opposition — the same individual who 
was a Member of Parliament at that time — now standing up in 
the House and crying foul. 
 
Well you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. You can’t ask 
for it and then cry foul when it happens. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
it just sort of, I guess you would say — and I won’t use the 
words — but I guess you’d say it flies in the face of, well, 
reality. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it certainly indicates to me that we have a 
political party that tries to pretend to represent farmers, but in 
the long run it has quite a track record of being anything but 
representative to farmers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, their policies 
and their record quite clearly indicates that they are a long way 
from supporting the traditional agriculture as we know it in this 
province — the agriculture of the family farm, the agriculture of 
communities, and agriculture of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to have to participate in this debate. 
It saddens me to even have this debate take place in this House 
because our family farms have been the hallmark, I guess you’d 
say, of Saskatchewan. It was our pioneers that suffered through 
some very tough times; that built this great province of ours. 
They’re the foundation of this province of ours. 

And they are now under increasing attack, not only from the 
federal government who seems to not have a clear 
understanding of what the situation is here in Canada, in 
Western Canada and in Saskatchewan, but also by the 
opposition party here in this province that has been anything but 
helpful in this whole process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I would be very happy to 
support the motion brought in by the Minister of Highways. It is 
something that I think needs to be addressed sooner rather than 
later, because the last thing our farmers need in this province is 
one more hit in the pocketbook. And that’s exactly what this 
will represent. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Farmers in 
Saskatchewan do indeed contribute greatly to both the 
provincial and the national economies of Canada. 
 
This province, agriculture exports are by far the largest category 
of exports, accounting for approximately 46 per cent of our total 
exports. Agriculture also contributes 10 per cent of our 
provincial gross domestic product, and directly and indirectly 
agriculture is connected to 40 per cent of our all our jobs in this 
province. 
 
A $320 million decrease in freight subsidies took effect in 
August 1995, and the loss of the railroad productivity sharing is 
costing Saskatchewan farmers over $100 million annually. The 
Crow buyout and strong farm prices initially masked the effect 
of the cuts in the years immediately following their 
introduction. Now that the world market prices have decreased, 
the true impact of the federal cuts is hitting home hard amongst 
our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers cannot adjust to income loss from 
federal policy changes at the same time that international 
subsidies are devastating our commodity prices. The freight 
rates for wheat in the Yorkton area of Saskatchewan were 
$11.58 per tonne during the ’94 and ’95 crop year. Freight rates 
for wheat from Yorkton for the ’99-2000 crop year will be 
$35.75 per tonne, which is a triple in the cost for the farmers. 
 
I know from my own farm operation, we had just shipped out 
some carloads of malt barley, and out of a cheque of $18,000, 
our take home after freight was only $10,000. So it is just under 
half of the money that we had worked hard to earn had gone 
towards freight. 
 
In addition, the federal government has not examined rail 
freight costs since 1992. Previously, costing reviews were 
conducted every four years to ensure cost savings achieved by 
the railroads were shared with producers. Having a costing 
review was completed in 1996 as indicated by the WGTA 
(Western Grain Transportation Act) before it was eliminated. It 
is estimated that productivity gains captured by the railroads 
would result in a $100 million profit going back to the 
Saskatchewan producers in 1999. The costing review in 1996 
would have reduced the freight rates by about $5 per tonne. 
 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

The federal government needs to take immediate action on this 
and other freight issues to ensure that the producers benefit 
from past and future productivity gains in the same manner that 
could or would occur in a truly competitive environment. 
Instead the federal government are allowing the CTA to 
increase their freight rates. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in this country it seems like 
the Mounties always get their man and the railroads always get 
their way. I believe that up until now our provincial government 
is no better in allowing this to happen than our federal 
government. If this government is as committed to farm 
families as they claim, then why did they not get their Liberal 
coalition mates to speak to their federal cousins regarding the 
increases of costs before now? 
 
Recommendations by the Kroeger and the Estey reports stated 
that there should be more competition and less regulation. 
Indeed these two reports have been available for review for a 
long time now, and they provide a great number of 
recommendations on how to address the problem of the 
increased transportation costs for our Saskatchewan farmers. 
But these recommendations have yet to be implemented. 
 
The federal government has ignored them and this government 
has ignored them. It needs to stop relying on the federal 
government to solve all their problems, take some initiative, 
show some leadership, and stop protecting their friends on the 
Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Since 1994 when the Crow was cancelled 
and the federal Liberals . . . by the federal Liberals, there have 
no strides made to recover the loss for our farmers by either 
level of government. Our provincial government just let it slide 
until we are now in an income crisis in rural Saskatchewan. Just 
like they let things slide when they took away GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) and didn’t replace it with another 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Oh, yeah, last year our Premier did say that 
he was going to write a letter to the Prime Minister regarding 
this issue and ask that freight rates be reduced by $5 a metric 
ton. But if that letter was actually sent, it obviously didn’t help, 
and there’s been no indication by our government that it was 
followed up on or pursued by any manner whatsoever. 
 
The truth of the matter is even if this government says that 
agriculture is a priority, even if they say that they’ve heard the 
voice of rural Saskatchewan, up until now they’ve done little or 
nothing of any consequences to address these issues. Willard 
Estey said himself, the farmers must unite to lobby for better 
freight rates or watch their industry’s demise. 
 
Our Government of Saskatchewan should be our strongest 
lobbying tool for everyone in the province. It is their 
responsibility. Up until now the NDP coalition government has 
failed miserably in lobbying the federal government. So I am 
very pleased that they have now put forward a motion and taken 
this opportunity to make things right. 

I therefore will be supporting the motion put forward by the 
member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was torn about 
participating in this debate, anticipating that the words in 
support of this motion would result in a unanimous direction by 
the Legislative Assembly on this very important issue — which, 
I will hasten to add, I still hope will be the outcome and the 
objective and the end result of today’s proceedings. 
 
But I am prompted to enter the debate based on the words of the 
last speaker trying to set out agricultural policy in a way which 
on the one hand is critical of the provincial coalition 
government as she describes it, and on the other hand is also 
critical of the federal administration. 
 
And what prompted me, Mr. Speaker, to get into this debate is 
the argument about consistency. The argument that we should 
be speaking with a united voice. And this is something that this 
side shares and I very much support. 
 
(1500) 
 
I believe that when this Legislative Assembly, on any major 
issue — this is a major issue of transportation we’re talking 
about, the 4.5, 4.6 per cent increase announced today — but on 
the general issue of transportation, or general other issue, when 
we speak unitedly, we speak with strength, and Ottawa gets a 
clear message about what the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan and what the people of Saskatchewan of all 
political ideologies and stripes believe in. 
 
What happens is when we pass a resolution and subsequent to 
the resolution one or other of the parties takes a different 
position to Ottawa, what happens is when in speaking to this 
resolution, as the hon. member from Watrous just did — set out 
two different positions in this regards — what happens then is 
that Ottawa takes a very, very jaundiced view of the importance 
of this issue. 
 
Now the hon. member opposite gets up in her remarks and she 
says that the provincial government should be chastised for our 
agricultural position. And she identifies two issues, failing of 
course, failing of course to recognize the position taken by her 
party in two areas which result in the confusion by the House of 
Commons in Ottawa. 
 
One issue is the question of the Crow rate. The hon. member 
from Maple Creek got up today in what I thought was a very 
thoughtful presentation. I didn’t agree with it totally, but he 
talked about the damage of the Crow rate and how the Crow 
rate and transportation impacted negatively on Western Canada 
and on Saskatchewan people. 
 
I want to tell the member from Maple Creek, he wasn’t in the 
House, but at every stage of the game, 1995 and pre-1995, this 
administration consistently in the House and outside the House 
said, the Crow rate must not be touched. It’s a Confederation 
bargain. The farmers in Saskatchewan cannot be . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We never deviated from that, we 
never deviated from that position once — not once. And then I 
see on March 6, 1995 the following, Mr. Speaker — this is my 
example about when we failed to talk in united voice. Speaking 
to the Rosetown Eagle, the following statements are made, 
quote, “There are benefits . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, please. Please 
allow the member on their feet to be heard. All members will 
have an opportunity to participate in debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have here before me 
the Rosetown Eagle of March 6, 1995. And I want to again 
repeat what I said just a few moments ago that before 1995, 
consistently this government has fought for the maintenance of 
the Crow rate. We fought for the maintenance of the Crow rate 
in 1981, 1982, even in that provincial election which we lost. 
And we maintained it right straight across the piece. 
 
And then lo and behold, on March 6, 1995, in an interview 
given to the Rosetown Eagle we see the following, quote, 
“There are benefits . . .” The writer is Dale Barber. “There are 
benefits to losing the Crow benefit.” I’ll read those words again: 
 

There are benefits to losing the Crown benefit. 
Kindersley-Lloydminster MP Elwin Hermanson said it will 
encourage development in the West. 
 
“There will be more incentive now not to ship grain out 
and to look at diversification,” Hermanson said. 
 
“Livestock operations will increase and people will look at 
methods to add value to their products,” he said. 
 

That is the quotation. 
 
Continuing on from the Rosetown Eagle: And Boyd, referring 
to the current member from Kindersley provincially, quote: 
 

And Boyd said it is something (it referring obviously in the 
story, Mr. Speaker, to the abandonment and removal of the 
Crow rate) that should have happened 20 years ago. But 
the change coming now with only a $1.6 billion cushion 
attached is a little like tough love. 

 
Now I will not recite for the hon. members opposite a little 
lecture that the current member from Kindersley provincially 
gave us about the meaning of tough love at the time of the 
December session of the legislative session, but it is available 
for anybody who wants to take a look at Hansard in this House 
of December 7, 1999. 
 
So here we have the member from Maple Creek making the 
argument that the Crow rate damaged rural Saskatchewan, rural 
Canada, farmers. And he made it very effectively, very 
eloquently, and very intellectually and very honestly. 
 
The current Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, when he was the 
agricultural critic for the Reform Party, said the converse as is 
quoted there in the Rosetown Eagle. And to this date, to the best 
of my knowledge, has never, ever apologized or withdrawn 
those remarks. 
 

And the hon. member from Watrous has the strength — if I can 
use that word rather diplomatically — to get up in this House 
and accuse this government of not standing up and fighting for 
the farmers. I say we are standing up and fighting for the 
farmers because we are talking with one concerted common 
voice. We support the Crow rate; that group fought for the 
Crow rate to be abandoned. They’re the ones who spoke with 
two tongues — two tongues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, that is the 
abandonment of the Crow rate and the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the Crow rate. But 
I tell you what really provoked or encouraged me to enter this 
debate for a short few moments. 
 
When the hon. member from Watrous got up and said in her 
continued attack on the provincial coalition government and 
this theme and this debate that the provincial government 
should endorse the Estey-Kroeger report because, she said, Mr. 
Justice Estey and Kroeger support the two principles of 
competition and deregulation. She said that — unless I 
misheard her. 
 
Hansard will tell whether or not those words are the correct 
words in the next day — competition and deregulation. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly at the core of this debate. We are in 
this position because the federal government has over the years 
adopted a policy of competition and deregulation. 
 
There was a time in the Canadian government when 
transportation was viewed as a positive tool for economic 
development for farmers and others; when it was used as a 
positive tool for social development and community 
development. It was a time when the National Transportation 
Agency and the National Transportation Act was viewed as a 
way in which to build Canada and to maintain an independent, 
strong Canada — not one subsumed by the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And so years ago in the House of 
Commons they introduced an amendment to the purpose of the 
National Transportation Act, and the fundamental amendment 
in setting out the mandate of that NTA (National Transportation 
Act) was to shift it from a positive tool to be used by the people 
of Canada to benefit the people of Canada to one of competition 
and deregulation. 
 
And it only makes sense, Mr. Speaker. We have 31, 32 million 
people in Canada; we’re less than the size of California. We are 
trying to build a country from sea to sea of varying economies, 
and right here in the middle of Western Canada, in the middle 
of the western North American Plains we are trying to build and 
maintain and to encourage a farm economy of which 
transportation has got to be one of the key components. 
 
Now how in the world can anybody supposedly getting up to 
speak in the interests of farmers says that there is going to be 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

true competition when there is no competition — with the 
exception of trucking perhaps — to the railways. If the railways 
are the sole carrier of transportation, then they are the monopoly 
delivery system with respect to transportation. 
 
When you have competition, Mr. Speaker, in transportation, 
you have intermodal — intermodal — competition. You have 
trucking competition in competition with the rail. You have the 
seaway in competition with the rail and the trucking. You have 
a variety of intermodal competitions. 
 
But when you are landlocked, when you have huge geography, 
when you’ve got large distances to travel, when you’ve got 
environmental considerations to concern yourselves about, 
when you’ve got communities to protect, when you’ve got the 
known, cheapest way to transport commodities of this nature to 
be rail, when you have to worry about saving the costs on 
highways and the damage created by trucks and the extra costs 
on fuel — they’re tabling petition after petition after petition on 
fuel because of the deregulation and the shift from rail onto 
trucking — Mr. Speaker, how in the world can you have 
competition? 
 
If you believe that, I’ve got one of several bridges in the city of 
Saskatoon to sell you very, very cheap. Very cheap. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And when she talked about 
competition and deregulation and urged us to accept the 
Estey-Kroeger report, remember, Mr. Speaker, and let the 
farmers remember that there are many components, but two 
major components of Estey Kroeger under that Saskatchewan 
Party’s policy of competition and deregulation. 
 
The first policy is this, the first policy is that the efficiency, the 
$5 per tonne that she mentioned should be paid back to the 
producers, the farmers. With that, I agree with her. With that, I 
agree with Saskatchewan Party. And that is the position taken 
by this coalition government and by this government. That’s 
exactly the position. 
 
But there is a second component to Estey Kroeger which, of 
course, fits in neatly to this free enterprise, right-wing collection 
of people who would see agriculture in Saskatchewan 
transformed to the American style. And that is the second 
component of Estey Kroeger; that is this — her words 
respecting the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The second component, the second component to Estey Kroeger 
would simply say this, Mr. Speaker, the second component 
would say . . . Mr. Speaker, I know they don’t want to hear this 
because they have an allergy to a dose of truth. But I’m going to 
get this message out, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to get this 
message out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — There is a second component, there is 
a second component to the Estey-Kroeger report which is tied 
into the Canadian Wheat Board. And that second component, 
Mr. Speaker is the fact that what Mr. Kroeger is recommending, 
in essence, is that the Canadian Wheat Board’s control over the 

allocation of grain boxcars if not be lessened, be absolutely 
totally removed. 
 
He argues now that the shipment of grains should be conducted 
by the grain companies. He argues that the Canadian Wheat 
Board should not have its role traditionally from the elevator, 
the country elevator, straight through the Canadian system, 
Vancouver . . . (inaudible) . . . and out to the market. That’s what 
he argues. 
 
And that is what she is arguing on behalf of Saskatchewan 
Party. Their position is to say take away the Canadian Wheat 
Board. In effect if you take away that power of the Canadian 
Wheat Board, you destroy the Canadian Wheat Board. That’s 
their position; that’s not our position. We do not believe in 
destroying the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And so now we find ourselves in the 
situation where if you’re in Ottawa and you’re a federal 
government and you’re listening to the farmers of Western 
Canada or Saskatchewan speak to the issue of the Crow rate, 
you have our government, our government consistently saying 
save the Crow rate. 
 
You have in the Saskatchewan House other voices of the 
Reform Party — as it then was the member, the agriculture 
critic, now Leader of the Saskatchewan Party — saying no, it 
could be a good thing to be done away with. You have the 
Leader of the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party — as he was 
provincially then in 1995, the member from Kindersley — he 
says no, do away with the Crow rate. 
 
Is it any wonder that Ottawa can look back and say in 
Saskatchewan there’s a house divided — there’s a house 
divided. The people of Saskatchewan say — by the Leader of 
the Reform Party and the member from Kindersley — you can 
do away with the Crow rate. And guess what happens, Mr. 
Speaker? Surprise of surprise — they do away with the Crow 
rate and that side welcomes doing away with the Crow rate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to close on this point. The larger 
aspect of this debate, Mr. Speaker, relates to the question of this 
competition and deregulation theory. Deregulation theory — 
this, Mr. Speaker, is the biggest threat, the biggest threat to 
farmers and Canada that there may be. 
 
If they believe that through . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I 
cannot hear myself, and I’m losing my voice. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the most important 
aspect of this debate is the competition and deregulation aspect, 
and Estey Kroeger in the larger context. That is the most 
important giveaway of where these people opposite stand. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the following as my vision of 
Canada. My vision of Canada is that in a Western Canadian 
setting, there is always a role and a need for vigilant federal 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

government — and yes, provincial government — to make sure 
that those who are held captive to the transportation system or 
the international subsidies’ wars or any other agricultural 
factors at least to have the government come to their aid as best 
as that government can come. That is the belief and the 
philosophy of this government. 
 
We think that today’s decision by Ottawa is a paramount 
example of competition and deregulation which does not apply. 
It is a natural outflow of the views contained by people in this 
House and outside this House, and it’s a view that we reject. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we should be doing is the following. 
We should be voting in favour of this motion unanimously so at 
least we can send the motion down to the Prime Minister and all 
the agencies, and say we are loud and clear, no to this 4.5 per 
cent. And I’m still hopeful that the Leader of the Opposition 
and the party members opposite will agree to that. 
 
But we need to do something else. We need to decide as 
Saskatchewan people that there needs to be a comprehensive 
transportation policy dealing with short lines, dealing with the 
question of whether or not Kroeger is to be accepted or to be 
rejected, as the member from Watrous has raised. 
 
We need to be dealing with the question of roads and support 
good roads. We need to be dealing with the question of rail line 
abandonment and stopping it. And we need to be saying to the 
CP and the CN, you have made profits off the backs of 
Saskatchewan farmers all your lives. No more! There is a public 
interest that you can . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And so, Mr. Speaker, a good first 
place to start is to pass this resolution. And the federal 
government then has the power, as we know by law, they can 
reject the resolution of the CTA; they can amend the resolution 
of the CTA; cabinet is under no obligation to accept the CTA. 
We can say loudly and clearly to them in a letter drafted by you 
or drafted by the Leader of the Opposition and myself, or 
whoever we want to structure it, to make sure that this 
particular 4.5 per cent matter is finished and rolled back. 
 
And then what we need to do is come to terms thereafter, during 
this session, early, to debate the fundamental concepts and 
visions of competition, deregulation, the future of Western 
Canada, and where the people of this province stand on this 
important issue. Because we believe that there is a role for 
government and we do believe in the family farm and 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. And that’s why I shall be voting in 
favour of this motion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard one of the 
most disappointing, unfactual presentations in this House since 
my election in September. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m truly disappointed in the response from the 
government. The mismanaged approach to this debate, the lack 

of focus, the lack of concern, and the cruel partisanship that 
they showed in this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record must be set straight. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to speak slowly so the government can understand the 
words that I say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is the key spokesperson for the government 
side? The Premier. The man who when he wasn’t elected went 
around happily foreclosing on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
That’s the man who’s speaking on behalf of agriculture on the 
government side. That’s the best they can bring to this House, 
that’s the best they can bring to this debate — Mr. Speaker. 
Shows a sad state of affairs on the government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was appalled when the member for Regina 
Northeast began to quote what I had said in the Parliament of 
Canada, and he followed he leader, the Premier, in not exactly 
misquoting but stopping in the middle of sentence, which in my 
opinion is as bad as misquoting what someone says. Mr. 
Speaker, what the member for Regina Northeast did, is he said, 
he quoted me this far, he said: 
 

For years farmers have been saying that they do not mind 
doing their share and losing the rail subsidies . . . 
 

And that was the end of his quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only fair that I read the entire sentence 
into the record of this House. Don’t you think that that’s fair, 
Mr. Speaker? What I said in the House of Commons was: 
 

For years farmers have been saying that they do not mind 
doing their share and losing the rail subsidies if other 
subsidized agencies do the same. Farmers have been hit 
with a 30 per cent loss to their safety net programs and the 
entire loss of their transportation subsidy in the west. 
 

I went on to say: 
 

At the same time the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) only gets kicked with a 4 per cent reduction 
in its subsidy. Does the government feel that a 4 per cent 
cut to the CBC is comparable to 100 per cent to grain 
transportation? 
 

And then I went on to say in the House of Commons, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was speaking for farmers in Saskatchewan and 
this is direct from Hansard: 
 

The removal of the Crow subsidies appears to have been a 
last minute decision. It appears pressure was put on the 
Minister of Agriculture to find more savings and so he 
axed the Crow without thinking through and planning the 
implications. The Minister of Agriculture called it a 
buyout, but the value of the WGTA is much higher. Some 
suggest it is more like $7 billion rather than the 1.6 billion. 
He should have more accurately called a Crow buy off at 
fire sale prices because the federal purse has been 
mismanaged so many years by Liberal and Conservative 
Finance ministers they simply do not have the money for a 
real buyout. 
 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier in my speech: 
 

For instance the agriculture industry in Western Canada is 
hit harder than any other industry. The loss of the Crow 
benefit will have obvious long-term effects on the industry. 
 
The gasoline tax will hit farmers particularly hard. Farming 
is a very fuel-intensive industry and travel is a necessity in 
rural areas. The government has increased the input costs 
for farmers, increased the cost of getting the product to 
market, and offered no hope of tax reduction in the future. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this was in the budget debate where the Crow rate 
was cut. Mr. Speaker, what the government fails to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, or how they’ve misled the people of 
Saskatchewan, is that I and my colleagues voted against that 
budget. We voted against the axing of the Crow because we 
knew it wasn’t fair to the agriculture sector. They have 
misrepresented that position. They have not told the truth about 
what I have done and said on behalf of farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an election issue. And in fact, the CBC 
researched — researched — what I had said and they told the 
people of Saskatchewan prior to the election that what the NDP 
were saying about my voting record, my position on the Crow 
rate was absolutely contrary to the facts, Mr. Speaker. And yet 
they will not apologize. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are not fools like the NDP would 
have us believe. That’s why they did not win rural seats in the 
last provincial election. They have a lot of nerve, Mr. Speaker, 
preaching to the opposition who won most every rural seat in 
Saskatchewan, saying that we don’t understand the industry, 
saying that we don’t represent them; and they couldn’t even get 
any votes, they couldn’t even elect any members in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’ve done so poorly that their support 
in urban Saskatchewan is falling as well. It’s because of the 
way of they argue, black is white and white is black, the way 
they misquote, the way they partially quote, the way they 
misrepresent what the official opposition is doing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke to agriculture spending in the House of 
Commons. And I pointed out where the Minister of Agriculture 
—perhaps will be the future colleague of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan if the rumours are correct and he does join the 
federal Liberal Party — but the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Goodale, the only representative from Saskatchewan currently 
in the House of Commons, viciously cut agriculture spending. 
 
And I was a critic, Mr. Speaker, of the cuts that he made to 
agriculture, of the way he cut the Crow rate. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I would say that the position that we had taken with regards to 
the funds of the Crow rate were prior to the signing of the last 
WGTO (Western Grain Transportation Office) to transfer those 
funds into a trade distortion adjustment program so that we 
would be able to go toe to toe with the Americans and the 
Europeans if they do not cut their subsidies and they continue to 
pour billions of dollars into their industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had the Government of Canada done that, we 

would not be in the vulnerable position that we are in today 
where we look helplessly as the Americans pump billions of 
dollars into farmers just across the line in Montana and North 
Dakota, and the Europeans put more billions of dollars of 
subsidies into their agriculture sector. 
 
And we sit here in Canada and we wring our hands and say 
what can we do. Well we could of done something, Mr. 
Speaker; I was part of a group that suggested what we should 
do. We were criticized by the NDP both provincially and 
federally, and the industry has suffered drastically as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did I vote against the dismantling of the 
Crow rate, but I also voted against the implementation of the 
current Canada Transportation Act, the Act that is causing 
freight rates to be increased today — the announcement today 
— the reason for this entire debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were in the House of Commons, we had 
representation from many organizations, many people in the 
industry, and the Bill was called Bill C-14. Mr. Speaker, I was 
able to sit on a committee that heard representation from 
shippers, from agricultural organizations throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to quote again from Hansard. This is March 26, 
1996. And I’ve said: 
 

Prairie producers have to ship their commodity, primarily 
grain, through rail as it is the only commercially feasible 
means of transportation that they have. They are captive to 
two railways, and at most times one railway. They have no 
opportunity to take their commodity down to the station to 
decide on which rail line they want to ship their products. 
That puts them in a category which is classified as being 
captive shippers. 

 
I went on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

A number of shippers appeared before the committee. I 
have a partial list of those shippers which is the who’s who 
of the shipping industry and farm organizations across the 
country. 
 
I’m going to list a group of organizations which have 
stated their public concern or opposition to subclauses 
27(2) and 27(3). They include the Alberta Wheat Pool, the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Manitoba Pool Elevators, 
the United Grain Growers, the Canadian Wheat Board, the 
Pioneer Grain Company, Cargill, the Western Canadian 
Shippers Coalition, the Canadian Dehydrators Association, 
the Canadian Fertilizer Institute, the Western Grain 
Elevator Association, the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the National Farmers Union, Southern 
Rails Co-operative, the Canadian Chemical Producers. 
 

Mr. Speaker the list goes on. These were shippers 
representatives that we heard and listened to. And as a result we 
voted against the creation of the new Canadian transportation 
Act which created a Canadian Transportation Agency which is 
allowing the increase of freight rates today. 
 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I think my record speaks for itself as long as they 
don’t distort the record. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they’ve 
been doing; they’ve not been telling the truth about the stand 
that I have taken in the past on behalf of agriculture. Mr. 
Speaker, I understand partisan debate and they can attack me 
for my position on the Canadian Wheat Board. I think it should 
be a voluntary marketing board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, their own government took away the 
monopoly on marketing hogs in Saskatchewan. So why is it 
okay to do it for one sector of the industry and not the other? 
Mr. Speaker, they’re not consistent; but if they want to attack 
me on that basis, let them go ahead and I’ll fight that political 
battle. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when they misrepresent what I say, when 
they misrepresent how I voted in the House of Commons, when 
they partially, when they partially quote me in the House of 
Commons to mislead the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that is unacceptable. And that is the reason why they faired so 
poorly in rural Saskatchewan; and that is the reason why they 
will go down the tube in urban Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, they also like to quote me 
from The Western Producer with a headline, and I didn’t write 
the headline, but it says “Reform presses for more agriculture 
cuts”. Mr. Speaker, we were doing estimates and I think the 
members opposite know what estimates are; and a lot of the 
spending is statutory, there’s no votes. 
 
But there are votes in a few areas and at the Agriculture 
Committee I moved three motions to reduce spending in three 
areas, not one of which negatively impacted Saskatchewan. 
None of them hurt the agricultural industry. But yet they would 
quote this headline and selective parts of the article to try to 
make it look like I voted for a reduction of funding for 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Agriculture reduced its staff 
substantially. Its operational funding though remained equal to 
what it was when they had a much higher staff. What they were 
doing was bloating the bureaucracy, the federal Department of 
Agriculture. And I voted to reduce the spending for bureaucrats 
in line with the reduction of services and the reduction of staff 
in the Department of Agriculture. I still think that was the right 
thing to do; it was a responsible position. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they cut the Crow rate and brought in the 
transition program they also brought in a feed freight assistance 
program to help Atlantic Canada. And then later on they made 
some amendments to their decision, decided to fatten up, to top 
up the feed freight assistance program to Atlantic Canada. But 
they didn’t do the same for the transition program for the Prairie 
provinces, for Saskatchewan. 
 
So I voted against that expansion to the feed freight assistance 
program because it wasn’t fair, Mr. Speaker. They brought in a 
package, they changed it halfways through — something this 
government knows a lot about — changed the rules halfway 

through, and so, in good conscience and for the betterment of 
Saskatchewan, I voted against that change. 
 
And the third area I voted against was for capital projects — for 
projects that the department were planning that weren’t even 
approved by Treasury Board. They had no idea how they were 
going to spend the money or whether they would get approval. 
And I felt as an elected representative of the taxpayers I had no 
choice but to vote against that estimate. 
 
Not one of those votes impacted transportation costs, input 
costs, safety net programs, research, development — all the 
things that are important to the agriculture industry here in 
Saskatchewan or, in fact, across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, what’s the record of this government on agriculture? I 
think my record’s not too bad. I don’t mind debating it, and 
they can argue with me about the Canadian Wheat Board or 
they can argue with me about safety nets. I would be happy to 
go enter into that debate as long as they don’t distort the truth. 
 
But what’s the record of this government, Mr. Speaker? Look 
what they did to the GRIP program — after the contract 
deadline. The Premier cancelled the program, took over $500 
million out of agriculture, and we have never recovered as a 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sent over $300 million back to Ottawa. We can’t 
get money from Ottawa for health care. We can’t get money for 
highways. We can’t get money for the needs of this province 
and he sent money back to Ottawa because he cancelled the 
GRIP program. And he took over $200 million that he had 
allocated for agriculture back to himself and then he said later 
on he would restore some kind of a safety net program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he didn’t keep his promise. Mr. Speaker, he broke 
his word to the province of Saskatchewan, to the producers of 
Saskatchewan, and look at the results. Last year, the year of 
crisis, income levels for Saskatchewan agriculture producers 
were a negative number. 
 
Manitoba, who had replaced GRIP with an expansion of crop 
insurance . . . yes, they were in trouble, but they had a 30 per 
cent of normal income level. Alberta, which replaced GRIP 
with a FIDP (farm income disaster program),they were up to 70 
per cent or better. Hardly any bankruptcies in the province of 
Alberta. But what did our Premier and his government do? 
Cancelled GRIP; never replaced it; never apologized for 
breaking a contract, Mr. Speaker; left farmers in the lurch, and 
they’re still suffering because of this action of cancelling the 
GRIP program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and then on top of that, we have the highest taxes 
of the Prairie provinces in Saskatchewan. And farmers do pay 
taxes. The Premier may not know it, but they do pay taxes. 
They pay sales taxes, and they saw their sales taxes expanded in 
this budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and then we have lease rates going up, input 
costs to producers. He said in the Throne Speech he was going 
to look for ways to lower input costs and yet he is directly 
increasing the input costs of producers for the agriculture 
sector. 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

Mr. Speaker, he should be ashamed of himself. He shouldn’t be 
standing up in the House and pointing at the opposition. He 
should be apologizing to the people of Saskatchewan, the 
farmers of Saskatchewan who he has betrayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, he ended the monopoly. He ended 
the marketing monopoly for hogs, and yet he doesn’t 
understand that the marketing monopoly for Wheat Board 
grains also has to be changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in the old days there was a single best-selling 
agent and, Mr. Speaker, there were state-trading enterprises that 
bought the products of our country. China and Japan and the 
Soviet Union were some of those. It doesn’t happen any more. 
The whole world economy is changed but this government is 
back in the ’50s and the ’60s, and they have put shackles on 
farmers so they couldn’t market their products. They have 
supported the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go to any community in rural 
Saskatchewan and debate that issue with the Premier of this 
province because it’s a losing argument for the Premier. The 
people of Saskatchewan want voluntary marketing. Yes, they 
want the Canadian Wheat Board but they don’t want to be stuck 
alone with the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) program — the mother of all bureaucratic goof-ups. 
Mr. Speaker, his former minister, Mr. Upshall, made a huge 
mess in negotiating the AIDA program. Where is Mr. Upshall? 
Well he’s not sitting in the benches across the way because the 
member from Watrous . . . the member for Watrous who just 
spoke in this debate replaced the former member, the Premier’s 
former Agriculture minister. 
 
And what has the current Agriculture minister done? He has 
absolved himself of all responsibility of the province as the 
provincial Minister of Agriculture. He has said that the province 
can’t do anything. It can’t do anything about GRIP. It can’t do 
anything about input costs. It can’t do anything about 
marketing. It’s all up to the federal government to fix the 
federal, international trade problem. And we recognize the 
federal government has a role to play there. 
 
But the Minister of Agriculture, the current one and the former 
one — like Pilate — washed their hands of all responsibility. 
Mr. Speaker, they should be ashamed of betraying the farmers, 
the farm families, the farm communities of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the facts, when you set aside the 
rhetoric and you look at the facts, the Saskatchewan Party has 
shown leadership in agricultural issues. We’ve been out to rural 
communities and we have talked with the voters. They 
understood it because we were telling the truth and they elected 
many of my colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in urban Saskatchewan also heard what we 
were saying and our support increased substantially to the point 
where the NDP almost lost some of their strongholds in the last 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am the one who believes that the truth wins in 
the long run. Mr. Speaker, in the long run, the truth speaks for 

itself. They can fabricate, Mr. Speaker, they can partially quote, 
they can misquote; but they can’t hide their record, Mr. 
Speaker. Their record is a disaster. The Saskatchewan Party’s 
record on agricultural issues speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask in closing, I would ask in closing that 
the government side be a little more careful when they’re 
dealing with facts, be a little more careful because there is a 
record, there is proof, and they will have to answer for their 
errors. They will have to answer for their behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this could have been a very constructive and it 
could have been a very positive debate. We could have had an 
unanimous resolution passed but the member from Regina 
Northeast decided to take to a different path. I think he’s 
formerly from rural Saskatchewan. He should have known 
better but he didn’t. He began to partially quote, he began to 
attack the official opposition, the ones that the people of 
Saskatchewan know are standing up for this province and 
working very hard on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I would move an amendment to the 
motion. Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member 
for Thunder Creek: 
 

That the following be added after the word “agency”: 
 
and condemns the provincial government for failing to 
make agriculture a priority and failing to implement its 
promises to farmers made in the Throne Speech. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, please. Order. We have a 
proposed amendment to the motion. I’m sorry. I apologize. 
There’s an amendment moved by the member from Rosetown, 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, seconded by the member 
from Thunder Creek. 
 

That the following be added after the word “agency”: 
 
and condemns the provincial government for failing to 
make agriculture a priority and failing to implement its 
promises to farmers made in the Throne Speech. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 
Transportation Agency, the CTA announced the four and a half 
per cent increase in the maximum rail rates for the 2000-2001 
crop year. So as of August 1, the cap for a typical freight rate 
will rise to approximately $34 per tonne. They cited higher fuel 
prices as a major reason for the increase. The current economic 
climate in Saskatchewan, in agricultural Saskatchewan, simply 
can’t tolerate a freight rate increase at this time. 
 
The industry is waiting for the federal government to act on 
recommendations to improve transportation in the grain 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

industry; an industry that generates about $12 billion a year in 
economic activity in western Canada. 
 
Farmers should be seeing a decrease in their freight rates since 
the CTA study released last year found that only $4.50 of the $9 
per tonne in savings has been realized from some rate 
deregulation that’s been passed on to farmers. 
 
Railroad profits have been substantial. Their main reasons for 
asking for increased freight rates are fuel prices. And this at a 
time when fuel prices are beginning to drop. 
 
But in 1995 when the Crow rate was cancelled by your friends 
over there in the federal Liberal Party and the Premier’s new 
caucus mates, if the media reports are to be believed, there have 
been no attempts made to recover the loss. No attempt made to 
increase competition or incentive for railroads to be efficient. 
 
It’s worth mentioning that over 20 years ago there was a Crow 
buyout offer on the table worth about $7 billion, but this 
government refused to negotiate. They fought this. Pretty soon 
the federal government started reducing the offer by about a 
billion dollars a year until the payout practically disappeared or 
was reduced to about $1 billion. In other words we lost $6 
billion on that deal. 
 
Six billion dollars would have made a huge difference in the 
economy of rural Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan as a whole. 
And who would suffer from this, this stubbornness from the 
party opposite? The farm families of Saskatchewan, that’s who. 
 
Will we have to wait another 20 years before anything is done? 
I don’t think so. I don’t think so because the government will be 
changing long before then. If this government was as 
committed to farm families as they claim, then why are they not 
getting their Liberal coalition mates to speak to their federal 
cousins regarding the increased costs in transportation and to 
encourage the feds to implement recommendations of the Estey 
and Kroeger reports. 
 
Since 1995, when the Crow rate was cancelled, how have things 
improved? Service has deteriorated; the roads are falling apart; 
short-line railroads are reluctant to invest in Saskatchewan for a 
number of tax and labour reasons, as well as a government that 
maintains an anti-business attitude. 
 
This government has had years to find some solution to this 
growing problem but it’s not a priority. Their priority is 
imposing hidden taxes on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Recommendations by the Kroeger and Estey reports stated that 
there should be more competition and less regulation. What 
steps has this government taken to implement some of the 
recommendations from these two reports? They should stop 
relying on the federal government and take some initiatives, 
show some leadership, rather than protecting their friends at the 
Canadian Wheat Board in Winnipeg at the expense of 
Saskatchewan farm families here. 
 
This government claims that they hear the voices of rural 
Saskatchewan but once again they’ve just turned a deaf ear on 
the pleas of rural Saskatchewan. The current system is not 
working. An example of this is in the 1996-97 shipping year 

when there was a massive system failure, when little grain was 
being transported — lots of potash, lots of sulphur, lots of coal, 
Japanese cars were still coming the other way, but no grain. 
And serious failures in the system continue to occur with 
alarming regularity. 
 
The Kroeger and Estey reports have provided a road map on 
how some of these problems can be solved and it is the 
responsibility of this government to lobby the federal Liberals 
to address these issues. This government should reverse its 
position and ask the CTA to consider policy reforms 
recommended by Justice Willard Estey and Arthur Kroeger that 
proposed a more commercial and competitive transportation 
system. 
 
(1545) 
 
Without these reforms the CTA must establish a rate scale 
according to the current formula based on labour, fuel, material, 
and capital costs. Their hands are tied. They can’t do it any 
other way. 
 
And this government continues to resist reforms to the 
transportation system, to protect the powers of the Canadian 
Wheat Board at the expense of Saskatchewan farm families and 
the economy of Saskatchewan in general. There is no incentive 
in the system for anybody to perform, and so an increase in the 
price of fuel just gets added to the cost of transporting grain. 
Yet this government continues to drag its feet on transportation 
reform. 
 
Jim Feeny, a CN Rail spokesman, said and I quote: 
 

I understand the pressures farmers are under but with the 
regulated system we have now, this is one of the things that 
we as an industry are faced with. 

 
What more evidence does this government need before it takes 
. . . it breaks off transportation reform and encourages the 
federal government to proceed with changes recommended by 
Estey and Kroeger? 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I second the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I woke up this morning 
hearing the news of the increase of 4.5 per cent. It was appalling 
to my ears to hear this. 
 
I think about the stories that we have heard, the reality that 
people are facing in this province, farm people, and to be hit 
with one more blow by the railroads is unbelievable at this time. 
 
It has been recommended by government study, federal 
government study, that the farmers should be getting back about 
18 billion . . . million dollars in payments. That $18 million 
might make some difference; 4.5 per cent increase will make a 
difference. It will strangle some of those farmers who are just 
gasping trying to survive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we can stand together, when we can 
speak with one voice against that federal government, when we 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

can challenge that federal government . . . 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was saying that when we 
stand together, if we can stand together in the face of this kind 
of attack by the eastern monopoly railroad, if we can stand up 
together, we have some strength. 
 
One of the problems that we face is that when we begin to fight 
with one another, we’re easily picked off, and the federal 
government is very adept at looking for those places where they 
can get at us and pick us off. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m convinced that if we could get by 
some of the partisan hassle and get to the point of what this is 
about, we may be able to shore up the farm families that need 
the help. We may be able to put some pressure on this federal 
government which doesn’t understand the situation. 
 
When we went down to Ottawa in the fall, one of the things that 
I was so thrilled with was that there was one voice speaking 
from this province. We told the story clearly to the MPs down 
there. We helped them, a few of them, to get an understanding 
of what it is that our farm families are facing here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They have been undermined for years. They have been 
undermined by the reduction of freight rates, the reduction of 
support — unilateral decision by the federal government to cut 
out the subsidies. And our farmers are expected to compete 
against a US that is subsidized by billions of dollars, against a 
European economy that is subsidized even more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t understand why a federal 
government would not give support to this industry. We look 
back at the history of the rail industry, how that industry got 
going in this country. It was designed to draw us together as a 
nation, we were told. We were told that it would build our 
economy to have a railroad running through the province. We 
could ship our grain; the ports would be there to move this 
commodity. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found out, as I studied the history of 
this system, that basically Saskatchewan has always been used, 
the farmers of Saskatchewan have always been used to 
subsidize that system. Because in the far East they cannot, they 
cannot compete with the seaway. The rail transportation cannot 
compete. They can’t make enough money. They can’t move the 
freight for cheap enough. 
 
In Western Ontario, through the Canadian Shield, they can’t 
make money. There is not enough product to move. They 
cannot make money in the west of Canada because they had to 
build through the mountains, and there’s not enough product 
there to move. 
 
So where do they make their money? Where do the railroad 
companies make their money? Here in Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba. They take our grain; they charge our farmers 
incredible rates to move that grain. As one of the members 
pointed out, the rates have tripled for our farmers. During these 
hardest of times, the rates have tripled. 
 
How will our farmers survive if they continue to be exploited 

by this monopoly? And I hear the people opposite talking about 
opening it up to competition. There is no rail competition. It’s 
not possible. There is one monopoly. The CN and the CP 
(Canadian Pacific) got the lines boxed up and they take 
everything out of this province . . . everything. 
 
And I can’t believe that these people want it opened up so that 
they can charge every price. Deregulate, they say. Unbelievable. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that is thrown 
across this House from time to time is that they have the 
monopoly, they have the greatest number of farmers over on 
that side. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s true. I am not a farmer. I 
don’t claim to be a farmer. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got to 
tell you that I have been in farm communities, lived there for 
years. I have family on both sides who farm. I keep in touch. I 
try and understand to the best of my ability. 
 
I don’t know it all. I don’t claim to know it all. But I hear the 
members opposite saying they do know it all. They not only 
claim to know it all about farming, they claim to know it all 
about everything. And they don’t. 
 
That argument will bite you in the backside. That argument will 
bite you in the backside because you don’t know anything about 
— what? — all of urban Saskatchewan? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk about taking off GRIP as if that 
was the ultimate sin for all time. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
people would bankrupt the province in no time. Bankrupt it. 
The GRIP program would have bankrupted this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — But we have to govern for all people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, all the people of this province. And we cannot 
subsidize just a few. We have to do the best that we can with 
the resources we have to take care of all of the people of this 
province, including the farmers. Including the farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — And so therefore when there is a program 
that will bankrupt the province, we must — we must — make a 
decision that will be the best stewardship of all of our resources, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s why the decision was made 
around GRIP. 
 
And yes, we will be having to answer that question time and 
again. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we answer that question 
and we answer it with the integrity that is here, we are saying 
very clearly that in order to govern this province and in order to 
provide good stewardship for all of the people of this province, 
that decision — difficult as it was — had to be made. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have brought forward a motion 
today, an emergency motion that I think is absolutely vital. And 
I’m appalled by that amendment that was thrown up just to kind 
of, oh well, we’ll get you, you said this, you’re the bad one. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we got to move above that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who started it? 
 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Mr. Wartman: — Who started it, she asks. That’s exactly the 
kind of thing that’s been going on there. You started it — 
you’re the bad guys. What utter nonsense. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we need in this House at this time is 
a bit of unity on this motion and to defeat that amendment 
because it is just an undermining factor as we’re trying to 
present a solid face to this federal government. If we stand up 
together, if you can let it go and stand up together and support 
this motion and drop that ridiculous amendment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if they can do that, I think we may be able to get the 
federal government to pay attention. We may be able to get the 
federal government to block that 4.5 or 4.6 per cent interest . . . 
or increase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have been a part of many of the meetings 
that have been set up in this past year to try and get the best 
handle on how we can support the farm industry in this 
province. We have taken out of the resources of this province to 
try and reduce the cost of farming, which we promised to do. 
There is now no tax on farm fuel — no tax on diesel, no tax on 
gasoline. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also have taken some portion . . . We 
do not have the resources to take all of the education portion of 
the property tax off, but we have taken 25 . . . We have taken a 
significant portion — and that will be for two years — off of 
the property tax that farmers have to pay. All in an effort to try 
and enable the farmers to be able to get on to the land and 
produce. 
 
We have provided support out of the resources of this province 
so that they can get out there. And we hope and we pray that 
there will be good crops this year for all the farmers. 
 
But at this time the last thing that farmers need is another blow, 
another cost. And the last thing that the railroads need is more 
profit. I can’t believe that on the heels of their proclaiming their 
great profits, I can’t believe that the CTA would recommend an 
increase. This industry has just sucked the country dry. 
 
They received all kinds of land, prime land within cities, in 
order to build that industry. That industry has received all kinds 
of subsidies from the very beginning . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Exactly. Rail cars were bought for them. And they just have 
made a fortune off the backs of Saskatchewan farmers. They 
continue to make that fortune. This increase recommended by 
the CTA is wrong. It’s unforgivable. It’s unjust. 
 
In contrast to an increase, there should be a decrease in freight 
rates — a significant decrease. The railroads try and point out to 
us, they try and say to us that they don’t make enough profit off 
moving our grain; they don’t make enough profit off moving 
our products. 
 
What they have done is hived off all the profit that they make 
off all of the land that they were given, off the buildings that 
they’ve been able to build on that land. They’ve hived all that 
off and they try and make the railroads a losing proposition so 
they continue to suck our farmers dry. Unbelievable! 
 
November 10, ’99 we called the federal government to put $100 
million in farmers’ pockets immediately. All they would have 

to do in order to put that $100 million into farmers’ pockets is 
reduce the freight rates by $5 a tonne. They’ve tripled those 
rates — moved them from $11 to almost $30. Why? They don’t 
need that kind of profit. They don’t need it. The shareholders 
out there don’t need that kind of profit. 
 
(1600) 
 
And if they would reduce the rates by only $5 a tonne, which is 
in no way going to harm the railroads, it would put another 
hundred million dollars into the farmers’ pockets. 
 
Now the one thing that I have to say, because I have heard it so 
many times coming from people on that side, is that they, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they claim to be the only ones who know 
about agriculture, the only ones who support agriculture. Our 
record speaks for itself. We have been there. We have been 
supporting agriculture. We have been there with and for 
farmers, and we will continue to be. 
 
We have stood up for the Wheat Board, which markets for all 
the farmers to make sure that every farmer gets a decent price 
for their crop. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Wheat Board doesn’t 
have to be justified here because it justifies itself by the support 
that it has given to farmers over the years. 
 
Down in the United States, farmers look at this Wheat Board 
and ask, how can I join? How can I get into this kind of a 
marketing body which will make sure that I get good regular 
price for my grain? They get into the world market, and because 
the world market can’t pick them off one at a time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it allows the most farmers to get the best price for the 
most time. 
 
And these folks over here would undermine that Wheat Board, 
would get rid of it in a minute if they had a chance, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What a narrow, short-sighted vision. It’s the same kind 
of narrow, short-sighted vision that would get rid of the Crow 
benefit, that would get rid of the Crow rate. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think I would be wrong if I 
were to say that there were people on that side who worked 
against the Crow rate and who were prepared to get rid of the 
Crow benefit claiming that it would do good for the farmers. 
And it didn’t do good and it won’t do good. And to get rid of 
the Wheat Board would do no good for the farmers of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my contention that 
when we pull together here as a House we can do good things. 
But it is my experience that when we pull together as 
communities and when farm people pull together as a broader 
community, that good will happen. It’s when they get separated, 
pulled apart that they can be broken. 
 
I remember a story that my colleague in ministry at St. James a 
few years back told. He brought to the Sunday service a little 
pack of sticks. And he handed the sticks out around to a number 
of the young children in the congregation; and he said, see if 
you can break these sticks. And the children broke them. No 
problem, easy . . . 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

An Hon. Member: — When you put them all together . . . 
 
Mr. Wartman: — The hon. member knows the story. I’m glad 
to hear it because there’s some truth in it. Those sticks were put 
together, bundled up, and nobody — not the strongest person in 
that congregation — could break them apart. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is very basic truth. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this very basic truth I know you can understand across 
the floor. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this very basic truth is the truth 
that is at the base and the core of the marketing system that we 
know as the Canadian Wheat Board. And that is sound 
management. It is based on truth. It’s based on real experience. 
And it’s time that the members opposite paid attention to that 
reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the support for the 
Canadian Wheat Board is much broader than what the members 
opposite try and paint as is the rural support for the New 
Democratic Party. Mr. Deputy Speaker, reality points to the fact 
that they did elect rural members. They beat some of our rural 
members out. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is good solid 
agricultural support for the New Democratic Party in this 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That support will rise. That support will grow. And these people 
who reach their peak in September will go down again and 
again and again. They think they’re fighting an election every 
day. They’re right. And that election — by the truth of what we 
are able to do in this government — will be won by the people 
on this side of the House. Not because we have all the answers, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; but because we know how to work with 
people. And we will work those people to get the best that can 
be done for this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we gather with our farmers regularly. We 
discuss with them. We listen to them. And I am convinced that 
the message that we hear, and the message that our minister is 
carrying through and implementing in the Department of 
Agriculture is going to have positive effect for the farmers of 
this province, and we will see the agricultural economy 
continue to grow. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my contention that if we will set 
aside that partisan stuff that undercuts continually and we will 
set aside that ridiculous amendment that has not even shades of 
truth in it, if we will set that amendment aside and everybody 
will stand together and support this motion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we may have a chance of getting Ottawa to back up 
and move away from that 4.5 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I speak in favour of the 
motion and against the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 
I’ve been sitting for the last hour and a half, two hours, listening 
to members on this side of the House and members on the 

opposite side talk about who knows more about agriculture. 
And I just listened to a rant, I guess you’d call it, and the on and 
on. It almost felt like I was being preached to as far as what is 
agriculture and who knows agriculture and all of that. And I 
found it very, very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I myself am in the process of getting ready for seeding and on 
the weekend I’m going to be trying to get some in the ground. 
I’m going to be . . . And as a number of us are on this side, 
we’re going to be looking forward to the next month or two to 
the megaproject, the billions of dollars that are going to be put 
into this economy due to agriculture. And just about each and 
every one of us is going to be going through that megaproject 
and we’re going to be investing a pile of money and hoping and 
expecting some sort of a fair return. And that’s all we ask for 
when we get out there and seed a crop. 
 
And I agree. I’ll agree with the members opposite. When a 
person looked at the headlines this morning and said freight 
rates are going to increase, it was more bad news. And you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I travel in my constituency . . . 
and on the weekend when I was at the farm all week and getting 
ready for seeding, I had a number of neighbours stopped in and 
talk. And you know, it was really unfortunate because I don’t 
know if I had one person that stopped and said, boy, I can’t wait 
to get that crop in the field. Boy, it’s a positive outlook. Boy, 
we’re looking forward to a good year. 
 
There wasn’t one of those. You know what people were talking 
about? What is this government doing talking about 
amalgamation? Is that what we need in our province right now? 
And then you see them stand up over there and they rant and 
they rave on how much they know about rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at a freight rate increase and that is 
the last thing my farm can afford. I don’t want to see freight 
rates increased. I grow a lot of specialty crops. I market a lot of 
specialty crops. A lot of them are processed and cleaned right 
here on the Prairies, right four miles from my place, and they’re 
shipped out without the dockage. 
 
And then we hear members opposite say, oh we’ve got to save 
the Wheat Board. It’s a saviour. Let’s ship it all away full of 
dockage and pay the freight weight. We’re paying twice as 
much freight weight as what we needed to had we started doing 
some value added, some processing right here on the Prairies. 
 
I didn’t hear one of those fellows mention over there, on the 
fact that if we did some processing here, if we loosened up the 
choke hold that the Wheat Board has on our prairie grain, if we 
gave a chance for people such as Prairie Pasta and a number of 
the pasta plants to do their processing right here in the Prairies, 
maybe this freight rate wouldn't be such a kicker as it is today. 
But I just finished hearing the member opposite spout the 
laurels and the virtues of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would invite that member to come to any 
rural meeting, poll off about . . . over the Canadian Wheat 
Board and see where it stands. He speaks like he knows what’s 
going on out there but he doesn’t have a clue, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Wait until you get farmers day after day stopping in at 
my farm, for example, saying it’s not positive. 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

We need some change. We can’t keep going the way we are. If 
we keep going the way we are, we’re destined to fail. And then 
you have a government saying let’s keep it the way it is. And 
people in rural Saskatchewan are saying on September 16: 
we’ve had it, we need a change. And unfortunately after a 
marriage of two parties, they didn’t get their change. But they 
needed a change. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just find it amazingly hypocritical 
for the members opposite to be talking and saying we need to 
pull together because these freight rates are increased. And I 
agree with that. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t very long ago 
that SaskEnergy rates went up. That’s something they could 
have controlled. It wasn’t very long ago that SaskTel rates are 
going up. Where were they then? It’s not very long ago that 
leased land rates went up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So they stand there and they say, oh it’s always somebody 
else’s fault. And they fail to look at themselves and say, what 
could we do as a government to help rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Let’s look at rural amalgamation. Let’s force RMs together. 
That will help rural Saskatchewan. Well I think if they would 
have . . . any of the members . . . And as I mentioned one time 
in question period, I can guarantee their safety to and from 
those meetings; once they’re at the meetings, they’re on their 
own. If they just would have went to those meetings and 
listened to what the people had to say at those rural 
amalgamation meetings, then maybe they could honestly come 
back into this House and speak with some sort of history and 
some sort of knowledge as to what people are saying in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know when you never go, you can spin your own 
cycle, you can spin your own tale, you can spin your own 
beliefs. And that’s what they truly believe without getting out 
there and getting in touch. I have talked earlier, different times 
in the House and the number of tax revolt meetings that I went 
to, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke to a number of people at 
these tax revolt meetings that were supporters of ours, but that 
were definitely supporters of the members opposite, and they 
were fed up. They needed a break. And I heard, through the 
debate today, members opposite say, well yes we listen to rural 
Saskatchewan, we know what they want, we’ll lower the 
education portion of the property tax. And that was their cure 
for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And then the Minister of Education, speaking that we’ve done 
so much for education. You talk to the school boards — what 
are they doing? They’re raising the mill rates. They’re raising 
the mill rates and raising the mill rates on this hand. The 
government is saying we’re lowering property tax on this hand 
for two years and after two years that money’s not there. Guess 
where the mill rate is. And then you take that money out from 
under them. 
 
It kind of reminds me a little bit of a program that was ripped 
out from under us — GRIP, that’s it. GRIP, you know. 
 
And they think that they know . . . we’re not saying . . . I 
listened to the member opposite speak last that we sound like 

we know everything that needs to be done in agriculture and we 
know all the issues. No, we don’t. But we have a pretty good 
idea of what’s going on in the areas that we represent because 
we talk to the people in our areas. We go to the task force 
meetings, we go to the tax revolt meetings, and we get the 
information from those people. We don’t sit in Regina and say, 
this is what I think they need. 
 
And they do a token tax reduction on education, and then take it 
away by raising the mill rate on the other hand. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mention, the hypocrisy of 
saying that it’s everybody else’s fault. It’s the federal 
government’s fault because they raised the freight rate, and all 
the things that this provincial government could do to help out 
rural Saskatchewan — uh, it’s not our fault; we don’t have to do 
it. It’s always somebody else’s fault, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I agree that the freight rates should not be going up. And 
we get into the whole debate about the Crow rate and all that 
type of thing, and we get misquote after misquote after 
misleading statement from opposition. And then I heard our 
leader speak . . . or the Leader of the Opposition and he set the 
record straight. And I just wish that they would have listened to 
the full statement of what he said through Hansard when he 
was a Member of Parliament. 
 
(1615) 
 
But you know, it just didn’t happen. The frustrating part of this 
whole debate, I guess that I find, is that when this debate started 
. . . we talked this morning about putting forward a motion. The 
members opposite put forth a motion, we were willing to 
second it, and the debate — and not necessarily debate — but as 
the member opposite was saying about his stick story, we are 
going to be united on it. 
 
And then the third speaker stood up, the member of Regina 
Northeast stood up and started spouting about the only person 
that knows, that has proper policy for agriculture. It isn’t the 
federal government and it sure isn’t the Saskatchewan Party; no 
way, what would they know? And he was the one that went on 
and on and on about how the only people that knew anything 
about agriculture were the members opposite. And due to that 
very thing, this has carried on and carried on, and now there’s 
an amendment to the motion — which I will be supporting. But 
it’s a shame that it had to come to that. 
 
You know, I had an opportunity to listen to the Premier go on 
and on and really try and rev his troops up. And it was really 
quite interesting. I think maybe a number of years ago when 
there was maybe only eight on this side, he could huff and he 
could puff, and maybe he would try and do some damage. But 
believe me this House on this side is built of brick. And he can 
huff and he can puff, but he is not going to scare us away. He’s 
not going to affect us because we know, we know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that our foundation, our foundation for this side of the 
House is built out of solid policy — policy that will work for 
the agriculture sector. 
 
And it just wasn’t invented because they saw a newspaper 
article, and now they think they should speak to it. It was 
manufactured and developed through grassroots people that 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

came with ideas that said this is what we need to have happen. 
And do you know, in all the meetings that we’ve had as far as 
developing policy and things like that, there was not one word 
mentioned about amalgamating RMs, amalgamating towns, 
amalgamating villages — forced amalgamation. But somehow 
this government, as mis-sighted as it may be, thinks that is a 
burning issue in rural Saskatchewan. Believe me, it’s not. 
 
They’re getting a little closer when they start talking about 
freight rates. But what they need to get a little bit closer on is 
input costs, and input costs such as phone rates, such as natural 
gas rates. All of those things are areas that they can control. 
 
I will agree with the members opposite, and I myself realize 
that, I mean, you cannot control the federal . . . what the federal 
government’s doing in some of their jurisdictions. All you can 
do is control the things that are in your ballpark. You can lobby 
the federal government, but you can control what’s in your 
ballpark — and unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not 
controlling that at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I find it really, really — again as I mentioned at the start —
hypocritical for the members opposite to be talking about and 
crying the absolute crime of the freight rate increase and then 
on the other side, increase all the fees that they possibly can. 
And a lot of them are hidden. I guess maybe once . . . you 
know, just looking at the parks issue . . . is once we get into the 
summer, we’ll see how much it really effects us. But you know 
it’s funny that they wouldn’t bring it out to begin with. 
 
And then they look at us and they say where’s that teamwork? 
Where’s that united voice going to Ottawa? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I wish it was a united voice going to Ottawa. And I 
really would have been following full behind until the member 
from Regina Northeast had to stand up and throw the first 
harpoon across the bow here. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s exactly what got this all going. 
 
And then as I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier 
standing up and saying that, you know, misquoting our leader. 
And I guess that stands to reason. I mean we had an experience 
with it last week when he adds words to quotations and things 
like that which are perfectly okay. 
 
But it just really, really causes a skepticism in rural 
Saskatchewan for this present government. And I would really 
invite the members opposite to get out to rural Saskatchewan, 
stop in at a grain elevator. They’re saying, oh well the grain 
elevators are going? Well maybe they are. Maybe you’d better 
get out there and stop in at a couple and see what they’re saying 
in those grain elevators. Because I’ll guarantee you, it won’t be 
positive for yourselves. 
 
And I wish . . . Perhaps that’s one of the problems is that maybe 
they don’t want to hear the truth. They don’t want to hear what 
people are talking about out there. 
 
You know, as I mentioned, every second day when somebody 
stops by the farm and talks, it’s not positive about what we’re 
looking forward to through seeding, it’s a negativity that is 
brought on by the members opposite. Because they don’t 
understand what is going on in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to support 
the amendment that was put forth by the Leader of the 
Opposition and seconded by the member from Thunder Creek. 
So I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wanted to 
add one or two of my thoughts when it comes to this particular 
debate on this motion. I think the motion is very timely. It’s 
very critical. And I want to reiterate some of the things that I’d 
heard earlier on from both sides of this House. 
 
There is an emergency when we get those kind of headlines in 
the paper. The discussion that went forward in producing that 
kind of a headline has been shielded from the farm people and 
from the people in the Prairies, generally. 
 
From my earlier life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pretty well 
aware of how those decisions are made. And I think it’s time 
that some of those decisions were made here in consideration of 
some of the things that go on directly in the Prairies and by 
farm people. 
 
The problem is, as it’s been pointed out, some of these 
decisions are made particularly by committees that have been 
appointed by the federal government. And it includes 
peripherally some of the interests of Prairie people, but 
basically it’s very much the interest of the railway companies, 
the people . . . the companies that have a lot of materials that 
have to be moved by rail. And whenever there is a particular 
problem in the transportation area, the Canadian Transportation 
Agency has a provision that dictates how the situation will be 
resolved. 
 
Earlier on I was fortunate to be part of a committee called the 
senior grain transportation committee and it was alluded to 
earlier on by one of our members. That particular committee 
had the power and authority to review the costs of the rail, how 
much the costs were increasing each year, and to make a 
determination of what was an appropriate rate adjustment based 
on the information that they received from a previous four 
years. 
 
The system, whether it worked or didn’t work, the system did 
give an opportunity for rural people because there was many, 
many farmers on that committee that did give the committee a 
great deal of insight and input into what the rail rate should be. 
 
That was taken away as the legislation was changed over the 
years. The Crow was removed. There was an adaptation plan 
put in place. The senior grain transportation committee was 
removed and in return there was no check and balance that 
allowed the rural people of Saskatchewan or the Prairies to have 
that kind of input into rail costs. 
 
Unfortunately the decisions now whenever there is a rate 
increase or a submission, goes directly to the Canadian 
Transportation Agency as our members well know, and they 
will decide. And likely if that was challenged, I would suspect 
that they would have a solid base on which to argue the 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

increase. 
 
However that increase is based on other kinds of commercial 
operations. Whenever there is investment by corporations in our 
industry, those return on investments range anywhere from 10 
to 15 per cent. And I’m sure the CTA made an adjustment and a 
recommendation based on that kind of a return. 
 
Because we don’t have an input into that kind of discussion and 
we don’t have a check and balance from the West in terms of 
rural, I really believe that this particular increase that was 
approved or recommended, I guess, by the CTA should be 
challenged because the consequences of that particular decision, 
how it affects rural Saskatchewan particularly, is very 
disconcerting. 
 
Now as the Premier mentioned in an earlier statement, the 
decision of the CTA is in fact only a recommendation to cabinet 
and it is up to the cabinet to consider whether that rate should 
be implemented or not. Now is the opportunity, as we are trying 
to do today, now is the opportunity to try and put forward a 
consistent and a joint statement of concern and statement of 
urgency about making a change to this particular 
recommendation that the CTA has come up with. 
 
And I thought we were going to be doing . . . we were going 
down that road and I thought it could have been achieved in a 
fairly short order. And again, I was really quite dismayed when 
the member from Regina Northeast, the third speaker after the 
seconder, took umbrage with the way that he perceived the 
Saskatchewan Party and how this particular party on this side of 
the House reacted to some of the farm policies. And at that 
point, I could see that we were not going to be able to achieve 
the kinds of things that I had hoped to in a very short order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess one of the problems that I see as 
we proceed into this debate — and I hope that we’ll be able to 
come to a conclusion — the problems that I see are the rural 
confidence in what this government can do and what we in the 
legislature can do. 
 
I know that there is the record that is being referred to often on 
the opposite side, the record is really put the confidence of the 
rural community in jeopardy. 
 
We’ve talked about earlier, about the GRIP that was in place 
and was taken away; that doesn’t do a lot for the confidence of 
our rural community. A safety net has not been put in place to 
replace that. Maybe it had its good points, maybe it needed to 
be amended; but whatever it was, it would have added a lot of 
confidence into rural economy at this particular point. 
 
Some of the other things that the rural community is looking at 
and needs to develop is that statement . . . or feeling of 
confidence and we’ve talked about input costs that this 
government feels that they have had a considerable input. Well 
the actual input costs that farmers are sustaining really have not 
been addressed in any particular way. 
 
I know we’ve talked about the rebate on property taxes, but if 
you’re a farmer and you see the opportunity to have property 
tax rebate and you take the 25 million and you divide it up 
amongst the farmers, you’re really talking about something like 

in the average of 400 to $450. Not a great deal of confidence in 
the . . . from the farming community even though the idea 
seemed to be good. 
 
When the government talks about eliminating the fuel tax, 
they’re really talking about eliminating the tax on the gasoline 
that’s used on the farm. There has been no tax on the diesel fuel 
and continues to be no tax. Now that . . . if that was in fact to be 
taxed, and now they say they won’t, that’s a really left-handed 
way of saying that they’re really good people and not . . . by not 
implementing a further tax. So the tax, the fuel tax itself, is in 
fact not a great item. And so that in my view is not a significant 
item in controlling the input costs. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some of the other things that I think should have been or could 
have been looked at was referred to early, and that is the 
encouragement of the short-line rail. And as the rail is being 
abandoned and elevators are being decommissioned, that 
acquisition of the short lines is a very important part that could 
add to the significantly, certainly in the short-term, to the ability 
of farmers to be able to move their grain forward on the rail. 
 
But it would also add a significant level of competition. And I 
know we talked a little bit about competition earlier, but the 
competition from the short line could have and should be able 
to give some confidence to the rural community. That I haven’t 
seen happening. 
 
Again, in my earlier life, I’ve done a little bit of work in trying 
to develop the short lines with . . . working with some farmers 
in this community, and I found that there was not a great deal of 
assistance made available to them from this particular 
government or from the federal government. 
 
Farmers are very interested in trying to acquire and operate 
these short lines but virtually nothing is happening in this field. 
That’s something that should have been moved forward. 
 
One of the input costs, of course, is the freight rate cost and it’s 
a very significant cost. But there’s other costs too. Another 
input cost that we probably should have looked at in this 
province — and farmers are rather disappointed when they look 
to see what the actual input costs are — and I want to refer 
briefly to some of the tax issues that farmers are facing on a 
pretty regular basis. One of them is of course the property tax. 
That’s a significant amount and it’s increasing. It’s increasing 
both on the property tax and on the education tax portion of 
their property assessment. 
 
Whenever we talk about a property tax rebate, that’s probably 
an assistance and it’s certainly helpful, but in a community 
where I’m from, the rural municipalities in that area are actually 
contributing more tax to the provincial government through 
increased PST on equipment and fuel, than in fact the provincial 
government pays to the rural municipalities. That’s not exactly 
a confidence builder for the rural economy. 
 
When we see that the property tax, the education portion of the 
property tax, is assessed to the farmers in my particular area in 
several of the municipalities, we see that the operating grants 
coming back to the RMs or the school units in my particular 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

area is not the traditional 60 or 50 per cent. And it’s not the 
provincial average of 40 per cent; it’s actually now, in my 
constituency, the school operating grants are zero. The property 
tax, the people paying property tax contribute the entire amount 
for school operations. 
 
With the model of hospital closures and the health district 
models that we have now, what our farmers are seeing and our 
rural people are seeing is the debt load that is being downloaded 
onto the health districts. I believe it’s around 22 of the 36 health 
districts are in fact now running debt. 
 
And that is a download directly onto the rural communities 
particularly, because those closures have had a significant factor 
in how the farms and the rural people respond to some of the 
government actions and the confidence that they have. Those 
things are very significant. 
 
When we talk about the profits of the rail company through the 
CTA, I really believe as I mentioned earlier, that those increase 
in rates has a significant factor on the amount of profit that the 
rail will make. And maybe the rail companies can justify a 10 to 
15 per cent increase . . . return on their investment. But in the 
rural areas of Saskatchewan particularly, that just cannot be 
done. And that is why we have to try and turn this around as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Farm income certainly depends upon the rail. Maybe it doesn’t 
depend upon the rail as much as it always has over a longer 
period, but the rail is a very critical part of the marketing. 
 
What I would want to do then, Mr. Speaker, is I want to 
highlight again some of the problems that I see. The confidence 
from the rural community and this government is lacking even 
though the intention of the original motion was very worthy. 
That’s why I’m going to at this time support the amendment as 
it was proposed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — To enter the debate — I want to speak to the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sir, I stood in the House earlier this 
afternoon in the spirit of co-operation and goodwill that has 
worked so effectively in the past — most recently last week, 
when we jointly in this House called on the federal government 
to take responsibility in funding the twinning of Highways No. 
1 and 16. I thought that set a precedent that we would be able to 
build on today. I was really hoping to achieve the same result 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat bemused by what followed — an 
unfortunate example of NDP’s philosophy that can take the 
cheap shot and win at all costs. The minister from Regina . . . 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. The member from Regina Northeast 
was more interested in trying to score partisan political points 
than he was in trying to help farmers. 
 
In fact, in 1995 the farmers of Canora-Pelly constituency 
recognized his concern and dedication to farmers by voting him 

out of office in the provincial election of that year. The current 
member for Canora-Pelly has served the interest of farmers — 
not only of that constituency but the whole province — and he’s 
done so with diligence and integrity. In fact, the people of 
Canora-Pelly recognized his contributions and re-elected him 
with a massive majority, in contrast to the election results of 
1995 when the previous member was thrown out only to 
resurface in the NDP borough of Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today that member’s inflammatory comments 
derailed what should have been a unanimous expression of 
support for the original motion, condemning federal inaction to 
provide freight rate relief for farmers. Comments by other 
government members today falsely suggesting this whole 
charade began on this side of the House wilfully ignore the fact 
that one of their own colleagues began the unravelling of this 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a non-partisan solution was required to 
achieve a common good, Hansard will record where the 
breakdown began and I am extremely disappointed by this turn 
of events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now be supporting the amendment put 
forward by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today, earlier, we were notified by the government that they 
would be proposing a motion to send to the federal government 
dealing with the increased freight rate proposed by the CTA. 
 
We also had such a motion prepared, independent of their own. 
Before session started, we discussed it on the floor of this 
Assembly, and it was agreed that whomever was recognized by 
Mr. Speaker, the other side would second that motion. And 
indeed, that co-operation took place in this Assembly. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake was recognized by the 
Speaker and presented his motion under rule 46. The member 
from Cypress Hills seconded that motion. Both of those 
members, Mr. Speaker, spoke about the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan, of farmers in transporting their products to 
market, and how this move to increase those freight rates would 
be detrimental not just to the farmers but to all of Saskatchewan 
as a whole. 
 
And then we had the member from member from Regina 
Northeast speak. That member, at one time, had represented a 
rural constituency. But in 1995, the people of the Canora-Pelly 
constituency recognized that that member did not represent 
them, did not represent agriculture, did not represent the needs 
and desires of the people of rural Saskatchewan. And they 
unelected him. 
 
They elected my colleague, the current member from 
Canora-Pelly, who won his second term in 1999 with a 
resounding victory — overwhelming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Rather than supporting agriculture, as 
this motion would have done, that member from Regina 
Northeast, having lost in 1995, moved into Regina and ran in a 
rotten borough and was elected by the city. He fails, Mr. 
Speaker, to support agriculture. Now he had an opportunity 
today, Mr. Speaker, to show that he and his party, Mr. Speaker, 
had the opportunity to show that he and his party could support 
agriculture. Instead, Mr. Speaker, his primary concern . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I’ll ask all members to 
kindly come to order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That 
member’s primary concern was not agriculture, was not the 
support of Saskatchewan, but to pay . . . play petty, partisan 
politics. And that’s why he launched his vicious attack. He had 
no interest in the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m going to ask members one more 
time. I plead with you to kindly come to order, allow the 
member to be heard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize 
that the truth often hurts and that’s why the members opposite 
are clambering so painfully. The members opposite . . . the 
member opposite has no feeling or understanding for rural 
Saskatchewan or farmers. And that’s why he was more 
interested in attacking the official opposition than he was in 
dealing with the issue and the co-operation that was exemplified 
by the member from Meadow Lake and the member for 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Later on, Mr. Speaker, we have another Regina member who 
stands in his place. The member from Regina Qu’Appelle who 
sanctimoniously lectured us as to how we should be supporting 
rural Saskatchewan. Sanctimoniously stood there with venom 
dripping from his lips as if it was from the fangs of a viper. 
Rather than supporting agriculture, attacks the official 
opposition. 
 
Again that member has no concern for farmers. He has no 
concern for rural Saskatchewan. His only concern, Mr. Speaker, 
is the potential of his re-election or loss. 
 
They could have talked, Mr. Speaker, on this motion about 
transportation. They could have talked about the need for 
short-line rail in this province. Because there certainly is a need 
for short-line rail that would counterbalance the weight of the 
CN and CP railroads. But did they talk about it? No, Mr. 
Speaker. They were more interested in attacking the official 
opposition. 
 
Why don’t they want to talk about short-line rail? They don’t 
want to talk about it, Mr. Speaker, because of successor rights. 
They don’t want to touch successor rights, which is the killer of 
short-line rail. Because if they have to, a rail line is abandoned 
and a short-line rail picks it up, they have to pick up the entire 
costs of the operation of that rail. 
 
And that rail, the reason it’s such a high cost and the reason that 
the costs are being transferred over to farmers, is because of the 
contracts that are signed and obligated on that rail line. And a 
new organization cannot come in and operate effectively, 

efficiently, that profits would be passed on to farmers under 
those circumstances. 
 
They’re more afraid, Mr. Speaker, of alienating some of their 
supporters in the unions than they are in helping agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Their government has failed, has failed 
miserably to provide transportation services to all of 
Saskatchewan. Not just rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but 
all of Saskatchewan, ever since they were elected in 1991. 
 
The fact is, the first minister of Agriculture that we had came up 
with the plan, Mr. Speaker, to gravel all the highways in 
Saskatchewan. He was going to turn them all into gravel roads. 
That minister was Berny Wiens, Mr. Speaker. He was the 
minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan at one time. He’s gone. 
 
We had Darrel Cunningham who was a seatmate of the member 
from Regina Northeast, next constituency over from him, in 
1991 to ’95. He was defeated. Gone. Andy Renaud who was the 
member from Nipawin . . . Carrot River He was the minister of 
Agriculture. He’s gone. Eric Upshall, who was the member 
from Watrous, was the last member . . . was the last Agriculture 
minister before this election. He’s gone. 
 
It’s not a pleasant thing to be the Minister of Agriculture in this 
government because they fail to recognize the needs of 
transportation in this province. They fail to deal with the federal 
government when it comes to the transportation of grain, the 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) . . . the 
CTA, I mean. They’re very big on the CCTA also. That’s 
another one of their union projects. 
 
They fail to provide for proper transportation on the highway 
system. Our highway system across this province is crumbling. 
And they ignore it. 
 
They promise $250 million a year, 2.5 billion over 10 years. 
This is the first year in a 10-year program, fourth year in, that 
even matches. And yet inflation is running ahead of their inputs 
into transportation, Mr. Speaker. They have no concern. 
 
And it’s that failure in transportation . . . affects not just rural 
Saskatchewan; it affects every person in Saskatchewan. 
Whether they just simply want to drive to the lake or if they’re 
hauling their grain to the elevator, Mr. Speaker, they have failed 
them. 
 
But the government opposite talked earlier, the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle in his speech condemned any possible 
change in the Canadian Wheat Board — condemned it. And yet 
the very Minister of Agriculture that I mentioned earlier, Eric 
Upshall, was the one who took away the marketing board in the 
feather industry in this province — in this province. He took 
away the marketing board in the hog industry. 
 
I didn’t hear that member standing up and condemning the 
Minister of Agriculture at that time for that very action. It 
shows, Mr. Speaker, just how utter their lack of concern is for 



April 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

agriculture. It’s all partisan; it has nothing to do with supporting 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw them take away GRIP program. Now that was a while 
ago; that was in 1992 they destroyed the GRIP program, clawed 
back the money. We had hoped perhaps they had got over that 
attitude of taking away programs from farmers. But what have 
they done? The Premier goes to Ottawa and comes back and 
says, we got a billion dollars. 
 
But when you start counting up the money, 400 million of it is 
already farmers’ money that they are owed by the Canadian 
Wheat Board that will be lent to them six months earlier. A loan 
from farmers to farmers, and it had nothing to do with the 
Premier or the member from Regina Northeast. 
 
They got a new program, Mr. Speaker. A new program — $260 
million of new money. Except if you get it, they deduct that 
amount from your AIDA. So you can have one or the other, but 
you can’t have both. 
 
So their $260 million doesn’t add up in their billion dollars. 
We’re getting . . . That money, that billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
is getting smaller and smaller and smaller — just like their 
support across Saskatchewan. 
 
The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, in their budget talked 
about how they were going to help rural Saskatchewan. And as 
my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone indicated in his 
speech, they put a little bit of money, Mr. Speaker, into property 
tax reduction for two years. That money and more will be eaten 
up by the failure to provide proper support for education. That 
support will now have to come from the property taxpayers 
across Saskatchewan — be it a farmer, be it a businessman, be 
it a labourer in this province. They have taken that money right 
back out of the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And they all fail. And they sit there . . . the member from 
Regina Northeast, and he laughs about it, Mr. Speaker — he 
laughs about it. 
 
There’s also lots of other money, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is taking from agriculture. Did you know that 
one-third of the cost of fertilizer in this province is provincial 
taxes? On average, one-third is provincial taxes — royalty taxes 
on the natural gas used to produce that fertilizer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government claims there is no tax on 
farm inputs — dead wrong, dead wrong. One-third of the cost 
of fertilizer is taxes collected by the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a government that does not 
believe in responsible government. This government has never 
accepted responsibility for any of their actions, for any of their 
statements. They simply do not believe in responsible 
government. 
 
They believe in winning at any cost. They believe in the rule of 
the NDP. And they will do whatever it takes, including on the 
backs of farmers by denying them, by denying them the 
opportunity to send a message from this legislature that would 
have supported the motion presented in a unanimous vote, in a 
unanimous comment. And it was the government members 

opposite that ruined that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen a good many other areas where this 
government has stood in the road of farmers and transportation. 
We had an opportunity to build a pasta plant in this province 
and this government has stood in the road in every way, shape, 
or form that they could to prevent that from happening, Mr. 
Speaker. It just shows how irresponsible this government 
actually is. 
 
It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that this government accepted the 
responsibilities of their eight years in government, which they 
have failed to do so, Mr. Speaker. They have failed to accept 
any responsibility for the destruction they have wrought. Not 
just on rural Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan as a whole, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The members opposite want a vote and indeed we will have a 
vote on this particular issue, because we think this is an 
important issue, that the message be sent to Ottawa that it’s 
their responsibility to roll back that freight increase. It’s their 
responsibility to follow their own legislation under the CTA and 
pass on those cost savings to agriculture. Approximately $5 a 
tonne, Mr. Speaker, that the CCTA says should be passed on, 
that the federal Liberal government that the Premier is 
considering joining needs to pass on to farmers. This freight 
rate does not need to occur, Mr. Speaker, if the federal 
government would screw up their courage and roll it back. 
 
I will be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:55 p.m. until 4:57 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Draude Gantefoer Peters 
Eagles Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 25 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen Melenchuk Cline 
Goulet Thomson Lorje 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The division bells rang from 5 p.m. until 5:01 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente on the following 
recorded division. 
 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2000 

Yeas — 44 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Kasperski 
Wartman Addley Hermanson 
Elhard Heppner Draude 
Gantefoer Peters Eagles 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the motion just passed be communicated to the Prime 
Minister of Canada, the federal Minister of Transportation, 
and the federal minister responsible for the Canadian 
Wheat Board on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if leave is granted, then I assume that the 
Opposition House Leader will second the motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard.................................................................................................................................................................................................. 881 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 
  McMorris ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 881 
  Weekes................................................................................................................................................................................................. 881 
  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 881 
  Harpauer............................................................................................................................................................................................. 882 
  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 882 
  Wiberg................................................................................................................................................................................................. 882 
  Hart...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 882 
  Stewart ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 882 
  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 882 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................882 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................882 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................883 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Weekes................................................................................................................................................................................................. 883 
  Melenchuk........................................................................................................................................................................................... 883 
  Harper ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 884 
  Hermanson.......................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................884 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Increase to Rail Transportation Rates 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................884 
 Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
  Weekes................................................................................................................................................................................................. 884 
 Training for Forestry Jobs 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Estevan Junior Hockey Player Receives Awards 
  Eagles................................................................................................................................................................................................... 885 
 Pak-Wel Produce Buys Potato Plant 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Canada Book Day 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Agricultural Sciences Month 
  Higgins................................................................................................................................................................................................. 886 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Premier’s Plans for the Future 
  Hermanson.......................................................................................................................................................................................... 886 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................886 
 Health Care Issues 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................887 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................887 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................888 
 Freight Rate Increases 
  Elhard.................................................................................................................................................................................................. 888 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................889 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................889 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................889 
 Land Information Services Corporation 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................889 
  Axworthy............................................................................................................................................................................................. 889 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 203  The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2000 
  Hermanson..........................................................................................................................................................................................890 
 Bill No. 210  The Health Ombudsman Act 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................890 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Request to Federal Government to Suspend Freight Rate Increase 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................891 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................891, 909 
  Harper .................................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Harpauer .............................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Romanow ............................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Hermanson..........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Stewart.................................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................902 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................905 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................909 
 Recorded division (amendment)..................................................................................................................................................911 
 Recorded division (motion)..........................................................................................................................................................912 
 


