





























































Hansard: April 04, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 483 
 April 4, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the House, in your gallery, Mr. Dan 
Palsich, who’s a long-term family friend. He has known my 
family long before I was born which isn’t really all that long 
considering that it appears that I’m . . . But he was a former 
principal in Paradise Hill and a long-time community activist, 
supporter of co-operatives and the credit union system and I 
hope everyone welcomes him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With leave to introduce a guest as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well with 
my colleague would like to welcome Dan here this evening. I 
get so few guests down from the far North that I’m going to 
take advantage of the opportunity. Dan, I as well have enjoyed 
working with you over the years and it’s nice to have you here 
observing the proceedings this evening. So welcome as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very eager to 
speak here this evening. It’s a privilege to be part of this debate 
on this historic budget which delivers the biggest tax cut in 
Saskatchewan history . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — . . . and the seventh consecutive year of budget 
surpluses that this government has provided. 
 
However before I really begin, what concerns me in listening to 
the debates in the last few days is the misunderstanding that the 
opposition appears to have. I shouldn’t need to give this lesson, 

but as a new MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I 
feel compelled to say this. Each of us, last September, was 
elected, really went through a job description, a job interview 
process, and we were hired by the public. And we were hired to 
manage the public’s resources. 
 
We were elected to work together to achieve that which cannot 
be achieved individually. The money that we’re talking about is 
not the NDP (New Democratic Party) money; it’s not the 
Liberal money; and it’s not particularly what some people have 
called the Saskatchewan-Alberta party money — the SAP’s. It’s 
the public money, and that’s what we’re here to talk about 
today, is how we should be managing the resources of this 
province and the public’s money. I didn’t think I had to say 
that, but it seems from the debate that we’ve been hearing the 
last few days, it’s important to do that. 
 
The budget, this budget, is a great step towards continued 
prosperity. This plan for prosperity balances two very important 
principles; principles that I think are very important in any kind 
of line of work that you want to be involved with. The first is 
fiscal responsibility. As everybody knows, unless you balance 
your books, unless you have fiscal responsibility, unless you 
can afford the programs and the services that we want to 
provide, it’s really no point in proceeding. You have to have . . . 
as a good Scot I know you have to balance the books. 
 
However, money isn’t the only thing. There has to be the other 
principle that’s balanced with that, and that’s social 
responsibility. And that’s what this side of the House has, and it 
appears from the debate, which I’m sad to say doesn’t seem to 
be found on the other side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Henry Ward Beecher, a 19th century American 
clergy, an abolitionist, an advocate for women’s suffrage said, 
and I quote: 
 

Expedients are for the hour; principles for the ages.  
 
After hearing the Saskatchewan-Alberta party — so-called — 
speak about their plans of short-term, crass, politically 
expedient schemes written on the back of a napkin, tell them 
what they want to hear, damn the consequences, run up the 
debt, radical-right ideas, I’m very pleased to outline the 
alternative. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All right, give. Let’s do it. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Although I do question a little bit the ability 
and the understanding of the SAPs across the way. Members on 
this side of the House quote 17th century political philosophers; 
20th century First Nation education advocate, Wilfred Pelletier; 
19th century American clergy opposed to slavery and in favour 
of women’s rights to vote; and of course, from our honourable 
colleague, passages from the Bible which we all . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And don’t forget Tommy. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Well I don’t think we’ve quoted Tommy yet, 
but we’ll never forget Tommy. 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

But who do the members opposite quote? Who do the members 
opposite quote? You know who they quote? Popeye. Popeye. 
That’s the best they can do is Popeye. I don’t get that. 
 

Expedients are for the hour; principles for the ages. 
 
We want to be here for the ages. We want what we say to be 
heard in the ages. We want to build a province that will stand 
up to the ages. 
 
There are budget principles on page 2, Mr. Speaker, which I’d 
like to outline a little bit. And that’s fiscal responsibility and 
good government. That’s fiscal responsibility and good 
government. The second part, a sustainable, effective health 
care system. Third, economic growth and jobs. And fourth, tax 
reform. 
 
The member from Rosthern chirps a little bit from his seat, but 
he doesn’t understand the four principles. He hasn’t got past the 
first one which is fiscal responsibility, which just happens to be 
the next point I’m going to be talking about. 
 
Under fiscal responsibility, as opposed to the social 
responsibility which I’ll talk about a little bit later, one of the 
key planks is economic development. Of course it takes the 
entrepreneurial spirit, taking risks, making profits, and using the 
capitalist system efficiently to generate wealth. No response 
from the opposition. But this government has provided the 
framework and the environment for that system to work 
efficiently and this budget takes another step down that road. 
Taxes. That’s the second part of fiscal responsibility. After 
wide-ranging, transparent consultation listening to the people, 
we will now be competitive with Alberta on the tax side. 
Thankfully we won’t be competitive with Alberta on the social 
side as I’ll be outlining a little bit later — because they just 
can’t meet Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a level playing field. We’ve removed the impediments 
for growth and economic development. Finally we can afford to 
remove some of the draconian tax measures imposed by the 
purveyors of gloom and doom on the other side of this House. 
Some of these taxes are — which support the family — we will be 
implementing a basic personal tax credit of $8,000, a spousal or 
equivalent tax credit of $8,000, a new $2,500 per child tax credit, 
and a $1,000 senior supplement to the age credit. As well, an 11 
per cent tax rate will be applied to taxable capital gains, to 
qualified farm property and small businesses. That’s so those 
businesses that that side of the opposition is telling is going to 
Alberta to register in Alberta to pay the taxes there — the taxes 
will be the same rate in Saskatchewan. 
 
As well as something that we’ve done that the federal PCs 
(Progressive Conservative) have not done, or the Liberals have 
just started to do, and that’s inflation protection will be 
introduced once the tax system is fully implemented through the 
indexation of the provincial income tax brackets and personal 
tax brackets. Protecting Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, as 
well the tax rates of 11 per cent on taxable incomes of $35,000 
or less; 13 per cent on taxable incomes between 35,000 and 
100,000; and 15 per cent on income over $100,000. 
 
Some of the taxes that will be removed: the replacement of the 
basic Saskatchewan tax; the flat tax; the debt reduction tax; 

surtax; the high-income surtax with the progressive three-rate 
tax structure; the continued exemption of most family 
essentials; and the introduction of the Saskatchewan sales tax 
credit which will allow low-income earners to pay less tax after 
the reform. Saskatchewan sales tax on families is still the lowest 
of all provinces which levy a sales tax, and is less than the 
health care premiums paid in Alberta and British Columbia by 
families earning $50,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Just a comment, which I picked up my mail at 
suppertime, and Alberta, according to the Seniors’ Voice, April 
2000, Alberta ranks among the provinces in per capita public 
expenditures the lowest. Health care premiums of $68 per 
month, Mr. Speaker, or $816 a year for a family. Of those 
health care premiums — and this is shameful, and this is what 
the people on the other side of the House are talking about — 
nearly one-quarter of Alberta’s health care insurance-plan 
holders are behind on their payments. An estimated 120,000 
accounts are in arrears. Collection agencies are chasing nearly 
40 per cent of those bad accounts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Over health care. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Over health care, a basic need that we offer in 
Saskatchewan, based on our tax system which is competitive 
with Alberta and that’s the way you seem to want to go. That’s 
not the great Alberta that we hear about here in Saskatchewan. 
Shame. Shame. 
 
Well I guess to go on, compare that with Saskatchewan health 
care. Over 90 per cent of Saskatchewan residents who used the 
health care system in the past year said they were satisfied with 
the service — over 90 per cent, actually closer to 92 per cent. 
Nationally, 1.8 per cent of respondents said they were very 
dissatisfied. Only 1.4 per cent of Saskatchewan residents say 
they were dissatisfied with the health care system. Part of the 
reason for the result could be that people have come to expect 
the worst from health care systems because of all the negative 
things they’ve heard. When they get even average service, 
they’re happier because their expectations are higher. So thank 
you very much in making sure these numbers are very good. 
 
Education. I put education under the fiscal side of the equation, 
not the social side because I think that’s really important in 
economic development. During the election when I was out 
knocking on doors, I heard from the people on the doorstep that 
said we should be funding institutions and we should be 
providing encouragement to students to graduate, to stay in 
Saskatchewan and work in Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore after a major consultation with the Minister of 
Education and the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, we 
are investing in K to 12 education, we are investing in 
post-secondary education, and in capital funding. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be putting more money into special education, 
into community schools in the North, into pre-kindergarten 
programs and new distance learning. Capital funding to 
complete up to 115 new school projects this year. Increased 
operating funds for university, regional colleges, and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 
Capital funding will be increased. Thorvaldson and kinesiology 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

buildings at the University of Saskatchewan, which I’m very 
proud to represent — which is in my riding — will be getting 
that money as well. Now that’s commitment. 
 
The Centenary Capital Fund — $30 million a year for the next 
four years for $120 million to address infrastructure needs. That 
money will go to municipal infrastructure, transportation, and 
environmental cleanup, post-secondary education capital 
projects, K to 12 capital projects, social housing, which is very 
important; as well as parks and heritage properties. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government that’s on the move, that’s 
providing the infrastructure that’s required for fiscal 
responsibility. 
 
Highways, Highways — $250 million a year, the largest budget 
in Saskatchewan history. That’s what this government is 
committed to — well on its way to a billion dollars. 
Performance, performance. 
 
Deficits and debts, part of more fiscal responsibility. When this 
government took over in ’91, the share of GDP (gross domestic 
product) of the debt was 70 per cent in 1991 — 70 per cent. 
That’s been reduced till today to 36 per cent and under this 
budget will be 31 per cent. However, I hate to say . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Member here from Regina said where did that 
come from? The interest on that debt is still $677 million, the 
hangover from the 1980s Tory debt. 
 
I ask the members here: what could we do with $677 million 
each and every year? I’ve got my list and I’d be interested in 
hearing your lists. But here’s my short list. We could find $300 
million for farmers. We could double the Highway budget to 
$500 million, and even with that we could still deliver a tax cut 
of $127 million each and every year — $127 million tax cut. 
That’s with the Tory plan of running up debts in the 1980s. 
Saskatchewan people are still dealing with the hangover of the 
Tory Party in 1980s. 
 
Another part of fiscal responsibility is the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, which replaces the liquor and gaming fund. That is a fund 
that is transparent. It’s 5 per cent of the budget. It will be used 
as a cushion, used as a savings account, as an emergency fund 
for unforeseen difficulties. 
 
(1915) 
 
But do you know what that fund isn’t going to be used for? That 
fund should not be used for bailing out the federal government 
from their responsibilities to fight the American and European 
treasuries, which is what the Sask Party on this side would have 
us do. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m very disappointed in December. 
I came here the first eight days of the legislature. We had a very 
historic coalition of agriculture groups from every part of this 
province. However, going back to that quote about expediency 
being for the day . . . expedience for the hour and principles for 
the ages, the SAP across the way broke with that coalition. 
 
Why did they break with the coalition? Because they wanted 
some short-term political expedient gain. They got that gain. 
They had the people on the front. They had the people 
campaigning down in the restaurant. But where did that get us? 

It didn’t get us anywhere. It basically took the federal 
government off the hook, and that is not appropriate. 
 
The last part about fiscal responsibility, and this is actually 
quite an important one, and that is political stability. Political 
stability is a very good part of this budget for fiscal 
responsibility. With this government, businesses can plan for 
the future. There’s no hidden surprises. They know we’re 
trustworthy. Our word is our bond. We have a proven track 
record of fiscal responsibility and political stability. 
 
When the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
worked with labour and with farm groups to form the New 
Democratic Party, it was a coming together of progressive 
voices, to again achieve together that which cannot be 
accomplished alone. 
 
That was over 35 years ago, Mr. Speaker, that the New 
Democratic Party started. I am very proud to say that my father 
was one of the first NDP candidates while my mother was 
pregnant with me. I do recall some of those speeches, Mr. 
Speaker, but they were a little bit muffled. 
 
Contrast that personal history with some of the members 
opposite. In the last four years, some members of the opposite 
have been members of up to six political parties — six political 
parties. Number one, the Saskatchewan Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s one. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Two, the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two. 
 
Mr. Addley: — The federal Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three. 
 
Mr. Addley: — The Reform Party of Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Four. 
 
Mr. Addley: — The Conservative Reform Alliance Party, 
C-CRAP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Now the Canadian Reform Conservative 
Alliance Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six. 
 
Mr. Addley: — And if Joe Clark wins his case in the court, you 
can add a seventh name change in the last four years . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I didn’t throw that one in. 
 
Now when you think about Preston Manning and Joe Clark — 
and that’s an alliance — and this side of the House talks about 
forced amalgamation. 
 
I do have to say, turning a little bit to the federal side of politics, 
I didn’t think anything would be possible for me to come to the 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

conclusion that Preston Manning is a moderate. I didn’t think 
anything could happen for that. But after reading some of 
Stockwell Day’s — and the member from Kindersley knows 
that individual quite well — after reading some of Stockwell 
Day’s radical right comments, Preston is learning to look like a 
little bit of a moderate. And maybe for some of these people he 
is not right wing enough any more. We’ll see. He’s starting to 
look like the kinder, gentler Reform Party. 
 
But anyway, back to the budget. Further on the topic of political 
stability, Mr. Speaker. Within my riding is a brand new 
subdivision that didn’t exist before 1991. And that subdivision, 
Mr. Speaker, is called Arbor Creek. Now we can’t take all of 
the credit because that new subdivision is largely the hard work 
and entrepreneurial spirit of individuals pursuing the 
Saskatchewan dream of prosperity. 
 
However, it’s also the framework and the environment and the 
stability — the political stability— provided by the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the government of Saskatoon. And that 
political stability to plan for the future, to invest in jobs, invest 
in growth, and see a realization on your investment, that’s what 
this government is providing, that’s what this government is 
committed to in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Now as important as fiscal responsibility is, and 
as a good Scot I think it’s very important, there’s really no point 
— there’s no point, Mr. Speaker, in having fiscal responsibility 
unless you can couple that with social responsibility. Social 
responsibility can mean a lot of different things to a lot of 
different people. But it can mean . . . what it means to me is this 
one fundamental point, and this is an important point. It’s not 
leaving anyone behind in our society because there’s no point in 
getting ahead if everybody doesn’t get ahead. We’ve got to look 
after the weakest part in our society because that’s what this 
country and this province is based on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Contrast that with the members opposite. It is 
not a survival-of-the-fittest mentality, an 
everyone-for-themselves mentality. It’s not leaving anyone 
behind. 
 
Health care funding is a very important part of providing social 
responsibility. I touched a little earlier on some of the 
comments of how bad things really are in Alberta versus 
Saskatchewan. However, in Saskatchewan what we will be 
doing is the funding for health care will be increased and will 
now make up about 40 per cent of the budget, a 5 per cent 
increase of anywhere between 63 million over last year or 113 
million over last year’s budget, however you want to account 
for it. As well, in addition to that, will be a $150 million 
transition fund for the upcoming transitional improvements to 
the delivery of health care. 
 
Now the members opposite will be very concerned and will 
want to do a little bit of scaremongering, but it’s related to what 
Minister Rock, the federal Health minister’s talking about. 
Providing home care and new ways of delivering health care 
and providing efficiency in the system, but ensuring that 

everybody is served with health care without having the tax 
collector, without having the collections agency chasing you 
down like you have in Alberta. 
 
Low-income residents are protected. That’s another aspect of 
social responsibility — $285,000 people will be qualifying for 
the sales tax credit, I’m told; 55,000 people will be removed 
from the tax rolls — 55,000 people. 
 
Aboriginal people, we’ve talked a little bit about that in the last 
little while. We need to respect the treaty rights. There’s a 
fundamental difference between the way that the people who 
came to Canada and met the people who were here versus the 
way the immigrants from Europe and others came to the 
Americans . . . to the United States and tried to force their way 
into that country. 
 
There was some talk about the violence that took place in the 
States for when, they call it settling of the United States, 
whereas in Canada we took a more compromising way. We 
signed treaties, treaties which, by the way, are agreements 
between two groups of people — the people that were already 
here, the First Nations people, versus those that came to 
Canada. 
 
We need to respect those treaty rights — agreements between 
the First Nations people who were already here and the 
immigrants who wanted to share this land. Obligations and 
responsibilities go hand in hand with rights and privileges. And 
we need to respect that principle and re-establish that principle 
and respect that principle in this House and when we will be 
outside this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And I could go a little bit on, on the affirmative 
action program but that is stretching it from the budget but I’d 
be willing to share those views at a later date. 
 
The taxes paid off-reserve will be less than the amount of the 
benefit of not paying taxes on-reserve. Aboriginal First Nations 
people will be eligible for the sales tax credit. And this is 
something that is beginning to be highlighted by some 
individuals in Saskatchewan, and that is the economic 
development on reserves that will be encouraged with this 
aspect. 
 
I come from northwestern Saskatchewan. And with this change, 
on-reserve businesses, on-reserve economic development, will 
occur. And people have said, well we’ve got to be concerned 
about this because it will put people in rural Saskatchewan, in 
the communities that are non-Aboriginal, out of work and have 
strains on their business. 
 
However I see this as an opportunity — an opportunity to 
develop some treaties today. Treaties that are just a fancy way 
of saying agreements of living together into the future. In fact I 
can see . . . We’ve talked about a former member in this House 
who actually ran a resort town that was owned by the 
Aboriginal people and there was a good working relationship 
with that individual. They found an expertise in this person and 
I’m talking about Gordon McNeill who we talked about in 
December. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

We can expect working together in rural Saskatchewan with 
Aboriginal First Nations people and non-Indian people, and this 
will actually go a long way to making Saskatchewan a better 
place. 
 
There will be no PST (provincial sales tax) on essentials, no 
PST on food, no PST on shelter, no PST on utilities, no PST on 
restaurant meals, no PST on children’s clothing. In fact the PST 
has the narrowest band of taxed goods in all of Canada which 
has a sales tax. 
 
As well, there’s no medicare premium of $816 a family or $408 
a person. It’s terrible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where do you find that? 
 
Mr. Addley: — In Alberta. We have one of the lowest 
unemployment rates in all of Canada. In today’s Leader-Post 
it’s quoted impressive job growth in January of over 4,000 new 
jobs, even with the difficulties that is facing agriculture and 
farm families today. 
 
Some of the exemptions that won’t be taxed: children’s clothing 
and foot gear, footwear; prescription drugs; electricity; farm 
machinery and repairs; fertilizer, pesticide, and seed; food — 
basic groceries, restaurant meals, and staff food; natural gas; 
reading materials; services; used goods with some exemptions; 
toll free telephone numbers; and the list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We hear more and more, Mr. Speaker, about how wonderful life 
is in Alberta. In the budget it shows how much will be charged 
or what the living expenses in Alberta versus Saskatchewan. In 
Saskatoon, the city that I call home now an average single 
person earning $25,000 total income — $9,135 versus $11,500. 
It is $2,367 more expensive to live in Calgary versus Saskatoon 
for that individual. 
 
What about a family of four earning $50,000? A difference of 
$2,581 more expensive to live in Alberta. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a lot of money. 
 
Mr. Addley: — That’s a lot of money. You can buy a lot of 
fishing licences with that. 
 
For a family of four at $75,000, the numbers goes to $1,652. 
It’s not better in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More on the social responsibility aspect, Mr. Speaker. In 
today’s . . . what is the name of this Conrad Black paper? The 
National Post, I think . . . National Post. 
 

. . . the province’s health-care privatization proposal in 
Alberta could lead to a two-tier system. (That’s a quote.) 
. . . there is no evidence showing the proposed private 
“surgical facilities” are more cost-efficient . . . the broad 
conclusion is that for-profit hospitals are not more cost 
efficient than not-for-profit hospitals, and that the cost to 
purchasers are higher.  
 

This is an Alberta health document dated March 2000. And it’s 
provided by the Institute of Health, Economics an independent 

research agency. 
 
Things aren’t better with private health care. Things aren’t 
better with the Alberta system. And there is no tax . . . and there 
is no collection agencies here as well. 
 
I wonder if anybody remembers this quote, “There’s so much 
more we can be.” That was a rallying cry in 1982. “There’s so 
much more we can be.” Yes, we had Saskatchewan’s economy 
growing. Yes, we had the prescription drug plan. Yes, we had a 
school based dental program. Yes, we had very low 
unemployment rates. Yes, we had balanced budgets. All 
positive news. 
 
(1930) 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 there was so much more 
we could be. In 1982, we had our affair with the radical right. 
And we’re still paying for that party with the hangover of debts 
and reduced programs. We’re slowly paying it off but we’ve 
also learned a very hard and bitter lesson, and that’s that the 
grass is not always greener on the other side. 
 
The way up is not the way to Alberta. Saskatchewan, as the 
United Nations has said, is the number one country in the world 
in which to live. Saskatchewan’s the number one country — 
number one province and the number one country in the world 
to live. That’s what the United Nations said. 
 
We were the first province in Canada to balance the books. 
We’ve had seven years of balanced budgets. We’re the only 
province to reduce child poverty. We’ve reduced it by 8 per 
cent. But there’s much more left to do — 8 per cent is not 
enough. We’ve got to go further. With this plan of the budget, 
we’re building Saskatchewan; we’re building a plan for 
prosperity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the members opposite like to 
concentrate on certain areas of the budget which is a tax 
increase, and they seem to say, well a tax increase so it’s a tax 
increase. But if you look at it from a total perspective, as a total 
package, this year there will be a $40 million . . . actually in 
excess of a $40 million tax cut, rising to $260 million in three 
years. 
 
Some of the analogies the members opposite have talked about 
is taking . . . putting money in one pocket and taking it out the 
other. Actually let’s go with that analogy a little bit, and it’s a 
little bit rough. It’s like putting $5 in this pocket and taking $2 
out of that pocket — you’re still left with $3. 
 
Now I see some vacant stares. Maybe it’s not quite simple 
enough, but that’s basically what it is. It’s not quite $3 but it’s 
$260 million. Now the member from Kindersley talks and 
yelps, but I have to say this: those who live in stone-age, stone 
houses shouldn’t throw glasses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just getting warmed up. The quote I started 
with was: “expedients are for the hour; principles for the ages”. 
Now I won’t go on for the full hour but I will indicate that 
principles are more important than expedients, and we need to 
concentrate on that in this House constantly. 
 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

Fiscal responsibility. It’s important. We have a proven track 
record. But just as important — actually more important than 
fiscal responsibility — is social responsibility. And in this 
budget and in this plan we have seen that. We have a balanced 
plan, we have a realistic plan, we have permanent 
improvements in the tax system in spending based on reality, 
not based on empty promises based on rhetoric. 
 
We’re building Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan for 
prosperity, a plan for growth and opportunity, and we do not 
believe in leaving anyone behind in our society. 
 
We’re on the right track, Mr. Speaker. We’re on the right track. 
That is why I will be voting for the budget and against the 
amendment. Thank you much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
stand in this House and reply to the motion before the House. 
 
When you look at the government’s news release the headlines 
on the news release is “Historic Tax Cut.” And we’ve heard a 
lot about this historic tax cut. In fact, the member that just 
finished speaking talked about the historic tax cut. And on first 
glance on budget day when I first looked at the budget it kind of 
reminded me of going to an auction sale and looking at a 
vehicle that had been just freshly painted. From a distance and 
at first glance it didn’t look just too bad until you got a little 
closer. And then you started noticing some of the defects in the 
vehicle. There’s the odd dint here, the door doesn’t close, the 
upholstery is torn. Then when you go to start it up you notice 
the black oily smoke coming out of the exhaust pipe and you 
realize what it actually is. 
 
This is I think a comparison we can use for this budget that was 
presented last week. On first glance there was some things that 
may have looked good to the citizens of the province, but when 
they looked at it more closely they saw it for what it is. It’s 
nothing but a tax grab disguised as a tax cut. 
 
On budget day, this being my first budget day in the House, I 
found it rather interesting with the media scrums outside, with 
the stakeholders in the province representing various groups 
and that sort of thing, and reading the press coverage, watching 
the coverage on TV, and all those sorts of things. And of 
particular interest that caught my attention was the comments 
made by one of our noted political scientists at one of our 
universities. This person was asked the question: who did this 
person think influenced the budget the most. Was it the Liberal 
party or the NDP? Whose influence was most evident in the 
budget? 
 
And it was quite interesting to hear this person’s reply. This 
person replied that it was actually the Saskatchewan Party’s 
influence that was most evident in some phases of the budget. 
The good parts. The lower taxes, the token help to the family 
farm, the farm families and the removal of the gas rebate cap, 
the small rebate on education tax on property. Those are some 
of the things that the analyst said were the good points that were 
reflected in the budget that came directly from the 
Saskatchewan Party. Not the NDP or the Liberals. 
 

Now we heard a lot about these tax cuts. Tax cuts that are going 
to be coming down the road. Most of them are going to start 
taking place. The cuts are going to start taking place in the year 
2001. So what type of a tax cut are we going to see in this 
current taxation year? Well I’ll tell you what it is. It’s one-half 
of one per cent of the flat tax. That’s the extent of the tax cut. 
So what does that mean? To a family, a combined income of 
$50,000 with two children, they have a tax saving of $250. 
That’s what it means. 
 
But just a minute. These people, they talk about tax cuts, but on 
one hand they give you some money in your pocket; the other 
hand they’re taking a whole lot more out. What have they done? 
They’ve expanded the PST. By their own Department of 
Finance charts and figures they say that this very same family, a 
two-income family earning $50,000 with two children, will 
have to spend at least $170 more per year in extra PST. So that 
leaves them a grand total of $80 net in their pockets. But they’re 
not done yet. We just recently had an increase in telephone 
rates, so if you factor that increase in, that takes another $40 out 
of their pockets. So now they’re down to $40. But there’s also 
another cost or increased cost which could be used as a tax 
increase because what does this party do? They take the profits 
from the Crown corporations and put them into General 
Revenue Fund, and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly. So it 
leaves them $40 to pay for the increased SaskEnergy costs and 
to buy a coyote licence. 
 
Now this reminds me . . . when this government talks about tax 
cuts and then bring in tax increases, it reminds me of a 
commercial that was on TV many years ago. And some of the 
younger members in the House may not remember the 
commercial, but the commercial had to do for . . . with canned 
luncheon meats. It was in cartoon form. You had the can of 
luncheon meat and you had a cow, and the dialogue went 
something like this. The cow said to the can, say moo. And the 
can would reply, oink. So the cow said to the can again, say 
moo. And the can would reply and say oink. And the cow 
finally looked at the can and said, why can’t you say moo? And 
the can says, it’s not in me. 
 
And that’s what’s in this government. It’s just not in them to 
give tax . . . to lower taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — They disguise tax cuts by tax increases. 
 
Now what were some of the budget reactions . . . reactions to 
the budget? Well we’ve heard members from this side point out 
some of the real reactions, and one of the reactions from SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) as we read in 
today’s StarPhoenix — they were very, very concerned about 
the increased funding. There’s nowhere near enough to look 
after their increased costs. 
 
The Saskatoon Public School Board is talking about a 3.2 per 
cent mill rate increase. The RMs (rural municipality). If you 
look at the budgets for RMs, the police cost restructuring 
assistance — last year it was $4,109,000; this year what have 
they got — zap, it’s gone — nothing, zero, zap. We hear a lot 
about zap, you’re frozen. Now we have zap, you’re gone, it’s 
gone. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

Now how does this translate into real costs, additional costs for 
an RM? One of the RMs in my constituency provided me with 
some of their real figures and real additional costs that they’ll 
be looking at. 
 
In 1999, their policing costs grant, costs were $8,990. They 
received a grant to offset that of $8,640 — left them with a net 
cost of $350. This year, because of the zap, you’re gone in 
effect, they’re looking at the total cost of policing of $8,990. 
That’s if the policing costs stay the same, and there’s no 
guarantee that that cost will stay the same. In fact, it’s very 
likely that those costs will rise due to the increased fuel costs 
which this government won’t do anything about. 
 
Now we hear about the increased funding for more police 
officers. We heard about the campaign promises of an 
additional 200 officers. We have a bit of an increase, most of 
that going to the cities. We understand that very little, if any, 
additional police officers will be assigned to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We hear about court house closings. I wonder what this 
government has to say to communities like . . . communities in 
my constituency, particularly the community of Lestock who 
was recently had a real problem with break-ins, vehicle thefts, 
seniors are afraid to leave their homes at night. Now it’s even 
getting to the point where they’re afraid to leave their homes 
during the day. 
 
What a difference one additional RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) officer living in that community would make. 
They’ve written to, they’ve phoned, the Minister of Justice’s 
office. They’ve written to him asking for some additional 
policing. What do we get? Zap — nothing. 
 
I’d like to turn my comments to agriculture. Last December in 
this House, the Saskatchewan Party proposed a package that 
would help farm families. We called upon the government to 
take $300 million out of their liquor and gaming fund, their 
slush fund. They say no, we can’t do it, we can’t afford it; it’s 
going to bankrupt the province. It’s going to cost every man, 
woman, and child in this province an additional $300 in taxes. 
 
In February what we said to the government is take the $300 
million, put it on the table, and leave with a bunch more federal 
money. But they wouldn’t hear any of that. 
 
Finally in February, after demonstrations at the legislature, 
people sleeping in the cafeteria — many of them from my 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood — they finally said 
“uncle” and, hat in hand, the Premier went off down to Ottawa 
and says well, I can put $80 million on the table. And with that, 
the federal government said they’d put 180 and we got $260 
million which, when it’s all worked through the payout system, 
we end up with a maximum payout to help farm families of 
$9,000 per farm, at a maximum. 
 
Now fast forward to March 29, budget day. And to our surprise, 
what do we see in liquor and gaming? Not $350 million as we 
were led to believe, but 700 million — double. 
 
Now if . . . just think now. If this government would have done 
as we had suggested, taken that $300 million, put it on the table, 

and said to Ottawa, here’s our 40 per cent, you put up your 60 
per cent, that would have translated into $750 million, which 
would have meant a maximum payout using current formula of 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $25,000. 
 
Now that would have been some real money. That would have 
been a real investment in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan 
agriculture. It would have helped farm families. But no, we’d 
sooner keep that and put it in a slush fund. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to thank the members for leave, in particular the hon. member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood for enabling me to make an 
introduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have cast my glance northward and spot in your 
gallery, four Moose Javians, and I’d like to introduce them to 
you and to the members of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Seated on both sides of my good friend and former member of 
the House, Lorne Calvert, are Gerhard and Dicky Scholten of 
Moose Jaw and accompanying them as well is Herman 
Hilgeman. These folks are here this evening, Mr. Speaker, to 
take a tour of the building. I understand that they were by my 
office, and I apologize for not being able to meet them while 
they were there. They are taking some time to sit in the 
proceedings. These are people who take great interest in the 
parliamentary proceedings of our province, Mr. Speaker, and I 
ask all our members to show them welcome to the House here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now as critic for 
Post-Secondary Education I would like to pass along some 
comments with regards to the budget, this budget as it pertains 
to students in post-secondary education. 
 
During last summer’s election campaign both the parties 
opposite, both the NDP and the Liberals, made some fairly lofty 
promises to students. They said they were going to come to the 
aid of our students, particularly in accessing post-secondary 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

education . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In a minute you’ll hear 
what this party had to say. The NDP promised free tuition for 
one year — that at a cost of $20 million a year. The Liberals, 
not to be undone, promised a thousand dollars per year per 
student for four years — $30 million per year. 
 
As a result of the election, both parties realized that their 
promises were somewhat off the mark so they embarked last 
January on a series of public hearings to meet with the public 
and to get feedback from the public. So what did they hear at 
this meeting, at those public consultations? 
 
I attended over half of those meetings and many times both 
ministers of Education were told that their election promises 
were off base and they should be looking at tax credits after 
graduation. Rather than giving money upfront, they said let the 
students go through their education, help them with student 
loans, give them some tax-free period after they graduate so 
they can get a job, and then start paying down their loan. Well 
we know that that . . . they didn’t . . . both ministers didn’t hear 
that because today we find out that that period of interest-free 
period was zap, gone in the budget, zapped out. 
 
So what did they come down with? Finally after all this 
consultation they came down with a one-time $350 tax credit — 
one time — at a cost of $3 million annually, a far cry from the 
20 and $30 million annual cost that they were talking about in 
the election. 
 
Now, where did they get that idea from? Well of course the 
people told them during the hearings, and that sounded vaguely 
familiar to something that we heard during the Manitoba 
election when the Manitoba Tories suggested that they give a 
$1,000 tax credit for four years for those students that came to 
work in Manitoba. Now again these people they get an idea to 
do something which is probably the right idea except they seem 
somehow to fumble the ball when they try to implement these 
things. 
 
Three hundred and fifty dollar tax credit. I asked several 
students that are graduating, after the budget: is this going to be 
incentive for you to stay in the province, and they said, not 
likely. They said . . . and, in fact, they weren’t aware that their 
six-month interest-free period was no longer in effect. So I 
would suggest that most students will lose more in that six 
months where now they have to pay interest on their student 
loans, than that $350 tax credit. 
 
So the members opposite ask, what did the Saskatchewan Party 
promise students? We didn’t make any false promises to them. 
They knew exactly where they would stand with the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Other things that we find when we look more closely at the 
budget as we found out yesterday, partnerships program that 
helped provide summer jobs for students — zap, it’s gone. It’s 
not frozen. Zap. It’s gone. 
 
The millennium scholarship. This program . . . now this wasn’t 
in the budget, but it has to do with students and post-secondary 
education. What does this government do? Not like Manitoba 
where the students get the millennium scholarship, and they 
also get the provincial bursaries. Oh no, this government can’t 

stand to see people have some extra money. So what do they 
do? A student receives a millennium scholarship. This 
government backs the provincial bursary off. The student is no 
better off than before the millennium scholarship. Who is the 
winner in this case? This NDP government. Those are the only 
winners in this case. 
 
We’ve heard very little from this government of what this 
budget has done for seniors, and it’s not without reason because 
it hasn’t done a thing. In fact, it’s added to their cost of living. 
The expanded . . . What has this budget done? Expanded the 
PST to things like non-prescription drugs, repair services, 
professional fees. All services and items that seniors use. 
 
They’ve also hiked the telephone rates. They say, well it’s only 
on your local service. Well seniors you’ll find make fewer long 
distance phone calls than the rest of us and the largest portion of 
their telephone bill is the monthly service fee. 
 
Also they’ve added . . . to that they’ve increased the energy rate. 
Seniors generally use more heat in their homes because as you 
get older they tell me that you need the home to be warmer. So 
this hike in SaskEnergy rate, who’s it going to hurt? Seniors. 
 
Another thing that has caused seniors concern is this proposed 
amalgamation of municipalities. Seniors living in rural 
Saskatchewan feel . . . You often ask yourself, why do they stay 
in the small towns and hamlets when sometimes there aren’t 
that many services. They have to get someone to drive them to 
the neighbouring town to go to the doctor, to the hospital, to the 
druggist, and so on. One of the reasons they stay there is 
because they know everybody. And they know the mayor of the 
village, they know the councillors. If they have a problem they 
can meet them on the street and ask for their help. They can 
telephone them. They feel very secure. Now with these 
proposed amalgamations they really have them worried. 
They’re worried about having their centre of government 40, 50 
miles down the road, people that they don’t know, they’re not 
familiar with and they’re very concerned. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about this 
historic tax cut that we’ve heard about. As I mentioned earlier, 
it’s historic because it isn’t here. It’s promised down the road 
sometime in 2003; several budgets to go before we get there . . . 
The member hollers from his seat, July 1. One-half of one per 
cent; one-half of one per cent tax relief. The member from 
North Battleford mentions July 1. One-half of one per cent. So 
what does this government do with their tax cuts and tax 
increases? They give you a dollar and they take two with the 
other hand. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I’ll be 
voting against the motion and voting for the amendment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and hon. members. It is my pleasure to enter into debate on this 
historic, tax cutting budget for the year of 2000-2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I want to make very, very clear as I 
begin my remarks is that I stand very, very firmly in support of 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

the motion before us, as a strong supporter of this budget which 
is a budget that is targeted, Mr. Speaker, for the future — a 
budget that is targeted to build for Saskatchewan the 
opportunity and growth that we deserve for our people in our 
province of Saskatchewan in the new century and in the new 
millennium. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened very, very carefully to the remarks 
of the hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who serves 
in this Assembly as the critic for Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training. And I want to acknowledge and commend the 
fact that he attended a good number of the consultation 
meetings that we had around the province in January. And I 
want to commend his professional commitment in doing that. 
 
I noted, Mr. Speaker, that he said that he heard, as I did, many 
people at those public meetings say that they wanted to see their 
tax dollars used to be in support of students, and that they 
supported directing assistance of students towards the end of 
their academic career. And in fact, many spoke in favour of the 
question that the Vicq report, Mr. Speaker, had asked us to 
consider; and that’s whether there should be introduced for the 
first time in Canada, Mr. Speaker, here in our province, a tax 
credit for graduates. 
 
We heard that said, Mr. Speaker, and as the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood would acknowledge, he heard the 
Minister of Finance refer to that on Wednesday of last week as 
we introduced, here in the province, Canada’s first graduate tax 
credit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I noted with interest — I noted with interest, 
Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member said that there were two 
parties in the election that made post-secondary education a 
priority. And he correctly identified them as these two parties 
on this side of the House when we had the debates in the last 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now both of these parties, Mr. Speaker, acknowledged that the 
proposals as to how to best support the access to post-secondary 
education were not well received, Mr. Speaker, and determined, 
determined to act in a way that would be consistent with the, 
with the wishes of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now, what I find, what I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, as I 
listen to the other side — because I hear now rumblings; the 
hounds are baying a tad here, Mr. Speaker. When I listened — I 
listened very carefully — he said, he said the Sask Party had 
something to say in the election about post-secondary 
education, and he said the Sask Party made no false promises, 
and he said that he was going to detail what the Sask Party said 
about post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. And what did he 
say after he said that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Nothing. Nothing. He repeated in his 
speech exactly what the Saskatchewan Party said in the 
election, Mr. Speaker — nothing. They sat on their tongues 
throughout that election when it came to post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker. And the hon. member acknowledges 
that there are two parties in this Assembly who support quality 
access to post-secondary education, and they sit here in 

government. And post-secondary education is a priority for the 
people of Saskatchewan and a priority for their government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he will also criticize — and I’ll come back 
to these in my remarks — he will criticize some priority 
decisions. He will note, Mr. Speaker, that as we had the public 
hearings and the people said very, very carefully, they said they 
expect the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training and their government to spend their taxes wisely. 
 
Now this is a foreign concept to the Saskatchewan Party. This is 
a foreign concept, Mr. Speaker, because when it comes to 
prudent management of the taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t, we don’t hear any restraint. All we hear coming from the 
other side, Mr. Speaker, is take the taxes down, put the 
spending up, never mind the amounts — it’s back to the 1980s 
and Grant Devine all over again, Mr. Speaker. It sounds a tad 
familiar, and it is lacking — lacking — in fiscal prudence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I find it interesting that when, that when a member of the 
government would stand and talk about exercising fiscal 
prudence, that somehow the members of the opposition would 
find that offensive. Just listen, just listen, just listen. Do we hear 
the objections to fiscal prudence, Mr. Speaker? All you have to 
do, all you have to do is just, just listen to the opposition. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ m not here to talk about the opposition — 
I am here to talk about a positive plan for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I am here to speak in support of our government. 
 
(2000) 
 
And the first thing I want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, is that 
this government said post-secondary is a priority. It says that in 
its budget. It said that at a time when inflation is running a little 
bit less than 2 per cent, by increasing the funding for 
post-secondary education by $27 million — about 5.6 or 5.7 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government said loud and 
clear in this budget on Wednesday that post-secondary 
education is a priority for us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that because we are well aware that 
here in Saskatchewan when it comes to post-secondary 
education, we are in the future business — that is what this is 
all about. We’re in the future business. And it is the 
responsibility in my judgment, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education has a responsibility to 
take those hard-earned Saskatchewan taxpayer dollars and 
spend them as prudently as we can in the interest of our 
students and in the interest of our province. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what it’s all about. 
 
It’s about taking those resources, making priority decisions — 
sometimes difficult decisions but that’s what they expect of 
responsible politicians — and spending the money as 
effectively as we can to enhance the opportunities for training 
for our citizens to make decisions about their own training and 
their own knowledge and their own qualifications, to shape 
their own futures. And, Mr. Speaker, to balance that with the 
needs of our province and to work in concert with the Minister 
of Economic and Co-operative Development so that we provide 
the training support for our economic development strategies to 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

ensure that we do the best job we can of providing 
Saskatchewan opportunity for Saskatchewan training for 
Saskatchewan jobs. That’s a future-oriented activity, and that is 
what the people of Saskatchewan have a right to expect of their 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — But before I get into some detail on the 
post-secondary field, Mr. Speaker, I just want to acknowledge 
the significance of the tax adjustments that took place and were 
announced and introduced in this session. Now I find, Mr. 
Speaker, very interesting that the hon. members opposite, the 
hon. members opposite will say that there is no tax break in this 
budget. Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. 
Nothing could be further from the truth . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the hon. member shouts from his seat, 
nothing today. Has the hon. member ever heard about 
forward-looking and future planning? This too is a foreign 
concept, it would seem. This too is a foreign concept, it would 
seem, Mr. Speaker, coming from the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in this budget what was 
introduced is changes in our tax system that followed four 
important principles to the members of this government when 
making decisions about how we change the tax system. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the tax system is changing — mark our words — 
and it’s there for all to see. But there are four principles that 
were put into play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, point number one: we said when going to a tax 
system it’s important in order for it to be fair, that it has to be a 
progressive tax system. Simply put, those who have the greater 
ability to pay will pay a larger percentage of their taxes. And 
with the system that is implemented, Mr. Speaker, come 
January 1 of next year, there will be a progressive tax system 
which, when it reaches its conclusion, will provide for tax on 
income of 11 per cent up to $35,000, of 13 per cent from 35 to 
$100,000, and for those with over $100,000, taxation at 15 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s progressive taxation. 
 
We also said, Mr. Speaker, that when you’re introducing tax 
changes and introducing tax cuts, that as a matter of fact, the tax 
reductions must come from new monies. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think all of the hon. members will recognize, even on that side, 
that when they look at the tax reductions —not this year but 
next year and the year after and the year after — it’s called 
forward planning, it’s called forward looking, it’s called 
building an economy, Mr. Speaker. They will recognize that all 
of those tax reductions are more than funded from new funds 
that come into the coffers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number three, Mr. Speaker, number three. The principle was 
accepted by the government that when you’re making tax 
reductions it is only fair that it be done in a balanced kind of 
way, and that in fact there must be at least more spending, at 
least as much if not more, spending on program enhancement 
than on tax reductions. Contrary to our friends in the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, and contrary — contrary — to the 
theories proposed by the hon. members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our federal government brought in a budget. What did it offer 
the people of Saskatchewan a month ago, Mr. Speaker? It said it 

offered $58 billion in tax cuts. And what did it say it offered for 
health and for post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker? It said it 
offered $2.5 billion over four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I contrast this with the approach of this 
government. Members opposite will acknowledge when they 
look in the budget books and add up the figures that there is a 
reduction in tax revenues being received this year, Mr. Speaker, 
in excess of $43 million — a tax reduction in excess of $43 
million. 
 
But when they look at the increase in spending, Mr. Speaker, 
including for post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, in 
post-secondary education alone, funding has been increased by 
$27 million. 
 
And so there is a balance, Mr. Speaker. Not only in 
post-secondary education, but in education and health and 
social programs, Mr. Speaker, and highways and so on. 
 
And fourthly, Mr. Speaker, we said there was a principle that 
was extremely important to all of us. We said that when you’re 
making tax changes, the tax changes must leave people better 
off, but most critically they must leave those who have the least 
amount of income in a better position than they were before. 
 
That was an important principle, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when I looked at this budget and I look at the 
implications and I look at the fact that what came into effect on 
Wednesday night of last week was a sales tax rebate which will 
go, Mr. Speaker, to some 285,000 Saskatchewan people. When 
I look at the fact that some 55,000 Saskatchewan people who 
were currently paying Saskatchewan income tax are being 
removed entirely from the Saskatchewan income tax rolls, Mr. 
Speaker, I say with a great deal of pride: this is a budget; these 
are tax changes that will be progressive; they will be balanced; 
and they will be sustainable; and they will be fair; and 
particularly they will leave those with lowest incomes better 
off. Those are the principles and that’s what’s happening in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when I look at the budget I 
want to recall the words of the Minister of Finance, who talked 
about the vision for the future of Saskatchewan, and to quote 
what he said, he referred to Saskatchewan as a place where, and 
I quote: 
 

where our young people find real opportunities to develop 
their talents to contribute to and benefit from a dynamic, 
growing economy. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what this budget positions the people 
of Saskatchewan to do and to experience. 
 
We’ll all recognize, Mr. Speaker, that we are, here in 
Saskatchewan and across the country, moving increasingly into 
a knowledge-based world and knowledge-based economy. And 
in that place it is important that we dedicate the necessary 
resources and we spend them wisely, and we prioritize to do 
that when looking at post-secondary education. 
 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, for post-secondary education, 
we saw increased operating funds for our universities and 
SIAST and regional colleges and Aboriginal institutions. Mr. 
Speaker, an increase of 4 per cent in funding to all of our 
institutions to keep tuition increases in check and to enable 
them to concentrate on excellence and expansion of programs 
— an additional expenditure, Mr. Speaker, in excess of $10.3 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw in this budget capital funding for key 
projects increasing. We saw in this budget, Mr. Speaker, greater 
capacity for training nurses to meet the emerging labour market 
needs of Saskatchewan. We saw in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
additional funds to bridge . . . to bring the campus to the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I went around the province of Saskatchewan 
I listened to people and they said, what’s the reality of making 
post-secondary education accessible; they said the tuitions that 
our students pay, that’s a factor. 
 
But when I get outside of Regina and Saskatoon they said a 
much greater factor than that is the cost of living away from 
home. That’s the reality. That’s the reality. That’s the greater 
detriment . . . or deterrent to being able to get access to 
post-secondary education. And they said they wanted us to look 
at different ways, at better ways of bringing the campus to the 
student. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, people in rural and northern 
Saskatchewan have a deep appreciation for the work of the 
regional colleges and for the use of SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network) as a vehicle to bring the campus to 
the student. And they asked to look at additional ways of doing 
that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that in this budget there is 
an increase in the funding for technology enhanced learning of 
$1.4 million, taking it to a budget this year of $1.65 million, Mr. 
Speaker, to increase our ability to bring the campus to the 
students in rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when we went around 
Saskatchewan, people said don’t try and fix little problems with 
big solutions. But when you see a problem in terms of access to 
post-secondary, put your finger on it and address it directly. 
And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that we were able to in this 
budget to increase the access to post-secondary education for 
people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is in existence the employability assistance 
for persons with disability. It is intended, Mr. Speaker, to give 
access to post-secondary education, access to the labour market 
and transition. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say 
that we increased the budget for EAPD (employability 
assistance for people with disabilities) by a million dollars from 
4 to 5, an increase of 25 per cent, to enhance the access of 
disabled people to post-secondary education in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development has talked 
about with her strategy for the economy that will be released later 
entitled progress for prosperity, Mr. Speaker, but has also 
identified earlier is the significance in terms of potential of 
expansion of our forestry industry here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it should ought not to be overlooked. That what was 
dedicated to enhance the training of people in northern 
Saskatchewan to take northern jobs in the forestry industry. Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to say that the forestry industry will have 
dedicated from this provincial government an additional $1 
million in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there is another category of 
educational institutions that I want to draw attention to just briefly 
and then to put it into a context. And that’s our Aboriginal 
institutions, Mr. Speaker, who do an excellent job of training 
people of First Nations and Metis ancestry and others, Mr. 
Speaker, in acquiring their post-secondary credentials. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members may acknowledge that about three 
weeks ago I released, and my department released, a labour 
market trends forecast. And what it said, Mr. Speaker, was 
when we look at what’s going on in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan today and in the labour market is that the world 
is about to change. It’s about to change here in Saskatchewan as 
it is across the nation, Mr. Speaker. What’s the reality? The 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that the baby boomers are starting to 
retire. That’s true in Canada. It’s equally true in Saskatchewan. 
In fact it’s a little more true in Saskatchewan because our 
average age in our province is slightly higher than the national 
average and the baby boom retirement is hitting here a little 
sooner. 
 
And we forecast, Mr. Speaker, that in about 2008 there will be a 
critical tightening of the labour market, and we’re moving in 
that direction all the time to this decade. The world is about to 
change. In the ’80s and the ’90s, for many the reality was they 
got training and then you look for work and it was difficult to 
find. Why? Because in our economy many of those baby 
boomers were well established and they were at the top of many 
organizations and they weren’t moving. Mr. Speaker, now 
they’re moving on. And what this means is that through this 
first decade of the new century, Mr. Speaker, is that there will 
be a tightening of the labour market, and it’ll become 
increasingly difficult for employers to find employees. The 
attitudes are going to shift. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one great advantage over 
the rest of the nation. And that’s that in our nation we have, 
behind this retirement of the baby boomers and a shrinking of 
the labour market, we have another little mini baby boom of our 
own that’s our great advantage. It is the young people of 
Aboriginal ancestry, Mr. Speaker, who are now into and 
entering the K to 12 system, who come the end of the decade 
will be available to take their place in the labour market of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s our great advantage in our 
province as compared to the rest of the nation. 
 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

And so therefore there is a challenge. There is a challenge to 
post-secondary; there is a challenge to partners in industry; 
there is challenge to all of our institutions, including our 
Aboriginal institutions, to ensure that we are all working 
together in the interest of our province to ensure that we have 
available to us a pool of educated and trained Aboriginal men 
and women to take their rightful places, active participants in 
our economy, Mr. Speaker. That is our great advantage, and I’m 
proud to say in this budget we are preparing for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that a 
competitive tax system is part of what it takes to attract and 
retain skilled workers. I’ll come back to the realities of 
graduates and their location in the nation in a few moments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But first of all what I’d like to do is to talk about the vision and 
the goals of the post-secondary department, post-secondary 
sector, which is part of our vision for support in this economy. I 
talked earlier about the Minister of Finance’s statement of his 
vision for Saskatchewan, and the vision for post-secondary 
education is this: through continuous learning all Saskatchewan 
people have the knowledge, skills, and abilities to benefit from 
and contribute to society and the economic prosperity of the 
province . . . said the clip, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, in The 
Future Business. 
 
And this year marks the first time, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to 
say, that there will be a comprehensive, sector-wide strategic 
planning process and a strategic plan that will be put in place 
for all of the post-secondary partners to be able to see, and 
they’ve been contributing to it — I thank them for that — to 
ensure that we’ve got the ability to make the priority decisions 
to take those limited resources, tax resources, and spend them 
as wisely as we can. 
 
And in our strategic plan, Mr. Speaker, we’ve identified five 
goals for our sector, and I’d like to share them with you now. 
They are these: 
 
Number one, the first goal is that there is effective leadership in 
the post-secondary education training and employment services 
sector, and the department accepts that responsibility with 
pride. 
 
Number two, the province will have a sustainable, high-quality 
post-secondary education training and employment services 
sector, and it’s important therefore, Mr. Speaker, to work with 
our partners. And I’m proud to say that here in the province of 
Saskatchewan our universities, SIAST, regional colleges, 
Aboriginal institutions, private vocational schools, 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission, Mr. 
Speaker, our career and employment services centres are all 
working with a new and vibrant mandate. And most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, they are working co-operatively in 
the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, our goal is that the sector will meet the 
needs of individuals and communities. As I said earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, post-secondary education, most critically, must be 
there to do the best job we can in providing the resources for 
our people to be able to make . . . to get the qualifications, the 
knowledge, the skills, the competencies, to make their own 
direction choices about their careers and their futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth goal is that the sector will meet the 
needs of employers and industry and contribute to economic 
growth because surely it must be our objective to provide the 
Saskatchewan training to Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan jobs. And therefore we must work in partnership, 
Mr. Speaker, not only with our institutions but also with 
industry and employers. 
 
And fifthly, Mr. Speaker, the sector promotes the discovery, 
integration, application, and the transfer of knowledge. We have 
some research responsibilities, and I noted with interest that it 
was just in today’s newspaper that — and although this didn’t 
come up for some reason, raised by the opposition — that the 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development was at 
the University of Saskatchewan to be a part of announcing $1 
million in funding from the Saskatchewan government in 
support of four different research projects going on at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, without question, 
post-secondary education continues to be one of the key 
provincial priorities here in our province. And the labour 
market trends analysis that I released about three weeks ago — 
that I referred to just moments ago — clearly shows that there 
will be tens of thousands of job opportunities in this coming 
decade. 
 
I point out with interest as well another fact that has not come 
up raised from the lips of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, that just recently about a month and a half ago, the 
pan-Canadian indicators reported . . . showed that 
Saskatchewan spending on education is higher than the 
Canadian average. And I say that with pride, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the record of some of our 
institutions here in Saskatchewan, and I note the SIAST annual 
grad survey that it is typical of that survey, Mr. Speaker, that 90 
per cent of the grads, six months after graduation, who are 
seeking employment, in fact are employed. And I say with 
some pride, Mr. Speaker, that the most recent survey, the ’98 
grads from SIAST six months after graduation not only were 90 
per cent of them employed, about two-thirds of them precisely 
in their area of training, but, Mr. Speaker, 97 per cent of them 
were employed right here in our Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, our institutions have formed 
successful partnerships with industry and they must do more. It 
is important that we spend taxpayer dollars wisely and 
prudently in a priority kind of way. And so I expect that our 
institutions will have partnerships and continue to build 
partnerships with industry. 
 
I point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that four years into the 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

university revitalization process Saskatchewan’s universities 
continue to grow in quality and efficiency in a co-operative way 
that I have never seen before in my experience in the 
post-secondary sector, and I compliment them for that. 
 
But we do face a number of challenges, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
afraid that I have to say that one of challenges we face was a 
federal budget. And I think it’s impossible to use . . . no other 
word to describe the reaction, my personal reaction to the 
federal budget than to say it was one of disappointment. When I 
was asked by the media how I felt, what I thought about the 
federal budget, I said it was less, it was less than we had 
expected and way less than we had hoped. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me put this into a perspective. The 
federal government has traditionally contributed not only to 
Saskatchewan, but to all the provinces in support of health and 
education and social services, post-secondary education through 
the CHST, or Canada Health and Social Transfer. 
 
And we saw in this country, Mr. Speaker, our federal 
government through the ’90s deciding to tackle their deficit in a 
way quite different from here in the province of Saskatchewan 
by reducing their funding to social programs. We saw in this 
province alone, Mr. Speaker, in 1995 and 1996 reductions in 
CHST transfers to our province in excess of $200 million — 
$200 million reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am proud to say, although it was not easy, that Saskatchewan 
stood alone in the nation — Saskatchewan stood alone in the 
nation in 1995 and 1996 — and backfilled every one of those 
lost federal dollars in support of health and post-secondary 
education right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And so we thought with the federal 
government talking about their $100 billion forecast in surplus 
that there were going to be some funds to assist not just us, but 
all the provinces across the nation. 
 
Now as we prepared for our budgets, Mr. Speaker, we had 
reason to believe, we had reason to believe that what they were 
going to provide this year, contrary to the calls by all of the 
premiers, all of the ministers of Education, all of the ministers 
of Finance in the summer and the fall, to begin to restore the 
CHST funding to allow us to rebuild some of the strained health 
programs that we’ve got going on and to be able to respond in 
ways that are growing critical across the nation in access to 
post-secondary education. 
 
The sad news, Mr. Speaker, was that we were expecting the 
night before the budget, the federal budget, that what they were 
going to say is that not that they were going to restore CHST 
funding but that they were going to provide $3.5 billion in 
one-time funding for a year and we thought, Mr. Speaker, that 
was devastating news. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if only it would have been that good. 
Because when we listened to the federal budget, what they 
announced was not $3.5 billion for health and post-secondary 
education across the nation, one-time funding for a year. What 
they said is there would be $2.5 billion for health and 

post-secondary education all across the nation for four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was a desertion of the obligations of the 
federal government to the people of Saskatchewan and across 
the nation. I say shame on them. This is not an approach to 
budget balancing that will be taken by this government which is 
committed to priorities in health and post-secondary education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — So I think, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the 
words from the federal government, we’ve been led to believe 
that there were expectations that would be realized but in fact 
they were failed expectations, Mr. Speaker. Some will question 
the significance of that in terms of sustaining things like the 
social union framework and, Mr. Speaker, these will challenge 
us all. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I went around the province of 
Saskatchewan, people said we must spend — as I said several 
times earlier — we must spend taxpayers’ dollars in a prudent 
kind of way. 
 
And so I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that this budget 
meets the fist of fiscal prudence. Fiscal prudence means you 
understand what your priorities are, you take your limited 
resources, you spend them the best you can, and you focus on 
your priorities. And our priorities, Mr. Speaker, are doing the 
best we can to meet the real needs of students. 
 
Now let me just talk for a moment, Mr. Speaker, about some 
things that are changing and to comment on a couple of subjects 
that the hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood raised in 
his remarks. He talked, Mr. Speaker, about the summer 
employment program, Mr. Speaker. And what does he say, as I 
mention it. Zap, it’s gone. 
 
Is that a criticism of this government? Is that a criticism of this 
government? I ask the hon. members, would the Saskatchewan 
Party be continuing the program? Well they’ve gone silent, 
they’ve gone silent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me explain, Mr. Speaker. We have had a student summer 
employment program in Saskatchewan, put in place a number 
of years ago, to support the creation of student summer 
employment — a very important phenomenon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, what exists, Mr. Speaker, what exists in the province, 
across the nation in fact, is a federal subsidy program that is in 
fact much richer and much more attractive. Now let me just 
explain them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan summer employment program provided a 
$1.20 an hour subsidy for student summer employment. The 
federal program — and I’ll be interested to hear whether the 
members opposite would say that their prudent decision would 
be to do something different. The federal program, Mr. Speaker, 
provides for — and the federal program is there — provides for 
employers a subsidy in the range of a minimum of $2.50 an 
hour to as much as $5.60 an hour, Mr. Speaker — substantially 
richer. 
 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

Would the hon. members say that we should take Saskatchewan 
taxpayer dollars and compete with a federal program with the 
same objectives that is much richer? And how do we know that 
it’s more attractive to employers, Mr. Speaker? All you have to 
do is look at the facts. The reality is that last year, Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan summer employment program approved 
applications from employers who requested the program. Mr. 
Speaker, 64 per cent of the employers who were approved for 
the Saskatchewan summer employment program said they 
didn’t want it. Two-thirds said they didn’t want it because they 
got the federal program, it was a better program, and they didn’t 
want the Saskatchewan program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, is it a wise expenditure of three-quarters of a 
million of Saskatchewan tax dollars to continue with a program 
that is in competition with a richer federal program that 
employers are saying they don’t want? Is this fiscal prudent 
Saskatchewan Party style? Is this responsible government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made a priority decision to redirect those funds 
in ways that will be of greater benefit to students in 
Saskatchewan, more directed to students in Saskatchewan, and 
that’s what we’re doing in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And I’ll come to those in a moment. It’s a 
number of things in combination. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member also raises the question of 
the six-month grace on interest following graduation for 
students. Now he doesn’t say this, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t say 
that there are in fact two student loans that students get. One is 
a Canada student loan, one is a Saskatchewan student loan. The 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, that when students graduate, for the 
large majority, two-thirds or more of their total debt is the 
Canada student loan. The bursaries that are going on are 
bursaries provided to bring down the debt that students have on 
their Saskatchewan student loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me point out that here in Saskatchewan we 
loan, in the student loan program, some 50 to $60 million a 
year. And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget year, in the 1999-2000 
budget year, the Saskatchewan student loan program provided 
bursaries forgiving over $22 million of Saskatchewan student 
loan monies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now I say, Mr. Speaker, and you compare 
that across the country, there is no place like Saskatchewan to 
be a student. The best student loan program in Canada is right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — That’s the reality. Now what do we know 
about the Canada student loan? We know that the Canada 
student loan never has, it does not, and it never has had a grace 
period for the six months after graduation. It’s never been there. 
It’s not there now. It’s never been there. Never been there. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, we also know that earlier this year 

we heard on the news, we all heard it, that the Canadian 
government lost their ability to contract with the banks in 
support as lenders for student loans. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, despite philosophical objections some may 
have, that’s a significant factor. That’s a significant factor. 
Those bank contracts for Canada and for the provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, are very significant in terms of being able to assure the 
availability of student loans monies for our students as they’re 
working to build their futures. 
 
And so the Canadian government said that they were no longer 
going to be able to provide that through contracts with the 
banks and they were going to lend Canadian taxpayer money. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now this leaves all of the provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker, in 
a position that is very, very difficult. We know, we know that as 
a result of our contract with the banks here in Saskatchewan, it 
has been able to save us, to make budgeting more predictable, 
in predictable ways to provide the priority spending to 
post-secondary education, and to save ourselves in order to be 
able to redirect it in other ways, millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. Millions and millions of dollars. That’s the reality. 
 
Now as a result, Mr. Speaker, of the change by the federal 
government, the provinces have got a couple of choices. Do you 
partner with the federal government and therefore find yourself 
in a position where you adapt your loan arrangements to their 
loan arrangements? I point out the Canada student loan never 
has had the six-month grace, Mr. Speaker. Or do you work hard 
to try and make yourselves attractive in order to get the contract 
with the bank in order to provide stable funding. 
 
In either case, Mr. Speaker, the reality is this. In either case — 
whether it’s partnering with the federal government or whether 
it is negotiating with banks — a deterrent in both of those cases 
is the grace period. And so it is with some . . . Mr. Speaker, 
with some sadness that I find myself feeling that a priority 
decision had to be made if you truly care about the long-term 
security and the availability of student loans. That’s what 
responsible politicians do. That’s what people do when they are 
dealing with priorities and concerns for the realities of student 
needs. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, a decision was made — not happily — 
but it was made. I point out that it has no effect on students who 
are graduating this spring. It goes into effect on August 1. And I 
point out as well very, very, clearly . . . Let me make it very 
clear that nothing has changed in terms of the first payment. It 
has always been that students have six months to make that first 
payment, and that continues, and that will continue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I repeat, when I look at the package together, I look at the 
fact that two years ago this province — ahead of the rest of the 
nation — decided to improve the support for students in our 
province with greatest financial need and introduce the bursary 
program that is the best in the nation. That this is a province 
that stands proud of our support for our students and has the 
best student loan program in the nation — bar none, Mr. 
Speaker. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I go on and I look at 
other priorities and changing priorities in changing times, one 
of the things that we need to attend to is the physical plants of 
our institutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I note that we are providing in this budget an additional 
new capital expenditure in support of the . . . (inaudible) . . . for 
air conditioning at the University of Regina in the form, Mr. 
Speaker, of a million dollars in this budget as a first payment. 
 
I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that we are making first payment to 
the University of Saskatchewan in support for construction for 
the new Thorvaldson Building and the kinesiology building. 
And that’s a new expenditure, Mr. Speaker, to the University of 
Saskatchewan of $7 million in this budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I point out with some pride what this budget 
introduced for six departments — including the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training — the Centenary 
Capital Fund, Mr. Speaker. A fund that will provide $5 million 
each year over the next four years — $20 million — in support 
of additional capital projects in post-secondary education; 
preparing for the new century; preparing, helping, and 
supporting our students for the new economy in the new 
century here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn my attention to the matter 
of financial access. The hon. member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood said, he said what he heard is he heard 
when he came to some of the meetings that the people of 
Saskatchewan concerned about access said that one of the 
things you should do is show support and financial assistance 
for students by introducing a tax credit for grads — and we did, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me just reflect on some other things, Mr. Speaker, and 
provide a little more detail to that. Because as a matter of fact, 
the package, Mr. Speaker, that is directly related to financial 
access totals some $16 million, Mr. Speaker, when we put it 
together in a way that the people of Saskatchewan told us made 
sense. 
 
Now, as I said, as I said, Mr. Speaker, they said if you’re going 
to give financial support directly, it’s better at the end as a 
reward than it is at the beginning, Mr. Speaker. And they also 
said, look for ways to provide incentives in order for 
Saskatchewan people who graduate to establish their careers in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when I tie that together with 
the demographic forecast of the labour market trends, it says to 
me that we’re using taxpayer dollars wisely when we’re looking 
for additional ways to add for reasons to be here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we introduced, in this budget, Canada’s 
first graduate tax credit in the amount, Mr. Speaker, of benefit 
to a graduate establishing here of $350. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
Canada first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, who does that apply to, 

who does that apply to? It applies, Mr. Speaker, to 
post-secondary graduates who are taking training in excess of 
six months. It applies to people who earn a degree at our 
universities. Who learn . . . who, Mr. Speaker, attend SIAST 
and get a diploma or certificate from SIAST or through the 
regional colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also applies to graduates of our private 
vocational schools who are taking training programs in excess 
of six months. And, Mr. Speaker, it also applies to our 
apprentices who earn their journeyperson tickets here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s another way of saying to graduates of post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan, who establish their careers here and 
pay Saskatchewan income tax, of saying we support you and we 
welcome you and we want you to be a part of building the 
future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already talked about the 
4 per cent increase in excess of $10 million that go to the 
universities, to SIAST, to the regional colleges; and as well, an 
additional 4 per cent to our Aboriginal institutions as ways of 
increasing their access and their quality of programs and 
keeping tuitions as affordable. Because, Mr. Speaker, although 
they said in the rural areas we want you to look for new ways, 
additional ways to bring the campus to the student; they said we 
want you to work to keep the tuition rates affordable. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are dedicating in excess of $10 million in a 4 per 
cent increase, when inflation is 2 per cent, to our institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also saying, as I said earlier, that we are 
dedicated to improving the access of people, particularly in 
rural and northern Saskatchewan, and we’re increasing the 
technology enhanced learning budget, Mr. Speaker, by $1.4 
million. That’s nearly a five times budget, Mr. Speaker, 
compared to what it was before. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, what it — what we are also providing 
is the increase in funding in support of disabled persons, Mr. 
Speaker, in the EAPD program, an increase of 25 per cent — a 
million dollars — to make it more accessible for people with 
disabilities to participate in post-secondary education. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to the Hon. 
Minister of Education who joined me in the consultations. I 
want to say thank you to the hon. member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, and many other members of the House 
on both sides who attended the meetings because they cared, 
because they cared to see what people were saying and 
concerned about in post-secondary education. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the results, it is with some 
pride that I say we put forth this prudent package. We said the 
principles are going to be this, that we would be bringing in a 
program, Mr. Speaker, that would respond to real student needs. 
It would support quality post-secondary education, and it would 
be fiscally prudent because it would therefore be sustainable. 
Mr. Speaker, that is what we did with this $16 million 
post-secondary access that is delivered in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

And, Mr. Speaker, I point out as well that the benefits that we 
brought . . . that we provide in the student loan program, and the 
improved benefits have aided over 30,000 people. I point out as 
well, Mr. Speaker, that in this budget there is $2.8 million to 
increase the nursing education in Saskatchewan, monies going 
to SIAST and to the university to increase by 80 — from 160 to 
240 — the number of nurses training to meet our health care 
needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I point out that there is an additional $1 million targeted to 
forestry training to assist in the development of the forestry 
industry in northern Saskatchewan, and it will be implemented 
in a way that is similar to the very successful mining strategy 
that we’ve developed through the multi-party training program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude with some reference to 
another reality that I suspect those who are into doom and 
gloom will find very discouraging, because, Mr. Speaker, the 
picture here in Saskatchewan as it relates to our graduates is 
rosier than I think many of the members opposite and others 
may in fact be inclined to think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was just late last year that StatsCanada made a 
report. Every decade or so they do a review and they look at 
what’s happening with graduates in the nation — province by 
province and in the nation. And when they looked at what was 
going on in Saskatchewan, they looked at 1995 graduates in this 
province and every other province, and they looked at where 
were they two years later in 1997 — so after the dust had settled 
and people had established themselves. 
 
And so it gives a very accurate way, Mr. Speaker, in our nation 
. . . This is not Saskatchewan’s work, this is StatsCanada, Mr. 
Speaker. And what they found was this. They said here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, when they looked where 1995 grads 
were two years later, and they subtracted the graduates — the 
university graduates, Mr. Speaker, they subtracted the 
university graduates, who had trained in other provinces who 
had moved to Saskatchewan, and they took that number, Mr. 
Speaker, and then they subtracted from it the number of 
university graduates trained in Saskatchewan who moved 
elsewhere. There was a difference of one — a difference of one. 
Maybe you know him, Mr. Speaker, or her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is that in the 1990s, here in the 1990s 
the number of Saskatchewan university graduates trained in our 
province is the number of university graduates who are 
establishing themselves in our economy. The number moving 
out are identical to the number coming in. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — But the news gets better, Mr. Speaker, the 
news gets better. When we looked at what was happening with 
technically trained grads — I just talked about university grads 
— when we looked at what was happening with technically 
trained grads, Mr. Speaker, what we found was that in fact, in 
Canada, 1995 grads two years later, the number of technically 
trained grads moving into Saskatchewan was in fact 
substantially more than the number of technically trained grads 
who were moving out of Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they put the technically trained grads 
and the university grads all together, they found that there was a 
net in-migration to the province of Saskatchewan of 4 per cent 
increase in the grads who were coming to Saskatchewan over 
those who were leaving. A net increase, Mr. Speaker, a net plus, 
for graduates who are locating themselves in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the ’90s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — That’s the reality, Mr. Speaker. And 
somebody asked me what about Alberta? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if they ask me where are those grads who 
are leaving Saskatchewan when they get their diplomas, 
degrees, and certificates, where are they going to? Well the 
answer is really quite obvious, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 
our neighbouring provinces. They’re going to Alberta, BC 
(British Columbia), Manitoba, and then Ontario, in that order. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we asked where are the grads who are 
coming to Saskatchewan coming from, that’s no more 
surprising, Mr. Speaker. They’re coming from Alberta, 
Manitoba, and BC and Ontario. 
 
And so what we find, Mr. Speaker, is that in this increasingly 
mobile world, that in fact grads are training in a number of 
places and they’re going to other places to establish themselves, 
but when you put it all together, Saskatchewan’s a net winner. 
 
Now how does this compare to the ’80s, Mr. Speaker? How 
does this compare to the ’80s? Because the previous . . . as I 
said, about every decade this review is done. And when it was 
done in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when they looked at 1986 
grads and said where are the ’86 grads from Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they found was this, was that 21 per cent of 
the grads from Saskatchewan were moving out, 10 per cent of 
grads from other places were moving in, and in the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan was suffering a net loss of 11 per cent 
of our grads. In the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, we are experiencing a 4 
per cent increase — a surplus of grads. Mr. Speaker, the 
economy of Saskatchewan is attracting people more effectively 
in the ’90s than it was in the ’80s when those folks were in 
power. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What went wrong with the ’80s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Somebody said, Mr. Speaker, what went 
wrong in the ’80s. What went wrong in the ’80s? And, Mr. 
Speaker, let me just say two words — these will be inspirational 
words, particularly for the hon. member for Estevan but a 
number of her colleagues who served with him in this place — 
they are political allies, Mr. Speaker. They are political 
affiliates. They won’t call themselves that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what went wrong with the ’80s in 
Saskatchewan was the Progressive Conservative government 
under the leadership of Grant Devine. That’s what went wrong 
with the ’80s. 
 
And what went right with the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, was a New 
Democrat government in this province under the leadership of 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

the hon. member for Saskatoon Riversdale. That’s what’s going 
right with this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at what’s 
happening here in the province of Saskatchewan, I’m proud to 
say that Saskatchewan people value education. It is a matter of 
fact that when you look at our universities here in 
Saskatchewan — we’ve got two good universities, Mr. Speaker. 
That in this province we have one of —some would argue the 
highest; I will say only one of because I can say that with 
absolutely certainty — we have one of the highest rates of 
participation at universities of our young people ages 18 to 24 
in this province. Twenty-four per cent of our young people in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, are attending our campuses at the 
University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, taking 
university training in the province of Saskatchewan. A higher 
rate of participation than the rest of the nation, Mr. Speaker, and 
about that we should feel proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And so, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
big picture, the Minister of Finance referred to this budget as a 
plan for growth and opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a plan 
that is brought to this Assembly with some foresight and with 
commitment to the objectives of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A commitment to make responsible decisions and priority 
decisions when those have to be made because we recognize that 
those tax dollars that come into the coffers — which in fact are 
being reduced; the rates are being reduced therefore making 
Saskatchewan a more attractive place to live, Mr. Speaker — they 
have an obligation to spend them wisely and to spend them well in 
the interests of the ones that sent us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training, I stand proud as my commitment and my 
responsibilities to the students and the institutions and the 
stakeholders and the partners in Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training. I stand proud of the budget that is presented 
here, Mr. Speaker, for the future and growth and opportunity for 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the motion and against the 
amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am so glad that I 
am able to stand because if I’d have sat any longer, I’d have 
fallen asleep. 
 
It is my privilege to stand here today, in this House, to speak to 
the first budget of the 21st century. 
 
I’ve always been a person who gives credit where credit is due, 
but I’ve also been one that will condemn those who take credit 
for doing nothing. Mr. Speaker, in giving credit to the 
government on a part of this budget is to say that by dropping 

personal income tax was a very good thing. Our party, the 
official opposition party, campaigned on this in the last election. 
By dropping personal income tax, you have adopted our policy 
that cutting income tax helps to stimulate the economy. 
 
Also by eliminating the flat tax, the debt reduction tax, and the 
high income surtax — this will also stimulate the economy. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the members opposite 
that brought forth something I never, ever thought would 
happen — First Nations paying PST off the reserves. In the last 
election, defeated NDP member Lloyd Johnson said, and I 
quote, “First Nations will never pay tax; it was against their 
treaty rights.” 
 
I am so happy this happened because it puts everyone in the 
same playing field. Everyone uses the services; let’s all pay 
equally for them. 
 
I was so glad last night when I came down to listen to the 
Minister of Northern Affairs talk. He had a lot of comments — 
good comments. He knows and understands the fairness of 
taxation for First Nations. It’s too bad a couple of members — 
namely Chief Ken Thomas and Chief Lawrence Joseph — 
hadn’t had his thoughts and wisdom when they decided on 
Thursday and Friday in the town of Spiritwood to demonstrate 
in this town. 
 
Were they demonstrating against the town of Spiritwood? The 
business in Spiritwood? The mayor and council in Spiritwood? 
The schools? Or were they demonstrating against the former 
NDP member, and now the NDP government? Mr. Speaker, I 
ask the member opposite, why Spiritwood? Why only 
Spiritwood? If it is a tax problem, is it not a tax problem in all 
of Saskatchewan? Why was Spiritwood singled out? 
 
The member of Northern Affairs talked last night about racism. 
This new tax for First Nations will curb racism in 
Saskatchewan. As you know, in the last election we may have 
been earmarked as being somewhat racist for bringing forth this 
proposal. Let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, and the members 
opposite, that we are not racist. This party is not racist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked of a couple of things this 
government has done for a positive. Now I want to talk about 
the things that are negative. And if I hadn’t thrown away 10 or 
15 pages I could still keep going on. As I stand before this 
Assembly to represent the people of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, I 
bring here concerns; and their concerns are many in regards to 
this budget. Mr. Speaker, I thought and hoped this budget 
would contain something good to keep people in Saskatchewan, 
but no, the PST left at 6 per cent, plus all the expanded PST in 
other things. 
 
What is here to keep the young people here working? On 
Sunday, Mr. Speaker, Sunday morning, my oldest son phoned 
me and he said, I quote: Dad, it’s time to leave for Alberta. 
With half my family there now and the NDP government at the 
helm, isn’t it time to move? So I said, Mr. Speaker, to my son, I 
said: Son, you have to do what you must do, but I know you 
will move and then my second son will move and then my third 
son will move. 
 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, after the last election the government 
would listen. They told us they would listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They told us that they would give us tax relief, 
not tax increase. They gave us relief on one hand; then they 
reached in the pockets and took it out on the other. With 
SaskTel and SaskEnergy increases, it adds up to 41 million. 
With the tax relief of 43 million that the government just 
promised — that gives $2 million left for the year. When you 
add it up or when you divide it up, it works out to $2 per 
person. Now is that a tax relief? Is this what we need to keep 
young people here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in economic growth and new opportunities, it has 
been stated children on welfare and families on welfare have 
dropped by 6,000 people. Why, you ask. Well it’s simple, 
they’ve gone to Alberta. There are jobs there. Premier Klein, 
Premier Klein will create an estimated 15,000 jobs in six 
months in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know our government, our government of today, our members 
opposite, will try and create jobs too but I know, and you know, 
they’ll all be created in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night a member from Battleford finally got up 
the courage and stood in the Assembly and said all the 
wonderful things Battleford is doing. He also said in his 
statement that we are going to start construction on the bridge. 
And I am so glad, I am so glad that this bridge is going to be 
constructed. He stated that he will start this year only with the 
ramps and the groundwork, and do the rest later. And I’m sure 
that this certain member, if he keeps stretching the truth about 
North Battleford, maybe he will become the bridge over 
troubled water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about health, health care, and 
how it affects the people of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. The goal of 
this government is to promote community-based services, is 
away off track. The wellness model that was introduced years 
ago has done nothing but close hospitals, convert hospitals to 
health centres, change acute care hospitals to nothing but first 
aid stations. 
 
Health problems are a major concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Recruiting doctors in small-town Saskatchewan 
is a major problem. I certainly believe an audit of the health 
care system must be done to cut the fat from the budget, to 
ensure the workers of health care and delivery are looked after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of this budget, education and 
training really took a hit. There are little or no money for 
education systems as it applies to schools and school boards. In 
talking to a couple of directors of education, they said and I 
quote: “There was little in this budget for us, but as they say for 
farmers, we’ll get by.” I am assuming that they will cut teachers 
or jack up the mill rate. Where else have they got to do, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
What hurts me most, Mr. Speaker, is the loser in this budget is 
the children; the kids of our future. What future is there for kids 
getting out of high school except let’s go to Alberta. In Alberta 
there’s a job waiting for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister stated — in Agriculture — this 

government has the courage and vision to look past that 
disguise to find new opportunities. Saying this to a farmer — 
which most of my colleagues here are farmers — is a joke. You 
got rid of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); you didn’t 
hear from the farmers’ cries until it was almost election time. 
Then after the election, the rural people spoke out; you still 
didn’t get the message. And still you state in your budget, 
though, we have a vision. Is your version to get rid of small 
farmers? Because if so, small business will follow. 
 
I am fortunate to live in an area of farming that is diversified in 
cattle. The cattle in my area will get by. Yes, we are losing our 
railways and elevators. Yes, we are losing our schools because 
of low school enrolment. Yes, the people in my area, through 
hardship, will get by. 
 
The minister talks of a strong province with a strong future 
because people can see beyond what is. Well what is if people 
can see the next three to four years as reality, then what can be 
will be a government in place, a Saskatchewan government in 
place. That’s what can be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the backbone of Saskatchewan is farming but the 
backbone’s breaking, and along with the backbone of small 
business, they are breaking too. Small business people are 
moving out of the province. High, and now higher, taxes 
coupled with the high cost of fuel is driving more and more 
business people out to neighbouring provinces. And I won’t 
mention Alberta; they’ll go elsewhere too. 
 
You can’t blame them. The minister says in Saskatchewan there 
is opportunity. The only opportunity for people is to get out; 
and the last one to leave, I sure hope they turn out the lights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my critic position of forestry and forestry 
management, the budget states there will be new partnerships 
and new training incentives. When will this come? Will it be 
soon or will be later? Will there be new jobs? Will there be jobs 
cut to offer more for the bigger players? We need to look after 
our forestry; we need to ensure that forests are there for our 
younger people coming up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency has been phoning and phoning in 
regards to forced amalgamation which has been driven by the 
members opposite. I hope that the minister from Yorkton will 
scrap the idea of forced amalgamation and let it become, as 
always, volunteer amalgamation. 
 
We see what has happened to our health districts and the 
controversy surrounding them. We don’t need this in rural 
Saskatchewan again. As a member from my constituency 
quoted: “If it’s not broken, don’t try and fix it.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, the opposition party, have been consistently 
asking for tax relief for all citizens in Saskatchewan. Finally the 
minister, Paul Martin, told us if the provincial government and 
federal government joined together, we can drop the gas tax by 
10 cents a litre. What a relief to tax payers. What a relief in time 
of need. 
 
When it costs about $60 million, we have $700 million in a 
slush fund. What is 60 million to $700 million when it will help 
so many right now? 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

But our government doesn’t want to give tax breaks. It’s not 
their mandate. Doesn’t this sound like a socialist government? 
And they wonder why, in the last election, 60 per cent of the 
popular vote went to us. The majority of the people know the 
difference. They want something good coming out of this 
budget, something positive. 
 
(2100) 
 
Well once again the citizens of Saskatchewan were failed by the 
NDP government. The NDP government gave us smoke and 
mirrors. They promised us, in last year’s election, to 
significantly reduce income tax without — and I say again — 
without expanding the PST. They broke their promise again. 
 
The NDP also said they could run the province on a $4.5 billion 
budget. This year with a projected revenue they will come up 
with $6.4 billion. This is $2 billion going into probably the 
slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing my address to the budget speech, I 
would like to once again emphasize the importance of taxes and 
taxation in which the Speech from the Throne shows there is 
some relief. But again, you can’t count on lowering taxation by 
putting a dollar in one pocket and taking two out in the other. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, is not good for my constituency, it is 
not good for me, and it is certainly not good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting 
this budget. But, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment put forth by the member of Rosetown-Biggar. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m proud to rise today to speak in favour 
of our government’s budget and in opposition to the 
amendment. I’m pleased to take some time today to bring to the 
attention of my colleagues on both sides of the House the good 
things in this budget from my standpoint as a person who will 
be celebrating 34 years in health care this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As a health care provider, I sometimes 
look at things differently than many people. I place a great deal 
of . . . I know I look very young. I place a great deal of 
importance on the determinants of health. 
 
Through my experiences in the workplace, from my own desire 
to learn, and from visiting health services around Canada and 
indeed the world, I’ve learned that health is determined by more 
than hospital beds, nurses, and doctors. Around the world, 
significant research projects are underway that will help us in 
Saskatchewan. Important research in the past has provided us 
with many of the innovations we now enjoy. 
 
Health care has changed since I entered nurse’s training at St. 
Paul’s in 1996. I’ve seen a lot of changes and I’ve been caught 
in the middle of the pain and the uncertainty of change as a 
health worker. 
 
I know things are different across the country. It may surprise 

some of my colleagues that health services are delivered in 
many ways around the world. But in Canada, Saskatchewan 
leads the way for innovation and adaptation. We see our health 
system adapting constantly to the changing demographics, 
advancing technologies in therapies, and a more informed 
consumer. Health services in Saskatchewan will continue to 
change and be improved based on current and future research 
and best practices. Best practices around the world help us in 
designing services that have a measurable effect on the 
determinants of health. 
 
Through research, innovation is recognized and applied to make 
things better. This budget provides for improvements in many 
of the determinants of health that we care about here in this 
great province. For example, Mr. Speaker, we have increased 
the budget in K to 12 and post-secondary education because we 
know that education is one of the most fundamental 
determinants of health. It affects your future income; it affects 
your choices and your options in life; it affects your lifestyle; it 
affects where you live and what you do in your spare time. 
We’ve increased the budget in social housing, an area that the 
federal government has stepped out of and has dropped in the 
hands of the provinces. 
 
My friend and colleague, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, 
Culture and Housing, has money in this budget for housing in 
the North as well as for a fund for general housing. 
 
Our government is interested in helping people find that balance 
between education, housing, and preventative health services. 
Healthy lifestyle choices are a major determinant of our health 
status. The level of exercise and activity we partake in overall 
affects our health. Our level of activity is decreasing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, changing eating habits and exercising, even 
starting at age 60 — pay attention some of you 60-year-olds — 
can have a huge impact on your life. You will live healthier 
longer and die quicker. That sounds good to me, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to be healthy for as long as possible and not linger in 
dying. 
 
My colleague, the opposition Health critic, in his reply to the 
budget wondered where our public policies on prevention are in 
health. Mr. Speaker, I could list hundreds but won’t in the 
interests of time. But I will highlight a few. 
 
First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, our single-payer, universal 
coverage is prevention writ large. I believe and my colleagues 
on this side believe, that having access to appropriate health 
services is the biggest prevention of illness that citizens can 
have. Knowing that they won’t be rendered bankrupt by an 
illness has lifted the stress that our families faced before 1962 
and that is stress that approximately 40 million of our 
neighbours to the south take for granted. We won’t go there. 
And people who don’t seek care when they really need it 
because they can’t afford an office visit only get care when they 
are acutely ill and then it costs more to treat them. Often it’s too 
late to get help. Their outcomes are poorer. 
 
But Saskatchewan is going to lead the way in this new 
millennium to an improved health system. To quote my 
colleague, the Minister of Environment: we are a government in 
a hurry. We are moving forward where others would come to a 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

grinding halt by doing an audit, which sounds like health 
services would be looked at strictly from the transactional 
viewpoint of who did what and what was spent where. Then 
what kinds of decisions would be made? Why abdicate 
leadership like that? 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has said he sees problems but has 
no solutions. That is typical of members on the other side. Mr. 
Speaker, auditing shows you if proper financial procedures are 
followed. It shows you what was spent where and if it was spent 
according to sound financial practices. And I must ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, do we want health policy to be made by an auditor, 
with all due respect to auditors, instead of getting input from 
health providers, from top researchers, from best practices, from 
the experiences of other innovators? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we as government are taking the lead and 
making policy. Governments do that, Mr. Speaker — they take 
the lead. That is what our government is doing, showing 
leadership and calling for a national debate and continuing to 
move forward in the 21st century by designing a health system 
for the 21st century, with population health policies, access to 
appropriate health services provided by the appropriate health 
care provider in a manner that is affordable to Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has a record of leadership and we will 
continue to lead based on sound research and best practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Back to some examples for the members 
opposite. Here’s a specific one that everyone knows about. We 
pay for pre-natal care for pregnant women. That public policy 
helps physicians identify potential problems in the course of a 
normal pregnancy. That’s why we have primary health service 
sites like Four Directions in Regina. That’s why we are 
developing more sites in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and the 
Battlefords. 
 
We want to ensure that everyone has access to the services, so 
we are going to provide them in the most appropriate way in an 
accessible place. Mr. Speaker, communities have identified 
gaps in services and our government, in partnership with groups 
in the communities and with the health districts, is moving to 
fill those gaps. 
 
Here’s another public policy. We provide pre-natal classes. 
Here’s another one. We pay for delivery in a hospital. And 
another one. We pay to have the newborn looked after, and we 
provide public health services to new mothers to assist them as 
they take their newborns home. We test the newborn in the 
hospital for early detection of diseases that could have 
catastrophic effects if not found early and treated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we require and encourage that infants and children 
be secured in car seats just as we require adults to buckle up. 
That is healthy public policy. 
 
Later, we immunize the baby and provide well-baby clinics and 
immunization clinics. That is public policy that helps prevent 
illness. 
 
We help educate parents about things to look for in their 

children. We can always do more and we continually look for 
new programs. My colleague, the Minister of Health, and I are 
currently exploring an early childhood strategy that will aid 
health providers in better identifying challenges and 
opportunities in the 0 to 4 age range for children in 
Saskatchewan. That is good policy, Mr. Speaker. That is 
translating research and best practices to policies that work in a 
Saskatchewan setting. That is leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mentioned primary health services a minute ago, Mr. Speaker. 
Primary health services is an innovative project of our 
government. It brings together a team of health workers, 
doctors, nurses with advanced skills, therapists, social workers, 
chiropractors, dentists, and many more. These teams provide 
care that is centred around health promotion and prevention. It 
is about seeing the most appropriate health provider when you 
need to, to get healthy, and to stay healthy. 
 
The new Saskatoon city centre project is such a primary health 
services site. Here a multitude of services will be located in the 
downtown core of Saskatoon, anchored by recreation programs. 
Even the police want to locate in this complex. Local businesses 
are so enthusiastic, Mr. Speaker, that they are offering to 
participate in job placements for people who want to enter the 
workforce. And this project came from the people of the area — 
from the Saskatoon Tribal Council and from the Saskatoon 
Health District and from many others. They brought it to us and 
we had the vision across departments of government to support 
it. 
 
Primary health services sites are in rural areas like Beechy, 
Kyle, Hafford, La Ronge, and Hudson Bay. There are 
innovative primary health services centres in rural 
Saskatchewan where advanced clinical nurses work in 
partnership with a physician to provide health services. 
 
Organizing primary health services sites has been a visionary 
program of this government, and because our books are in 
order, we have been able to provide funding to get this 
visionary program started and to keep it going. 
 
The acquired brain injury program — jointly administered by 
Saskatchewan Health and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) — helps with treatment and education about the 
need to prevent brain injuries. Helping young people 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that it only takes one second to make 
the right choice and put on a bicycle helmet or not to dive into 
unknown water. That is good public policy. 
 
I don’t believe that either communities or health districts are 
struggling for ideas, Mr. Speaker. There are a multitude of good 
ideas out there. Telehealth — x-rays and CAT (computerized 
axial tomography) scans can be sent around the province 
electronically to receive expert and second opinions. Health 
care providers and patients can use video conferencing to 
interact across long distances. 
 
SHIN, the Saskatchewan Health Information Network. The 
health sector is one of the last to computerize, Mr. Speaker. 
Here is a way to integrate records and reduce duplication. 
Records can be sent immediately around the province and 
around the world in a secure environment. Communication can 
be improved, and we have worked in an incremental way to 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

bring clinics and hospitals and their staff up to speed on 
computer usage. And we have provided the infrastructure to 
connect into the existing systems — for example, hooking up 
the prenatal system with the newborn system in the 
immunization system; for example, hooking up pharmacies and 
doctors. 
 
The BridgePoint Centre in Milden — another innovative 
program that came from the community to make use of a 
facility and to bring a provincial program to Milden. Treating 
people with eating disorders and helping them recover from the 
disorder is good healthy public policy. And educational 
programs that health districts have done over the past several 
years have helped bring this issue to the attention of high school 
students and the public in general. 
 
The all-party Committee on Tobacco Control — through the 
hard work of our colleagues on both sides of the House, this 
committee is exploring ways to help our young people, keep 
them from starting to smoke. I’m excited to see what 
recommendations the committee will bring in — good, healthy 
public policy. 
 
There are seven diabetic education sites around the province. We 
know that the incidence of diabetes is rising at an alarming rate. 
Mr. Speaker, diabetes can be prevented or controlled through 
making healthy choices about food and an active lifestyle. These 
education sites will bring awareness of healthy choices to people 
in their communities in various ways, targeted specifically to the 
communities the sites are in. What do we notice about many of 
these programs, Mr. Speaker? They do not occur in doctors’ 
offices or in hospitals. Most prevention occurs in the community 
where people live and work and play sports and breathe fresh air 
and swim and ski. 
 
I’m also a strong advocate of continuing improvement in our 
home care programs, Mr. Speaker. For me, home care is the most 
crucial prevention program and one that promotes the most 
independence for people who want to stay in the community. For 
seniors and for people with disabilities and for many others, home 
care can make the difference between living at home in 
comfortable and familiar surroundings rather than having to move 
into an institution. 
 
Support for improved home care often frees up acute care beds. 
Care provided at home means that beds are available for urgent 
and emergency surgeries, and other emergent or urgent 
occurrences. Mr. Speaker, that is good public policy. Care 
provided at home means that a bed in the hospital is free. Some 
people need a nurse to come in and administer IV (intravenous) 
medications several times a day or week. That can be done at 
home in their own bed. Home care helps keep people out of 
special care homes and keeps those beds open for people from the 
community who need that level of care. Home care is a 
preventative program. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the partnership program that was 
proposed several years ago by the Schizophrenia Society of 
Saskatchewan. In that program, families and people with mental 
illnesses go to schools to speak and community groups to speak 
about mental illness. This innovative program has provided 

information to the community, while building confidence in 
people with mental illness by giving them the opportunity to 
contribute to a better understanding of how mental illness 
affects people. 
 
I’ve been told that very often people come forward after 
presentations and ask questions for themselves or for others 
close to them. That is good policy, Mr. Speaker, because early 
identification of mental illness means better treatment, and 
helps us provide services and prevent problems down the road. 
 
It is also important to reduce the stigma associated with mental 
illness by showing the human side, and hearing stories from 
people living with mental illness and from their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently had the great honour of being invited to 
represent Canada at a Pan American Health Organization 
sponsored meeting in Buenos Aires, Argentina. I spoke to the 
Minister of Health for Argentina and the ministers of Health in 
the provinces, as well as the Minister of Health in Brazil on 
primary health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my visit had a profound effect on me. I got to see 
a two-tiered health system up close, and it was very personal for 
me as I identified with the staff in all settings. Mr. Speaker, they 
do so much with so much less than we have. I was shocked at 
some of the things we saw in my tours. I saw equipment in use 
that I’ve never seen in over 30 years of working in the health 
care system. I now remind people of how lucky we are in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
The public system in Argentina is very poorly funded as 40 per 
cent of the people don’t pay their taxes. They buy their health 
care services and feel no compunction to support or contribute 
to the public system. 
 
But there was some very positive aspects of my visit. I was 
happy to see some very well-developed primary health services 
sites, where patients had access to a wide variety of health 
providers so they could be seen close to home. 
 
This is a worthy goal for us to build towards in Saskatchewan. 
And indeed, primary health care is talked about around the 
world. There is no bogeyman there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my previous life I now know that I had a pretty 
narrow view of the world. I’ve told many people what I have 
learned is that it is much easier to lobby than it is to govern. 
Coming to elected office in government has given me the 
benefit of looking at every issue with a wider lens and of 
hearing from a wider audience of interested people. 
 
And being a member of Treasury Board has given me even a 
wider view again as hard decisions have to be made. As a 
member of that committee of cabinet, the benefits of every 
proposal are weighed against spending the money elsewhere, of 
doing something new, or of doing something different. The 
good of the whole, Mr. Speaker, is a union principle that 
translates well to a provincial perspective in governing. 
 
And the members opposite — while I realize that they often 
don’t understand how the health system works — hear 
anecdotal evidence and don’t get the whole story. And they 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

don’t have solutions to the problems we face in health care. 
 
Proposing an audit of the system is really simplistic. Each 
health district is already audited every year as is the entire 
Health budget. Those audits are public knowledge. That’s not 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. As another of my colleagues across the 
floor described it, that’s skating around on the pond getting 
ready to jump. Except in their case, the ice is cracking. They 
aren’t on sound footing with their audit; they’ll call in the 
auditors as the ice cracks around them. And you can’t stay very 
long without solid footing before making some kind of 
decision, Mr. Speaker. You have to make choices and you have 
to show leadership. Our government has experience and has 
shown leadership once again in this budget and isn’t afraid to 
make choices. 
 
We want to continue to build a health system responsive to the 
present and ready for the future. Our goal, Mr. Speaker, is to 
make the system work better, not to talk about how it works and 
wonder what to do next. 
 
My colleague from Melfort-Tisdale thinks that the goal of 
providing services in the community has gone off the rails. He 
said that since hospitals have converted, there are no services 
offered in the community. What about people who can now get 
chemotherapy in their community? What about people who can 
get dialysis in their community? His constituency is one, Mr. 
Speaker. Does he count that as a community program? What 
about people who can get visiting specialist services in their 
community, where before there was no access? 
 
My colleague does admit that we cannot continue to increase 
our spending in health. We do agree on that one item. We have 
to be more innovative within our means. 
 
I guess my colleague doesn’t know that Saskatchewan is 
viewed as a leader in integration and co-operation around the 
country. At a national conference last year on innovation and 
health care — after I presented the Saskatchewan primary 
health services initiative — noted health care researcher Dr. 
Michael Dector said: here we are thinking about a policy and as 
usual Saskatchewan is already doing it. 
 
My opposition colleague admits to being upset by conflict 
between health workers. Let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, health 
workers take no comfort in his interest in them, especially when 
one looks at the Bills that his party has introduced in the past 
and again in this session that would greatly reduce the rights of 
workers. 
 
In contrast our recent work with the SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association) and the deans of nursing has 
yielded many good things in nursing education. Things I only 
hoped to see, Mr. Speaker, in my previous life, such as having 
an assessment of prior learning for nurses who don’t have a 
degree. We will now have several options for students who 
complete a degree in three years, three and a half years, and in 
four years. There may be an opportunity for a co-op program 
where students work and get paid and get credit for clinical 
time. That is a great improvement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I listened to the member from Thunder Creek talk gloom and 
doom, and once again look to Alberta. Recently a businessman 

said to me: if we continue to run down Saskatchewan, we are 
the ones causing the exodus and a lack of confidence in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Alberta may look, from a distance, like 
Oz. It has wonderful scenery and lots of oil wells, but there are 
problems there. I want to bring to the attention of all my 
colleagues that there are a large number of people in Alberta 
who don’t pay their health premiums because they cannot. It’s 
quite a concern for the government. The number I have, Mr. 
Speaker, is that one-quarter of the insurance plan holders are 
behind in their payments. In 1999, the percentage of the total 
number of plan holders who weren’t paying was 23 per cent. 
 
What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? The report I said . . . that I 
have said that many people were hearing from collection 
agencies, not from Alberta Health. 
 
What does having such a high number of delinquent accounts 
say for Alberta? I think it says that a quarter of the people in 
Alberta are one step away from being refused services because 
they didn’t have insurance. 
 
Health premiums are hugely unpopular in Alberta. People who 
have unstable employment, who are probably at most risk for 
becoming ill, are the ones most likely not to pay their 
premiums. Many people view health premiums as a lump sum 
tax. It is one for seniors. For others it is a payroll tax, which 
means lots of bureaucracy and is a nightmare for employers. 
And doctors in Alberta are concerned about providing services 
that they won’t be paid for when people aren’t covered. 
 
If you make over $630 per month as a single person, you pay 
full premiums of $34 a month or over 5 per cent of your 
income. This is not what we want for Saskatchewan. So I 
suggest my colleagues across the way stop comparing us to 
Alberta. 
 
This budget moves Saskatchewan forward, Mr. Speaker, and I 
am proud to be part of a progressive government that looks at 
the new millennium with optimism. This budget is about 
change. We see the income tax structure getting the most 
dramatic change in the province’s history. The change in our 
provincial sales tax base allows us to change our income tax 
system. Our tax changes will benefit farmers. They will benefit 
seniors. They will benefit people on fixed incomes. They will 
benefit low-income families. We have not cut services, Mr. 
Speaker, and we still have offered tax cuts that will put 70 per 
cent of Saskatchewan residents on par with Alberta taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, change is a constant in our world. We are 
changing the way we do business and the way we communicate, 
educate, and relate to one another. As a government, we are 
constantly adapting to the new way the world works. We are 
emphasizing biotechnology, the development of our petroleum 
research industry, development of rural businesses through 
regional economic development authorities, medical research 
and innovation, community development — the list goes on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are looking at better co-operation between us and our 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

neighbours to the South. We are working with our residents in 
the North. We are making major steps in the information 
technology area, especially in health. 
 
We have a vision for the future. We have managed the economy 
well, we have made the right decisions, and we are on the right 
track for all the reasons I and my colleagues have talked about. 
And for those reasons, I support this budget and will not 
support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve listened to many 
excellent speeches in this House over the last day and a half, or 
two days . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well in fact there was 
one very good one from the other side and I want to comment 
on that right now. The Minister of Post-Secondary Education — 
I love his style. In fact when I grow up, I want to be just like 
him. But just because I liked his style, doesn’t mean I agreed 
with everything he said. 
 
And I’d just like to comment that during his presentation 
tonight he did say that the Saskatchewan student bursaries 
group wrote off $22 million in bursaries to Saskatchewan 
students this year. But he failed to mention that that amount was 
offset by $10 million that came from the Canadian millennium 
scholarship fund, and that should have gone to the students but 
instead the money was confiscated by the NDP government to 
help with that little angle there. 
 
But having made that note of correction, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to say that it’s with great pleasure that I stand in the House 
today to give a response to the government’s budget on behalf 
of the people of Cypress Hills. 
 
Having listened to my hon. colleagues, both yesterday and 
today, there’s not much of a general nature that has not already 
been covered by them. However there are elements in this 
budget which have a specific bearing on the people of my 
constituency and I hope to address them in this speech. 
 
I know that the budget speech was delivered on March 29, but 
for awhile there I thought it was, oh maybe something else. I’d 
lost a couple of days, something had happened. The contents of 
that speech were contrived to convince me that it was April 1, 
and I was almost fooled into believing that this was a tax 
reduction budget that would bring immediate benefit to the 
whole province. A look at the details has proved that idea 
wrong. As in so many cases, the devil really is in the details. 
 
Now when the Minister of Finance introduced his budget last 
week, he made a big production out of the fact that this is the 
seventh consecutive budget to be a balanced budget. Many of 
his colleagues have belaboured that same point. It was balanced 
all right. Now that the details are out, everybody’s mad at him, 
with the possible exception of the restaurateurs. And where I 
come from, balancing your budget means living within your 
means, not borrowing from your savings account or some rainy 
day slush fund to cover your basic needs. And it’s so much 
easier to balance your budget when you can get someone else to 
put the money upfront to help your cause. 
 
Now that’s exactly what this government has done with the 

expanded PST. Balancing a budget is not that difficult if all one 
has to do is raise taxes to achieve the desired results. 
 
Now what the people of Cypress Hills got from this government 
was the worst possible combination of tax changes — the 
application of a PST to a vastly expanded list of goods and 
services at the current rate of 6 per cent, and no relief in the 
realm of income tax until the next year at the earliest and that 
won’t even be in a significant amount. So before we get a nickel 
back in tax relief, we’ll pay a projected $160 million, Mr. 
Speaker, province-wide in sales tax. 
 
Now could someone explain to me again how this is not a tax 
grab? And why is it necessary to raise taxes in order to get a tax 
saving? Real tax reduction means a lowering of taxes across the 
board — not increases. To call this a tax reduction budget is 
simply playing with words; it’s semantic gymnastics. 
 
Even the promise to not tax utility bills has a rather hollow ring 
to it. Any money saved by consumers through that decision has 
already been eaten up by rate increases approved by the interim 
rate review commission, not to mention probable applications 
for future increases. 
 
When Crown corporations have ready access to rate increases, 
there’s no need to add PST to the bill of consumers. 
 
Similarly, small additional allowances on farm gasoline 
purchases, while appreciated, aren’t significant enough to make 
an impact on the bottom line of farmers. Now this is especially 
true in view of the fact that much more money is spent by 
farmers on diesel fuel than on gas, and there’s been no effort by 
the government to address the other input costs. 
 
The $25 million per year for the next two years toward 
education tax on property will not be enough to offset the added 
cost of day-to-day living brought on by the expanded PST. 
 
This budget has been most aptly described as a 
smoke-and-mirrors budget for the very reasons already stated, 
and its impact will be detrimental to every one of us who live 
and do business in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
(2130) 
 
But why do I say that? Well simply because of our proximity to 
the Alberta border, where the sales tax is zero. Unlike many 
other people who speak on this issue, I in fact live with the 
reality of that border right in my own backyard. We’ve seen 
every sector of our economy hurt by the allure of tax-free 
shopping just across the border in Medicine Hat. 
 
And as of this morning, we learned that the Alberta government 
is seriously considering lowering its portion of the gasoline tax 
even further. Where Alberta already has at least a 6 cent per 
litre tax advantage on fuel, the discrepancy is about to grow 
significantly larger. 
 
So how are service station operators, convenience stores, and 
even bulk fuel dealers going to compete with that kind of 
difference in a pricing regime between two neighbouring 
provinces? How long will it take before another business or two 
or several bite the dust in Cypress Hills? And what of the 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

impact this will have on tourism in the upcoming summer 
season in this most beautiful region of the province? And what 
about the crippling ripple effect such discrepancies generate in 
the overall economic well-being of our region? 
 
Does anybody in this government care about the debilitating 
consequences of their policies on the southwest part of this 
province? The answer is clearly no. No wonder there’s such a 
feeling of alienation and isolation in the hearts and minds of 
people toward the provincial government, a feeling that is 
especially prominent in the distant reaches of rural 
constituencies like Cypress Hills. 
 
Now in view of the threat of further fuel tax reduction in 
Alberta, maybe the Minister of Finance would like to reconsider 
his flat refusal to match the federal government’s offer of a 5 
cent per litre fuel tax discount. The logic of this provincial 
government mystifies me completely, especially on this 
particular count. 
 
It has said so often that it cannot accomplish this or that project 
because the federal government has not contributed its share of 
the funding. Even the Minister of Agriculture indicated 
previously that he wouldn’t walk away from money on the table 
put there by the feds. And yet as recently as this afternoon, the 
Minister of Finance stood right over there and steadfastly 
refused to accept money already on the table to help ease the tax 
burden of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So what is it, sir? Mr. Minister, will you or won’t you accept 
federal money? Or will you only accept it when it won’t cost 
the provincial treasury anything to get it? And when in the 
future do you foresee that happening? 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we have here an example where the 
provincial government could act to counter the economic 
imbalance between Saskatchewan and Alberta but refuses to do 
so. Such an action will directly impact every small business in 
the Cypress Hills, whether they retail gasoline or not. Now the 
lure of tax-free shopping in Alberta and enough cheap gas to 
pay for the trip will very nearly put an end to growth in our 
area. Even worse, it will undo much of what has already been 
accomplished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m thinking too of the effect that this budget will 
have on the new dinosaur museum being built in the community 
of Eastend, in my hometown. After 10 years or more of local 
initiative to get the facility built, not to mention the financial 
commitment of the Government of Saskatchewan in that 
project, the cost of fuel to get tourists there may well undermine 
the viability of the project in the short term. 
 
And when tourists do arrive, a new 6 per cent tax will be there 
to greet them when they spend any amount of money at all on 
that site. And even the price of their admission will go up. 
 
The expansion of this tax really is self-defeating in every area 
of endeavour. Nothing, I repeat, nothing discourages initiative 
and enterprise like taxes. And this one is very discouraging in 
southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
I heard a member opposite yesterday refer to this document as a 
budget of growth and prosperity. From the prospective of 

Cypress Hills, it’s a budget to guarantee growth and prosperity 
in Alberta or any other jurisdiction where people choose to 
move or do business to escape the oppression of 
Saskatchewan-style taxation. 
 
The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley said yesterday 
that he has relatives in Alberta who would return home to 
Saskatchewan in a minute because everything else is so 
expensive in that province. What he left unsaid is even more 
important. 
 
I submit that the reason his family members don’t return to 
Saskatchewan is the same as the reason why members of 
thousands of Saskatchewan families don’t return — there’s no 
jobs to return to. And if they do happen to find a job, the taxes 
are far higher than they’re paying in Alberta right now. I know 
personally many, many people from southwest Saskatchewan 
— my son among them — currently living in Alberta who 
would gladly return home, but the economic opportunities just 
aren’t here. 
 
It gives me no pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to compare Saskatchewan 
and Alberta. But the reality is that Alberta continues to attract 
our people in huge numbers, much to our personal, our social, 
and our economic regret. Surely only wilful blindness would 
fail to acknowledge the reality and consequences of such 
out-migration. 
 
In fact, I’m told that a reunion is planned for Saskatchewan 
expatriates of the past decade in Calgary this summer. 
Organizers are anticipating over 60,000 people to attend that 
event out of a possible 100,000 living in that immediate area. 
Now that’s only people who have moved from this province to 
Calgary in the time this NDP government has been in power. 
 
By its overwhelming economic prowess, this government has 
managed to turn Calgary into Saskatchewan’s third largest city. 
And now I ask you: if our province really is doing as well as the 
government says, why isn’t our population growing? Why is it 
necessary to remain the farm team to a burgeoning economy to 
the west? 
 
I’m mystified today, Mr. Speaker, more than ever, after having 
listened to the members opposite stand in this House and praise 
the location and growth of corporate and retail giants among 
their constituencies. You know, such praise of corporate 
Canada and multinationals is highly unusual from the lips of 
individuals who claim to stand firmly on the bedrock of 
socialist philosophy. While I personally might think such 
activity is proof of heady economic times, it seems to me 
incongruous when socialists do too. 
 
You know, I hope I can be excused for not comprehending fully 
such an apparent contradiction between philosophy and politics. 
But even greater is my incomprehension — I’m sorry — but 
even greater than my incomprehension is my extreme 
disappointment that such wonderful economic times are not 
being enjoyed by small towns and rural areas of this province 
generally. And where it is happening, it’s in spite of this 
government, not because of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the simple truth is this. The provincial government 
need not look any further than its own record to understand why 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

economic development in rural Saskatchewan is stagnant, or 
worse, in remission. Economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan has actually suffered at the hands of this 
provincial government for the following reasons among many. 
 
One — high levels of taxation in all areas whether it be 
personal income tax, small business tax, corporate tax, the PST 
compared to our nearest neighbour to the west. 
 
Secondly — we have a disintegrating infrastructure, especially 
highways, but including railroads, airport runways, and other 
necessary areas of government involvement. 
 
We have a political philosophy that says if one area or 
community prospers, such prosperity inevitably comes at the 
expense of some other area or community. I heard that 
expressed in a speech tonight. 
 
Labour laws which are so lopsided in favour of unions and 
against business owners that the very existence of some of our 
current manufacturers of short-line equipment is in jeopardy. 
 
And finally, the continual imposition of grandiose schemes 
hatched in Regina or some other area — maybe a university 
campus — against the will of the people most directly affected, 
and then compelling those very people to pay for it. 
 
With this kind of leadership, Mr. Speaker, from the provincial 
government, it’s a wonder that any entrepreneurs of any kind 
are even left in this province. As one area individual told me in 
the community of Hazlet the other night, anyone who has even 
tried to run their own business in Saskatchewan ought to be 
given a gold medal, the odds are so stacked against you. 
 
Two of the best example of economic development initiatives in 
the constituency of Cypress Hills are located in the community 
of Frontier. Honey Bee Manufacturing and Prime Pro Ventures 
are owned by local people. They are responsible for the 
employment of about 135 individuals between them, and they 
contribute significantly to the economic well-being of their 
community. Neither one of those companies has asked for any 
help from the provincial government. In fact, they have 
steadfastly refused assistance, even when it’s been offered. But 
given the deteriorating highways which lead to their plants, they 
have serious concerns about their long-term viability in 
southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
The only thing they need from the government is a decent road, 
Mr. Speaker, not a huge municipal government, not government 
grants. There would be many more such ventures happening all 
over rural Saskatchewan if we had a provincial government that 
understood and encouraged such initiatives instead of 
penalizing them with poor infrastructure, overwhelming 
paperwork, punitive taxes, and a condescending attitude. 
 
In the past month, this region of the southwest part of 
Saskatchewan has also suffered from the loss of substantial 
numbers of medical personnel, Mr. Speaker. The community of 
Leader has lost two doctors. The town of Shaunavon has lost a 
doctor. A dentist in Swift Current has sold his practice to his 
remaining two partners and relocated. And the dentist in 
Frontier has made public her intention to move away. 
 

Now each one of these medical-dental practitioners is moving 
or has moved to Alberta. Why? Because the opportunities are 
greater there. Once again, taxation is a major factor but so too is 
the inability of those professionals to incorporate in this 
province. That’s a feature that has been steadfastly refused to 
them by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So rather than allow medical professionals to incorporate and 
lose a few tax dollars for the provincial treasury, the 
government says no, we can’t do it. And we end up losing the 
practitioner completely. 
 
How many tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, do we lose in this province 
when we chase the doctor out of the province completely? And 
what impact does losing such people have on the economic 
development of rural Saskatchewan? I haven’t heard one of 
these medical people say that legislative renewal was a major 
factor in their decision, or that they didn’t have enough patients, 
or they couldn’t make their practice viable for some other 
reason. They left because the economic opportunities were 
better elsewhere and they will continue to be better elsewhere 
even with the introduction of this budget. 
 
Now we’ve heard much about the increase to various 
government departments provided by this budget, most 
noticeably the Department of Health. Is any of this new money 
going to find its way into Cypress Hills? Well, I hope so. But 
I’m afraid to speculate, Mr. Speaker, in case that new money 
finds its way out there as a means to further close hospitals. 
 
As it is today, for most of my constituents, the best and closest 
major health facility is in Medicine Hat. Now isn’t that a 
coincidence? The small hospitals in Leader, Maple Creek, and 
Shaunavon are starved for money and have been effectively 
reduced to emergency band-aid stations by design of this 
government under the guise of so-called reform. Even the larger 
medical facility in Swift Current is chronically underfunded so 
the people of my constituency are routinely directed to 
Medicine Hat Regional Hospital, and how grateful we are to 
have at least that much available to us. Perhaps Saskatchewan’s 
Department of Health could save even more money by ignoring 
completely the health needs of southwest residents. 
 
And what about the glowing praise that has been given the 
Department of Highways, a whole $15 million increase to a 
total never before reached — $250 million — representing a 
whole 6 per cent increase over last year. That’s just enough to 
cover the expanded PST costs. Excuse me, sir, if I don’t join in 
the celebrations. 
 
Now looking at the fine print, one discovers that the estimates 
are for less dollars to be spent on actual road construction, a few 
more dollars on repairs. It’s my guess that by the time this 
government pays for the higher costs of fuel and oil products 
needed to patch our roads, we won’t even get the increase in 
repairs that have been budgeted. We’ll probably get 
substantially less. Of course that will save wear and tear on 
those newly acquired pieces of construction equipment that 
were purchased under such hushed and hurried conditions just 
prior to the conclusion of the last fiscal year. 
 
Today our Minister of Finance said that 78 per cent of the fuel 
tax goes into our highways. Yesterday it was 80 per cent. At a 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

loss of 2 per cent a day, it’ll take less time than we have to sit in 
this session to see the entire Highway budget disappear before 
our eyes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, even if, even if 80 per cent of the 
fuel tax goes to the Department of Highways, precious little of 
it will ever go to our roads. More bureaucracy maybe, more 
engineers maybe, but not much to our roads. 
 
It’s hard for me to imagine, Mr. Speaker, anything that could 
alienate more the people of Cypress Hills to a government in 
Regina than a budget that promises so much and delivers so 
little. During the election campaign last fall, the NDP promised 
voters a $1,000 tax reduction for a family of four. Not once do I 
remember hearing anything about the need to raise the PST in 
order to get a break on income tax. 
 
(2145) 
 
Was that promise just election rhetoric or was the Premier not 
telling us the whole story? It’s no wonder the governments have 
a credibility problem among the electorate. It boils down to 
believability and credibility, Mr. Speaker, and right now the 
NDP government doesn’t have much of either. 
 
It’s for that reason that I will be supporting the amendment put 
forward by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of 
the Official Opposition, in this budget debate. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with a great deal of intent and I’ve 
been intently listening to the remarks from the member from 
Cypress Hills and just for the record, I do want to say to him 
that the $22 million bursary that is given each year to successful 
university students is money over and above the $10 million 
millennium fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve listened intently to many of the 
speeches that have been delivered in the legislature and I think it is 
important that we try and present facts to the people of this 
province and I just want to present that fact to the people listening 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed an honour to rise tonight to take part in 
the 2000-2001 budget debate and to speak about our new 
investment in health in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget is a clear indication of our government’s 
ongoing commitment to publicly funded and publicly 
administered health care in our province. We’re investing nearly 
$2 billion in health services. The dollar figure, Mr. Speaker, is $63 
million more than last year’s budget, which contained $50 million 
in one-time funding for Y2K (Year 2000). So when you add it all 
up, it means that there is an additional $113 million or a 5.9 per 
cent increase that will be spent on programs and services in this 
fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, and it’s well beyond the freeze that is 
contemplated by the members opposite. 

Mr. Speaker, this funding is going to help us manage rising 
utilization of the health system and in some areas provide for some 
improvements to the health services that our citizens expect. I 
want to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to outline how some of 
these new dollars for health services will be spent in this fiscal 
year. Payments for medical services and education will rise $18 
million this year. This reflects increased use of physician services, 
costs of out-of-province coverage for those services that aren’t 
available here, and increased support to our College of Medicine. 
 
Spending on our drug plan, Mr. Speaker, will go up by $21 
million this year and this represents an increase of 27 per cent. 
And that just covers the cost of the increased use of drugs and 
some new medications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would like to say to the members opposite which 
was a comment that I made to my colleagues all across the 
country last week is that for this year and last year we’ve seen a 
48 per cent increase in the drug plan costs. On top of that, we 
had a $9 million special warrant. So as you can see, the costs of 
the province’s drug plan have gone up dramatically in the last 
two years as more people are using prescription drugs and there 
are new prescription drugs coming on to the plan. In addition, 
Mr. Speaker, funding to the Canadian Blood Services will go up 
by 50 per cent to a total of $24 million. And this reflects 
growing use of blood products by Saskatchewan people and the 
cost of ensuring a safe blood supply in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cancer agency will also receive an extra $2.2 
million. That’s an increase of 8.7 per cent toward cancer 
treatment for our Saskatchewan citizens. Community based 
organizations or the CBOs (community based organizations) 
will receive a general 2 per cent cost of living increase. We’re 
also providing $150,000 increase to the BridgePoint Centre for 
the treatment of people with eating disorders. An additional 
$70,000 to the Schizophrenia Society and $620,000 to further 
our emphasis on preventing health problems for high-risk 
youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health districts will receive an additional $63 
million, an increase in their base funding of 5.1 per cent. The 
additional funding to districts this year will help expand and 
improve some of their services and respond to growing 
utilization by the public. For example, home care and other 
supportive services will grow to meet the needs of our aging 
population. 
 
And just as an interesting note, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
about 14 per cent of our population over the age of 65, and that 
14 per cent of the population utilizes about 45 per cent of our 
$1.97 billion dollars in health costs. 
 
There is also additional funding for vital provincial programs, 
like renal dialysis and cardiac catheterization. And we’re 
providing more money to other specialized acute care services 
in Regina and Saskatoon to recognize the growing use of 
tertiary centres. And there is new funding, Mr. Speaker, to 
cover improved wages and benefits to help recruit and retain 
our valuable health providers in the province. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, we’ll provide more than $1.3 billion to 
our health districts across the province. And that’s 1.3 billion to 
provide a vast growing range of quality health services for 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

every one of our citizens. 
 
The size of the undertaking of Saskatchewan’s publicly funded 
and publicly administered health system is absolutely 
astounding. Every day, Mr. Speaker, an average of 35,000 
Saskatchewan people have some contact with the health system 
at a total cost of almost five and a half million dollars a day. 
 
Every day, more than 250 people in our province receive 
surgery. Every day, more than 9,000 citizens receive nursing 
home care. And every day, Mr. Speaker, 18,000 prescriptions 
are filled in the province. 
 
Our provincial lab does an average of 4,000 tests every day, and 
our province’s road ambulance provides emergency services to 
more than 200 people every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that our health system has a lot to be proud 
of. Let me give you some examples. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now we often wonder where . . . we 
hear from the opposition, they want to know where the money’s 
going, and if you just listen, I’ll tell you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 4,706,000 visits and consultations with family 
physicians and 926,000 visits to specialists; 9,000 nursing home 
residents; 29,100 people each year receiving home care services 
— a total, Mr. Speaker, of 1,750,700 hours of home care 
services, and, Mr. Speaker, 483,750 meals. 
 
Over 8 — listen to this — over 800,000 days of in-patient 
hospital care at a cost of $400,000,000; an estimated 650,000 
emergency room or clinic visits at a cost of 95 million; 76,000 
trips by road ambulance, and the province copaying, along with 
the citizen, puts in $12.9 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 836 air ambulance trips at a cost of 2.4 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 253,000 diagnostic or therapeutic 
radiology services at a cost of 9.3 million. 
 
Listen to this: 118,000 ultrasounds at a cost of 8.3 million; 
48,000 CT (computerized tomography) scans at a cost of 5.5 
million. And, Mr. Speaker, last year the numbers of people that 
saw MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) increased by 73 per 
cent. 
 
Here’s another interesting figure — 400,000 immunizations for 
children and adults at a cost of 3.9 million; plus, Mr. Speaker, 
thousands of other services such as screening for breast cancer 
across Saskatchewan, and tuberculosis, prenatal care, public 
health inspections, occupational and speech therapy, hearing 
services, nutrition counselling, health promotion, health 
research, and the list goes on. 
 
That’s where our $1.97 billion goes, Mr. Speaker — to 
basically hundreds of thousands of services to the people of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we have a lot to be 
proud of in our health system. We have an excellent team of 
health care providers across the province, who provide a wide 
range of these vital services — and, Mr. Speaker, at no cost. 
Our citizens are among the healthiest in the world. I’m proud of 
our government’s investment in health care, and the additional 
support that we’ve provided to our citizens year after year. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that we can’t be 
blinded by these successes. I recognize that this level of growth 
cannot go on forever, and in order to sustain our health system 
we depend on in this province, we need to look carefully at how 
we could adapt into the future. Members of this House will be 
aware that rising costs and utilization in our health system pose 
a significant problem. And while this budget continues to 
support the excellent care that we’ve all become accustomed to, 
it also underscores the need for change in how we look at health 
services. 
 
I’ve talked a great deal, Mr. Speaker, lately, about the 
crossroads that we’re approaching. We’ve reached the point 
where we need to have a discussion. We can no longer sustain 
the kind of rapid growth in health spending — true, given the 
lack of adequate support from our federal government in 
Ottawa. 
 
Health ministers, Mr. Speaker, from across this country, have 
made the point to our federal minister, Mr. Rock. We did so 
before the federal budget. We did so after the federal budget. 
We did so in Montreal when we met as colleagues, as provinces 
and territories, and we did again last week when we met with 
Mr. Rock in Markham, Ontario. 
 
We told Minister Rock that his federal budget fell short of what 
we were expecting. We told him that the federal government 
has not come close to replacing the $6 billion a year it took out 
of the system between 1995 and 1997. We told him that the 
federal share of health spending has fallen from 50 cents on the 
dollar in 1977 to a mere 13 cents on the dollar today. We told 
him that the provinces need to see cash on the dash to sustain 
our present health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House know full well about the 
rising costs we face in health. Over the past few years our 
government has backfilled every single dollar taken out by 
Ottawa. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Speaker, we’ve added additional funding 
for health, an extra half billion dollars a year as of this budget. 
We’ve done so, Mr. Speaker, to keep up with the growing cost 
of new drugs that benefit our citizens. We’ve done so to pay for 
expensive technologies, like new MRIs in Saskatoon and 
Regina, like a mobile CAT scan that goes between the cities of 
Moose Jaw and Swift Current. And we’ve done all of this to 
help our health providers diagnose and treat illness. We’ve done 
so to provide fair wages and benefits for our health workers. 
And in a market where we’re competing to attract registered 
nurses, licensed practical nurses, physiotherapists, doctors, and 
others, this has become a major cost driver. 
 
The simple truth, Mr. Speaker, is we cannot maintain this rate 
of growth. We’re already spending in the range of 40 per cent 
of our program funding on health. We’re not able to support 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

double-digit increases to health spending like the 11 per cent 
that we provided last year. Nor are we prepared to see our 
publicly funded health system dismantled. 
 
Let me say very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that privatization and 
private hospitals are not the answer. Mr. Speaker, to protect 
medicare we have to keep it affordable. The health system we 
have will continue to adapt to present-day realities. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, as a nine-year-old girl growing up in 
rural Saskatchewan, the emotional battle over the introduction 
of medicare in 1962. I remember the then premier, Woodrow 
Lloyd, who was the MLA for the constituency of Biggar, the 
place where my family came from, about his conviction, his 
belief in that publicly funded health care was the right thing to 
do. 
 
(2200) 
 
Even then however he knew, and as the CCF knew, that his 
government was only introducing phase one of the medicare 
plan. He knew the second phase, the more difficult one, would 
be to reorganize the delivery of our services to provide the kind 
of care our citizens need in a more innovative way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we began that phase some eight years ago. And 
progress has been made thanks to the efforts of people across 
this province whether they’re health providers, physicians, 
district staff, volunteers, and health board members. But we 
need to do more. 
 
We need to continue to focus on our original goals — the 
prevention of illness and injury; delivering health services in 
community settings whenever appropriate instead of relying so 
heavily on hospitals and nursing homes; promoting community 
involvement. After eight years, we still have some changes 
ahead of us. This budget, Mr. Speaker, will drive some of those 
changes. 
 
This budget will challenge all of us in health care to work 
together, to ensure sustainable publicly funded health care that 
ensures appropriate access to care. This is not a time to grasp at 
the past and the old ways of thinking. This is a time to look 
forward, to adapt to the realities of the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, members of this House 
will know that we’ve devoted an additional $150 million of 
one-time money in this year’s health budget to support these 
changes. And let me be clear, the Saskatchewan health 
transition fund is one-time money. It is meant to help us make 
the transition to a more sustainable health system and support 
innovation in the delivery of health services. 
 
And we’ve already earmarked some of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, to some immediate priorities. First, we’re going to 
address the issues identified in the external review of the 
Regina District. And given that the findings with respect to 
tertiary care in Regina also apply to Saskatoon, we’re providing 
additional funding to those two districts. 
 
Second, we’ll be directing some one-time funds toward capital 

equipment purchases in Regina and Saskatoon, and 
Saskatchewan’s cancer agency. We’ve heard that the need for 
new equipment and technology across the province is a priority, 
and these funds won’t meet all of the needs but they’re a good 
start. 
 
The remainder of the Saskatchewan health transition fund will 
support innovation. The final allocation will depend on what is 
needed to ensure long-term sustainability in our health system. 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been considering very 
carefully how do we determine this. We’ve talked about the 
need for a broad review of what we want our health system to 
look like in the future. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we need to have a public dialogue, a 
dialogue at the national level because this is a national issue. In 
recent weeks, Mr. Speaker, I have sought to impress this on my 
colleagues from across the country, including the federal 
minister, Mr. Rock. 
 
And if we are unable to spark some action at the national level, 
then we will have to take the lead ourselves. We did so in 1962 
when our citizens introduced North America’s first publicly 
funded health system. We did so in 1993 when we introduced 
phase II of medicare. And in a nation looking for a way to make 
our publicly funded health system sustainable for the future, we 
can do it again, Mr. Speaker, and we will once again lead the 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this will not be an easy 
task. We are going to look to all of our partners in health care 
and to all members of this House to help engage the public to 
find real solutions. We need to go beyond a narrow audit of the 
system to take a look at broad questions about what kind of 
health care do we want. There’s more money needed for health 
care and where should it come from? Does more spending 
always lead to better health, particularly if those dollars come at 
the expense of other important government services. 
 
What kinds of care can we appropriately provide in our 
province, in our tertiary centres, in our regional centres, and in 
our rural communities? And who should deliver that care, Mr. 
Speaker? And are there more effective and efficient ways to 
deliver the care that’s needed? 
 
If we want to preserve publicly funded health care for our 
children, these are the questions that will need to be addressed. 
And this budget will provide both the support and the impetus 
to move forward on these deliberations. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the government will be asking 
districts to make plans for innovation. We’ll be working closely 
with districts to ensure that they can meet the needs of their 
residents within their means. 
 
Members of this House will know, Mr. Speaker, that we saw a 
dramatic increase in health district deficits this past year. We 
will not allow health care to be put at risk by allowing further 
increases to these deficits. I’ve committed, Mr. Speaker, to 
working with districts to carefully manage change and to ensure 
appropriate access to health care for all citizens across our 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

province. 
 
We have a very large challenge ahead of us in this province and 
across Canada. But we also have some very real opportunities 
— an opportunity for innovation, an opportunity to renew our 
vision of medicare going into the 21st century. We have an 
opportunity to protect publicly funded health care and to lead 
the country in making it adaptable and sustainable into the 
future. 
 
Forty years ago, it was our province, our citizens, that led the 
country in defining a system of medicare that could provide 
vital health care to all of our citizens regardless of their means. 
It was a gift to the nation that today still defines who we are as 
Canadians. Now we need to work together to lead a 
pan-Canadian debate to help redefine medicare to ensure its 
survival into the future. This budget will begin to assist us in 
that dialogue while ensuring the continuation of quality services 
for the people across this province. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:08 p.m. 
 





 

 


