





























































Hansard: May 31, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1467 
 May 31, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in my place today to present 
a petition on behalf of the communities of Lanigan and Watrous 
— the people there concerned about possible closure of their 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

This petition is signed by the good citizens of Young, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the 
Lanigan and Watrous area who are petitioning the government 
to retain their hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Young and 
Watrous and Leroy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people concerned about the future of the Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this particular petition are all from the community 

of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding hospital care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly ever pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the community of Young. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the health care system and people concerned in the 
Lanigan and Watrous area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and this petition is signed by the folks from 
Lanigan and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the futures of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people in the Lanigan and Watrous area concerned about their 
hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are very concerned 
about health care in this province. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And this is signed by residents from Colonsay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present, to do with the state of health care in the 
province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community involved, Mr. Speaker, is Young, Young, 
Young, and Young. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These prayers, these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
people of Young, Zelma. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospital remains open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from the town of Davidson. 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the closure of hospitals. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The citizens are from Young and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this afternoon in regards to keeping roads open in this 
province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to keep the boundary road near Okema 
Beach open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present today that has to do with cellular service, telephone 
service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
And the petitioners come from the community of Strasbourg 
and Regina. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have the opportunity to rise in this Assembly to bring forth a 
petition regarding the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petitioners are from Strasbourg and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
The petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Young. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present another petition on behalf of 
the good citizens of Young, Saskatchewan. The petition is to 
retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 

 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To cause the governments to reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Strasbourg, Duval, 
Govan, and Bulyea; 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Tobacco Control 

 
The Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Kowalsky, Chair of the Special 
Committee on Tobacco Control presents the first report of the 
said committee which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, and through you, members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I’m very pleased today to rise as Chair of your 
committee to present this report, as well as to make a few 
remarks with respect to the report. 
 
The first thing I want to do is say that this report is the 
cumulative property and work — intellectual property and work 
— of seven MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
this Assembly and the staff that worked and co-operated with 
them. 
 
I would like to at this time to mention who the MLAs are. I 

served as Chair of the committee, Mr. Speaker. The Vice-Chair 
of the committee was the member from Estevan. Other 
members of the committee were: the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland; the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy; the 
member from Saltcoats, the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, and the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we had assigned to the 
committee several staff members. Mr. Greg Putz and Ms. 
Donna Bryce, Clerks from the Clerk’s office; Monique Lovatt, 
also from the Clerk’s office. We had Hansard staff and sound 
crews who I would like to acknowledge. 
 
And I would also like to acknowledge, and with leave of the 
Assembly, introduce Ms. Tanya Hill who was the research 
officer. And I’m not sure if Tanya is the galleries. There she is 
waving, so I want to acknowledge Tanya’s work on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our committee conducted a series of meetings and 
hearings around the province. We heard . . . and we went to 
several schools as well. We were rather impressed, Mr. 
Speaker, by some of the . . . by a lot of the testimony that was 
given. 
 
What particularly impressed us was new knowledge that we 
gained about the impact of tobacco use in Saskatchewan, 
particularly the fact that there are up to 1,600 deaths attributed 
to tobacco use annually; that it is a very addictive substance, 
more addictive than most of us thought going into this work; 
and the illnesses that arise from it; and the fact that the total cost 
to the province both direct and indirect is estimated to be $266 
million. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, the work that we did is produced in 
this report — 33 recommendations which we feel, if 
implemented, will go a long way to reducing tobacco use in the 
province over time. 
 
We understand, Mr. Speaker, that a move in this direction 
would require a societal change in attitude towards tobacco; that 
it’s not something that can be done overnight. It’s a gradual 
process so hence this is our first report. The committee will 
intend to carry on its work into the fall and next year if 
necessary. 
 
I want to just give a very brief outline of the major items, Mr. 
Speaker, for these . . . to the members of the Assembly at this 
time. The major recommendations, first one is that the 
Department of Health establish a comprehensive strategy, 
including the setting of goals and timelines for when this 
strategy should be achieved. We’re recommending that the goal 
be to reduce tobacco use by 50 per cent within five years and 
then another 50 per cent the subsequent five years. 
 
There will be some money needed to do this, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re recommending that $5 million be allotted, and this be 
generated by taxing tobacco and cigarettes at an additional 10 
cents per pack which would yield that money. 
 
The emphasis of the report is on youth, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe that it is our youth who carried the ball for us or started 
it and initiated the whole movement in Saskatchewan in 
environmental protection. We also believe that the youth of 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Saskatchewan once again showed leadership when it came to 
making new rules and complying to new rules with respect to 
drinking and driving. 
 
And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that through leadership of groups 
that are now formed in the schools, like Students Working 
Against Tobacco and other groups, that they can help us on the 
road to reduce tobacco consumption, particularly amongst 
youth, and this will lead also to less tobacco use right across the 
piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Accordingly then we’re recommending that the school 
curriculum have a portion, a greater portion of education, 
mandatory education, every year from K to grade 9 on tobacco 
use; that the high school curriculum also, in areas of phsy. ed. 
and health, have a mandatory portion; that there be community 
education conducted by the health boards; that there be public 
education conducted by the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we need to denormalize tobacco 
use. One of the ways we want to do this is to recommend to this 
Assembly that there be a prohibition and there be a restriction 
on the age that a person is able to purchase and possess tobacco. 
And that age be anybody under 18 should not be able to 
purchase or possess tobacco, similar to our liquor laws. 
 
We believe that there should be no smoking on school property 
altogether. We are also recommending that any vendor who is 
now currently selling tobacco products and wishes to continue 
to sell tobacco products would have to apply for a licence. And 
that any tobacco sales should be done from a counter or a 
cupboard that is out of sight to the public and particularly to any 
place where young children access. 
 
The last recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is that smoking be 
prohibited in all public places in Saskatchewan with the 
exception of bars, casinos, restaurants, and bingo halls, and that 
the committee look at and work in co-operation with the 
hospitality industry to make recommendations into the future as 
how we can work towards having our society accept the fact 
that we want to reduce tobacco use in those establishments as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of coincidental that today happens to be 
World No-Tobacco Day, May 31 — World No-Tobacco Day 
which is a day sponsored by the World Health Organization. 
Their motto is “Tobacco kills — don’t be duped.” 
 
When we are recommending this through this report, our 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker, our objective is, and the 
message is to our youth and the people of Saskatchewan, “Be 
stronger, live longer, drop tobacco.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Accordingly, it’s my pleasure to move, 
seconded by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on Tobacco 
Control be now concurred in. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
Vice-Chair it is my pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to 
second the motion put forward by the hon. member from Prince 
Albert Carlton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I am sure you are well aware, the Special 
Committee on Tobacco Control has been working diligently 
and has travelled extensively throughout our province to hear 
what the people of Saskatchewan have to say on this very 
important issue. Mr. Speaker, although the committee has made 
significant progress over the past few months, there is still a lot 
of work to do. 
 
And at this time I would like to commend all of my colleagues 
on the committee, the legislative staff, and researcher for all 
their hard work and dedication, and to thank all of those 
individuals for their very well-thought-out presentations. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to second the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill 
entitled The Sex Offender Registry Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: (1) were officials from 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance consulted about who 
should be appointed to the review committee studying the 
personal injury protection program; if so, who was 
consulted, when were they consulted, why were they 
consulted, who consulted with them, and what advice was 
offered by SGI; and (2) which groups or individuals were 
consulted by the minister or other government officials 
regarding who was appointed to this committee? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day 55 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: of the three remaining members of 
the personal injury protection program review committee 
as of May 30, 2000, which were once employed by SGI; 
which are or have been involved with organizations which 
have received funding from SGI; which have been 
involved in other Saskatchewan government review 
committees and please name those committees. 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a good friend and a former member of the Legislative 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

Assembly. And at the time he was here, between 1971 and ’82, 
he, for a period, was the youngest Finance minister in Canada 
and, I might remind all members, balanced the books, and the 
economy of the province was very, very strong. 
 
I’m sure all members will want to welcome Elwood Cowley to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of 
the legislature, people that are in our galleries that have 
travelled here from all across the province. I am delighted that 
licensed practical nurses are visiting the legislature today to 
witness the second reading of their legislation. In particular, I’d 
like to welcome Noella Hart, who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, to the 
legislature, as well as Ede Leeson, who is the executive director 
of SALPN. 
 
I would ask all licensed practical nurses in our galleries to stand 
in order that we can recognize their presence here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to join with 
the Health minister in welcoming all of the health care 
professional licensed practical nurses that are here this 
afternoon to watch the very first step of a very important bit of 
legislation that not only affects their scope of practice and their 
terms of employment, but also affects the delivery of health 
care right across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very important people in the delivery of 
health care service in the province and I certainly would like to 
join in welcoming them here today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just would like to 
join the Deputy Premier in a brief welcome to a constituent of 
mine, Mr. Elwood Cowley. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to members of the Assembly and to you 
as well, Mr. Speaker, a number of special guests that we have in 
the west gallery as well. 
 
Present with us today are a number of irrigators . . . are here to 
listen to the second reading speech of The Irrigation 
Amendment Act that we will move later today. And these are 
obviously some of the key stakeholders who are involved in a 
number of the consultation meetings where the amendments 
were discussed. 
 
And I just ask them to rise at the very end just as I’ve introduce 
the last of the them. 
 

Very quickly, with us today in the west gallery is Ron Tittle, 
Elias Hofer, Dan Hofer, Mark Oram, Bill Karwandy, Ken 
Plummer, Jarrod Klassen, James Harvey, Sandra Bathgate, 
Barry Akins, Lorne Jackson, Gordon Kent, Don Dean and from 
SaskWater, as well we have Stephanie Choma, Bill Vavra, and 
John Linsley from the Outlook office. 
 
So if I could have all of you please rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party, bring greetings and welcome our guests 
here from the Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects Association. I’m 
sure everybody here will give them a warm welcome. And if 
they choose to meet with me afterwards, I’d be quite welcome 
to. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. While 
my colleague was introducing the licensed practical nurses and 
they were all standing, and I want to welcome them too. This 
person was not standing. 
 
In your gallery is an individual by the name of Jackie Sedley. 
She’s the public representative on the Saskatchewan 
Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, and she has a long 
history of working with children in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She’s been a director of a community day care for many years 
in Yorkton, managed her own child care facility for many years, 
and has been sort of home for many families and children in 
Yorkton over the years. And she’s a loyal volunteer and gives 
of her time unselfishly for many community groups. So I’d ask 
Jackie to please rise and the rest of the Assembly kindly 
welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Among the 
Saskatchewan Irrigation Project Association members here 
today are three people I would like to recognize specifically. 
 
As you know and have experienced, the Cypress Hills are a 
long way from Regina and I don’t get visitors from my 
constituency in this House very often. So I want to take this 
opportunity to especially recognize Ron Tittle, Don Dean, and 
Willie Karwandy, all from the constituency of Cypress Hills. 
 
In a former life, I was a salesman for a John Deere dealership 
and Ron Tittle was my best customer. Don Dean was my 
competing salesman, and Mr. Karwandy was a customer I just 
hadn’t got to yet. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this 
Assembly, the Social 10 class from the Spring Valley School. 
Mr. Blair Sands there seated in the east gallery, and 
accompanied by chaperone, Ms. Ashworth. 
 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

I hope that they’ve had an interesting and educational visit to 
the building today and that they enjoy the proceedings here and 
that all members of this Assembly will welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Trans Canada Trail Celebration in Outlook 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Monday I 
had the honour of attending the Trans Canada Trail Relay 2000 
celebrations held in Outlook. The town of Outlook is one of 
several communities in my constituency that will see a portion 
of the Trans Canada Trail pass through their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mere scale of this Canada-wide recreational 
trail is most impressive. Spanning over 16,000 kilometres, this 
is the longest shared-use trail in the world. It will join the 
Atlantic, Arctic, and Pacific oceans. 
 
Not only will this nationwide trail be used for walking but also 
cycling, horseback riding, cross-country skiing, and 
snowmobiling. 
 
I would like to congratulate all of the water carriers from the 
many communities across my constituency. These communities 
are of course Outlook, as well as Elbow, Mistusinne, Dundurn, 
Hanley, Keeler, Marquis, Tuxford, and Tugaske, along with 
Buffalo Pound, Danielson, and Douglas provincial parks. 
 
By taking part in this relay, which transports water from our 
three oceans to our nation’s capital, these dedicated and 
patriotic people will ensure Saskatchewan’s place at the historic 
opening of the Trans Canada Trail, on September 9. 
 
In conclusion I would like to once again congratulate the 
organizers of this celebration in Outlook. Their noble work will 
help the Trans Canada Trail become a reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ponteix, Saskatchewan Twinned with Ponteix, France 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the town of Ponteix, 
Saskatchewan and the community of Ponteix-Aydat, France, 
have celebrated the twinning of their two respective 
communities. And in a ceremony held last Thursday, the two 
communities signed a pact of friendship. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the town of Ponteix and the village of 
Ponteix in France, have a history that goes back to 1906, when 
Father Albert Royer, with a number of settlers from France, 
established a new community in our province. And that 
community he founded was first called Notre Dame 
d’Auvergne. And it was then changed later, in 1914, to Ponteix. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ponteix is located in the Wood River constituency 
between Assiniboia and Shaunavon, and approximately 60 per 
cent of the residents speak the French language. 
 
A delegation from Ponteix-Aydat, France, arrived in 
Saskatchewan earlier this month. The group included 15 grade 

5 school children, and having toured the province of 
Saskatchewan and other parts of Western Canada, attended the 
celebration in Ponteix last Thursday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate these two 
communities on the twinning and the friendship that exists 
between our province and the great country of France. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Input Management Program 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rural Saskatchewan 
is widely known for its innovation. And my constituency is at 
the top of the list, I believe. 
 
While this government is slow to develop programs that are 
beneficial to farmers, businesses within the farm communities 
realize the value of flexibility and the importance of agriculture 
to our province. 
 
Today I would like to recognize three co-ops from my area — 
Naicam, Spalding, and Lake Lenore. Last year the members of 
the co-op board, staff, and general manager Gordon Dmytruk 
recognized a problem in rural Saskatchewan, a financing 
problem to help cover the crop-input expenses which would 
allow farmers the flexibility to sell their products in various 
markets. 
 
A year ago they piloted a financial program called agricultural 
input management which is now available to producers right 
across Western Canada. They talked to various credit unions 
and banks, and the TD (Toronto Dominion) in Toronto was 
interested in the idea and met with the boards and general 
manager. Together they developed a program. 
 
Farmers can apply at their local co-op for a revolving line of 
credit to cover crop-input expenses. Credit amounts range from 
10,000 to $250,000 and participants have up to one year to 
repay. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Dmytruk, and the boards of the Spalding, 
Naicam, and Lake Lenore co-ops. Your foresight innovation not 
only meets the needs of the farm community and your 
businesses but ensures that rural Saskatchewan will be viable 
into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Michael Lypka Awarded Gold Medal in Dentistry 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
spring is a time for university convocation. A time in which 
students are recognized and rewarded for their dedication and 
determination. A time in which our Saskatchewan students 
show the world that they have the right stuff and that they are 
the future. 
 
To find an outstanding example of the kind of right stuff we 
have in Saskatchewan we need look no further than your 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, to Michael Alexander Lypka of 
Balcarres. 
 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

Michael, in this year’s convocation at the University of 
Saskatchewan, was awarded the gold medal in dentistry. He is 
one of the most accomplished individuals ever to graduate from 
that college, and at 23 he is also one of the youngest. 
 
This young man has excelled not only in dentistry where he was 
awarded numerous scholarships and awards — eight in his final 
year alone — but he was also a member of the CIAU (Canadian 
Interuniversity Athletic Union) All Canadian All Academic 
team for five consecutive years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we work in government to make Saskatchewan 
a force in this new millennium, it is people like Michael Lypka 
we can place our hope and confidence in, knowing that the 
future will be in capable hands. 
 
I ask all members to join with me, and I’m sure with you, Mr. 
Speaker, in expressing our congratulations to Michael and 
wishing him all the very best in his future endeavours. 
 

Royal Canadian Legion Ladies’ Auxiliary Division 5 
70th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today in the Assembly to congratulate and 
commend the Royal Canadian Legion Ladies’ Auxiliary 
Division 5 on the celebration of their 70th anniversary which 
took place in Humboldt last Saturday, May 27. 
 
The mandate of the ladies’ auxiliary is basically to support the 
veterans of their local branch. However, in addition, it should 
be noted that they work diligently to support Girl Guides, Boy 
Scouts, and other youth organizations. They have also taken it 
upon themselves many times to support their communities in 
various ways. 
 
For example, in Humboldt, through a variety of fundraising 
efforts, the ladies auxiliary contributed $35,500 over a five-year 
period to support St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. As well, the 
Humboldt day care and the Humboldt Aquatic Centre were 
beneficiaries of new playground equipment and a waterslide for 
youth respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these women are very down-to-earth, 
hard-working people. They are dedicated to community 
development, and they deserve to have a great deal of credit for 
their initiatives and their work to support community and youth. 
 
I would personally like to thank the ladies, and I wish them the 
very best for continued success in your . . . in their ongoing 
work. And I ask the Assembly also to show some support and 
appreciation to all ladies auxiliaries of the Legion in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seeding and Spring Credit Advance Program Update 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have some 
bad news and some very good news. First the bad news: I’ve 
not yet completed my seeding. I know the member for Watrous 
will be concerned. 
 

Now for the very good news: the members of this side of the 
House would like to congrat — I’ll try that again — 
congratulate Saskatchewan farmers on seeding more than 95 of 
this year’s crop. This is well ahead of the five-year average of 
67 per cent and last year’s progress of 68 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to update the House on the 
Canada-Saskatchewan adjustment activities. Of the applications 
that were mailed out on April 13, 2000, Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance has received back from farmers about 46,000 
applications, and of those have processed just over 44,000. This 
means, Mr. Speaker, that SCIC (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation) has paid out approximately 95 per cent of the 
applications they received back. 
 
To date just over 182 million has been paid out to 
Saskatchewan farmers to help with this spring’s seeding. This 
175 million is in addition to the 40 million in tax cuts on farm 
fuel, education, and land tax, 300 million available under the 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program, and 
400 million available under the spring credit advance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is that these programs have been 
put in place, the programs are working, and we congratulate the 
farmers for their successes so far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World War I Veteran Recognized 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at a 
time when we are remembering those who fought and died for 
this country during the world wars, and particularly the First 
World War with the ceremony in Vimy Ridge laying to rest the 
solider found some 80 years after his death, and the historic 
ceremony that transported an unknown soldier from his resting 
place in Vimy Ridge back to his home of Canada and his final 
resting place at the foot of the National War Memorial in 
Ottawa, I would like to recognize another brave soldier from the 
First World War. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize Mr. Harry Kulyk of 
Blaine Lake. Mr. Kulyk is a First World War veteran who 
served with the 218th Battalion in England, the 6th Canadian 
Field Ambulance in France, and following the armistice the 
Occupation Army in Germany. Mr. Kulyk will be turning 100 
years old in July of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday, May 26, Mr. Kulyk attended a 
ceremony at the Royal Canadian Legion, Nutana Branch in 
Saskatoon where he was presented with the Legion of Honour, 
France’s highest national order. He was also presented with the 
John McCrae Medallion and a certificate of appreciation from 
Queen Elizabeth II. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to give recognition to Mr. Kulyk 
for his dedication to his country and his determination to carry 
out his duties. I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
Mr. Kulyk on receiving the well-deserved honours he was 
presented on the 26th, and thank him for his services in World 
War I. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Maintenance of Highway 18 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we now 
have a by-election on in the Wood River constituency and the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) and the Liberals are fighting over 
who gets the credit for the NDP record. I’m wondering right 
now who wants the credit for Highway No. 18? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 18 is so broken up that the Climax 
School will no longer run a school bus down that road. It’s 
simply too unsafe for Saskatchewan school children to travel 
down this Saskatchewan highway. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
disgrace; and it speaks volumes about the years of neglect faced 
by the people in that part of the province. 
 
To the Minister of Highways today. Mr. Minister, how could 
you allow this to happen? How could you allow Highway 18 to 
fall apart so badly when it’s no longer safe for children in a 
school bus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
we’re always concerned about public safety, and that’s one of 
the reasons why we have invested the highest amount of dollars 
in highways and transportation in Saskatchewan’s history — at 
$250 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s an increase of 6.6 per cent over last year. Specifically on 
the highway that the member refers to, it’s my understanding 
that a contract has been tendered and will be awarded shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
though we have the largest increase ever in the Highways’ 
budget, and we’ve reached stratospheric heights with that, most 
of the new money isn’t even going to roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school children used to learn that the three Rs 
stood for reading, ’riting, and ’rithmetic. School children in 
Climax know now that the three Rs stands for Roy’s rotten 
roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to think about how the people around 
Climax feel. Now you just became a father recently, and I want 
you to think about putting your children on a school bus and 
then wondering whether they’ll make it to school or not. 
 
Mr. Minister, the broken pavement and potholes were so huge 
that the bus couldn’t avoid them when there was oncoming 
traffic. Mr. Minister, how would you feel as a parent if your 
children were on that school bus? 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a serious question. The road is a disgrace. 
How could you allow this to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m 
certainly concerned about public safety, it’s unlikely that I’d 
ever send my son to a school in Cypress Hills. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, also I want to again . . . I want to 
report again, Mr. Speaker, that we have, we have this year the 
highest Highway’s budget in Saskatchewan’s history at $250 
million. We are concerned about public safety, and for that 
reason, we’ve increased the Highway’s budget by 6.6 per cent. 
 
But I find it ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition members, 
day after day, come into the House with petitions asking us to 
lower the gas tax and, at the same time, put more money into 
highways. It absolutely makes no sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have tendered for Highway 18 and there will be 
improvements on that road shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the reason we suggest the 
lowering of the gas tax is because most of it isn’t getting to the 
roads anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a new problem in that area; that highway 
has been dangerous for years. Tonight in Val Marie, the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) will honour Dave 
Kleinsasser of the Sand Lake Hutterite Colony. Two years ago, 
Dave Kleinsasser saved a Moose Jaw woman’s life after the car 
she was driving hit a pothole, lost control, left the road, and 
flipped upside down under water. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Kleinsasser was in the right place at the right 
time and as a result, a life was saved that could have been lost 
because of that deadly stretch of highway. I might add — a 
neglected stretch of highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, why has it taken so long to fix this dangerous 
highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If the member needed any clarification, 
by the way, on why I wouldn’t send my son to Cypress, it’s just 
a little far to bus him from the Meadow Lake constituency. As 
well it happens that I happen to know the principal involved 
there and he comes from my constituency so I know they have a 
very good educational system there. 
 
As well again, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the member 
that I’m aware of the highway and I know it needs 
improvement, and that is the reason we’ve tendered the 
contract. And I understand it’s being awarded either today or 
tomorrow and work will begin on that highway within the next 
few days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskWater Investment in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for the SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Yesterday the spring report of the Acting Provincial Auditor 
removed all doubt that SaskWater is to blame for the loss of 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars. The auditor says, and I quote: 
 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

We found problems with SaskWater’s rules and procedures 
for safeguarding . . . controlling public money. 

 
He also states, and I quote again: 
 

We found SaskWater’s rules and procedures for managing 
its investment in the potato industry were not adequate, 
from 1996 through most of 1998. 

 
Mr. Minister, this is a major investment for the SaskWater 
Corporation involving tens of millions of dollars. How do you 
explain that proper procedures weren’t in place to manage it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are well 
aware that it was a major investment with their . . . part of the 
reason that we invested out in that area, as I’ve said many times 
in the legislature before, is there were hundreds of millions of 
dollars, literally hundreds of millions of dollars, invested in 
infrastructure by way of irrigation, both federally and 
provincially. 
 
We had in most cases depressed cereal grain prices. It was 
clearly the view of this government — and I think with good 
vision — that we should diversify in agriculture. And that’s the 
reason that we invested in irrigation and also into the 
production of potato prices . . . potatoes, I should say, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The auditor’s findings clearly indicate that there were problems 
but he also notes that there were substantial improvements 
made by the corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The auditor’s report 
indicates SaskWater spent millions more than they planned 
when they built the storage facilities in 1997. They spent 
millions more than the conditions placed on them by CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation) specified. 
 
They did no risk or cost benefit analysis. They set no clear 
objectives. They did no investment evaluation along the way. 
They did no market research. In other words they went ahead 
like a bull in a china shop without any idea what they were 
doing. They put taxpayers’ money at risk, local businesses at 
risk, and the potato industry at risk. Mr. Minister, this is no way 
to operate a business. 
 
Who were the people overseeing this investment by SaskWater, 
and are they still employed by the corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I say, Mr. Speaker, that we 
realize that mistakes were made and we’ve learned from that. 
And clearly in the auditor’s report — and I’m going to quote 
directly from the auditor’s report — here’s what he says: 
 

In our opinion, for the year ended December 31, 1999: 
 
SaskWater’s financial statements are reliable; 
 

He says: 

SaskWater had adequate rules and procedures to safeguard 
and control its assets, except (Mr. Speaker) that SaskWater 
should set appropriate security policies for its information 
technology systems and data; and 
 
SaskWater complied with the authorities governing its 
activities relating to financial reporting, safeguarding 
assets, revenue raising, spending, borrowing and investing. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s scathing report on 
the actions of SaskWater and SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) shows that the taxpayers lost $9 
million in 1999 on the failed potato venture. But it’s really too 
bad the auditor couldn’t examine the full loss to the province. 
 
There are Saskatchewan businesses who were contracted by 
SPUDCO for supplies and services that also lost millions. 
Greenhouse operators, custom harvesters, fertilizer dealers, 
trucking companies, all suffered by your mismanagement of 
this venture. They lost their life savings; they lost their 
businesses. They definitely lost their respect for the government 
based on how they were treated and how they’re still being 
treated in the wake of this disaster. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your estimation of how many millions of 
dollars in economic spinoffs were really lost by the failure of 
SPUDCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish the 
member would be just a little more positive. Investing in an 
industry, as many of the people in the gallery know today, like 
potatoes, is I think a very good idea. 
 
As an example, diversification — Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
list for you some of the things that diversification have done. As 
an example, there’s a growing hog industry in Saskatchewan, 
including both the location for new swine genetic production 
units. 
 
We have an integrated beef lot, ethanol production unit. Mr. 
Speaker, there are now, because this government has promoted 
and pushed diversification, there are now 279 food processors 
in Saskatchewan in 1999 — an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 95 per 
cent since 1991. 
 
I would argue that we have a strong industry out in the area that 
the member’s referring to and it only makes sense that our 
government should be involved in diversification. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the losses at SPUDCO and the 
economic hardship it caused to many Saskatchewan businesses 
has nothing to do with depressed potato prices. It has everything 
to do with SaskWater and the NDP government sticking their 
nose in private business. They signed contracts with businesses 
who expanded or made investments based on their 
commitments to SPUDCO, only to turn around and then cancel 
them. 
 
This government refuses to accept their responsibility to 
taxpayers and to businesses who are negatively affected by this 
failure. 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Mr. Minister, you can’t hide from the auditor’s allegations. Will 
you admit that SaskWater and SPUDCO were wrong in their 
handling in the investment of the potato industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, if he’s, Mr. Speaker, if 
he’s asking me to say that, he’s also asking me to say that the 
Royal Bank, who has lots of expertise, and the Farm Credit 
Corporation, who has lots of expertise, also made mistakes. 
They, like us, and in partnership with us and in partnership with 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is 
asking me to say that, he’s also saying, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Royal Bank and the Farm Credit Corporation, who have much 
expertise in this, who worked with ourselves and who worked 
with many of the irrigators who are here today, also that they 
made mistakes. 
 
And I think we are all prepared to admit that we did make 
mistakes. But we made substantial improvements, and we’ve 
learned a lot and there’s a strong and growing industry out in 
that area today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Audit of Uranium City Hospital 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Associate Minister of Health. Yesterday in 
his spring report, the Acting Provincial Auditor revealed very 
serious problems within his audit of the board of governors of 
the Uranium City Hospital. This board was established by order 
in council in 1995. 
 
In his report, the auditor indicates the board had no conflict of 
interest guidelines, no strategic plan, no code of conduct, no 
operating budget approval process, no written rules and 
procedures for financial reporting of inventory and asset 
control, and questionable actions in all of these areas. In short, 
your appointed board is running out of control and has no 
accountability to the taxpayers. 
 
Madam Minister, in light of the scathing report by the 
Provincial Auditor, what are you going to do to correct this 
problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The board of 
governors at Uranium City Hospital and the department have 
responded to the serious allegations of misconduct that were put 
forward, and a file has been sent to the provincial Justice 
department for a public prosecution. They have done an 
operational audit in Uranium City and also a forensic audit, and 
that is in the Justice system right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again to the associate minister. Mr. Speaker, we understand that 
there was a report submitted to the Department of Health in 
June 1998 which was done by SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurse) and CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) 
concerning problems they were raising about this hospital. 
 
We also understand that when the Associate Minister of Health 
was the president of SUN, she herself was in Uranium City 
looking into the problems expressed by her members. Yet the 
auditor says it wasn’t until December 1998 that the board of 
Uranium City Hospital contacted the department with their 
concerns. So obviously there was a problem that a lot of people 
knew about, perhaps even a year before anything was done by 
the Department of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, when did you first learn that there may be 
problems of this board and its staff? What specifically were you 
told, and will you release all of the reports that were submitted 
to the department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Department 
of Health was aware June ’98 that there was some 
mismanagement there at the management level, so an 
operational audit was done. From that operational audit, then 
we looked at some of the recommendations and a forensic audit 
was initiated. 
 
I was elected to this legislature in June of ’98. When I was SUN 
president and up in Uranium City, there was problems with the 
staff and the CEO (chief executive officer) and the director of 
nursing. Those were the situations I was looking into at that 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
minister. Mr. Speaker, the auditor raises serious questions about 
the practices and conduct of the board of the Uranium City 
hospital. 
 
He points to payments made to board members for personal use. 
He says the overall financial planning and reporting needs 
drastic improvement. He says the board delegated the CEO of 
the hospital to manage and control operations. He says during 
the specific time period, the board did not approve a strategic 
plan of any operating budget. 
 
Madam Minister, you approve the operating budgets of health 
boards. Did you receive one from the Uranium City Hospital 
Health Board? Did you approve this budget? Were you 
responsible for it or were they? 
 
Madam Minister, how could you approve budgets when you 
knew there was an investigation as to the procedures going on? 
Where was your responsibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, the 
board of governors and the department are working together on 
this issue. The operational audit was done, then the forensic 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

audit was done. That audit was given to the Provincial Auditor 
and now it is in the hands of the Justice department. Further 
information or further action will be taken on advice from them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, isn’t 
this a wonderful situation? Here we have a board that was 
appointed by your government, that is now under investigation 
by the Justice department. You have a scathing Provincial 
Auditor’s report which refers to misuse of health care dollars 
and negligent financial management. 
 
You’ve taken the control away from other boards and yet for 
two years you’ve done nothing but approve these budgets year 
after year. Obviously there’s not only neglect going on at the 
Uranium City hospital level; there’s negligence going on in 
your department, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, when will you take responsibility for this? 
When will you see to it that there’s a complete audit and review 
of this entire health system? What other things are you keeping 
under wraps? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 
Auditor identified some problems with the operations of the 
board that we are following through on. We’re currently 
reviewing the control processes, the orientation of the board, 
how the board deals with its financial situation. We are working 
on that with this board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, once more the minister keeps 
ducking responsibility in this whole matter. 
 
Madam Minister, why is it so that your government only comes 
clean with these issues when the Provincial Auditor brings it to 
the light of day? Madam Minister, what else is going on behind 
closed doors? Will you release the reports that were given to 
your department so the people of this Assembly can understand 
what’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll say again that 
in June of ’98, when we found out about the problems in 
Uranium City, an operational audit was immediately initiated, 
which we participated in, and assisted the board of governors. 
 
From that operational report there were some issues that we 
thought needed to be followed through with a forensic audit. 
We then initiated that and have given the results of the forensic 
audit to the Provincial Auditor. So nothing has ever been 
hidden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question for 

that minister of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in a rare fit of unsolicited honesty that 
minister revealed that no one wants to chair his botched up 
no-fault review committee, Mr. Speaker. Not even Fred 
Zinkhan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s think about that for a minute. This is Fred 
Zinkhan of Olive Waller Zinkhan and Waller, the biggest NDP 
law firm there is. Mr. Speaker, that’s the firm. No one ever 
leaves the firm. Yet here we have Fred Zinkhan, one of the 
biggest NDP lawyers in town, and he doesn’t even want to 
touch the mess with a 10-foot pole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, how much more evidence do you 
need? When will you admit that your no-fault review is a 
complete failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a mandate in the 
legislation to review this personal injury protection plan and to 
deal with it in a way that allows us to improve it and make it 
even better than it is now. We’re going to continue with that. 
There are many people who are very keen on volunteering and 
being part of this kind of review because it involves a review of 
public policy. 
 
What I really reject and what I object to from that member and 
other members opposite is that they will personally attack those 
kinds of people who come forward to offer their services. That 
is not good for public policy in this province and I would ask 
this member to apologize for many of his remarks that he’s 
made about some very prominent individuals of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 
member across said mandate — that he had to fix something. I 
think he should have said that he’s got a band-aid to fix 
something. He’s concerned about the people of good repute in 
this particular province not wanting to work on his committee. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, no one in this province wants to work on his 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are also not happy times at Tommy Douglas 
House. Support for the NDP is disappearing ever day, and now 
even people like Fred Zinkhan are getting ready to bail out. 
Why didn’t Fred Zinkhan want to head up the no-fault review? 
Because, he said, one of the factors now driving the lawyers’ 
opposition is a desire to replace the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — He said, and I quote: “Their thinking may be 
the most . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Hon. member for 
Rosthern kindly go directly to your question. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to continue 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

with that quotation. 
 

Their thinking may be that the most effective way to 
replace no-fault, (Mr. Speaker), is to replace the 
government. 
 

That from a long time NDP supporter . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact 
that no one seems to like your review, Mr. Minister, will you 
scrap it and start over with a truly independent review 
committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again, rather than 
apologize that member repeats his offensive statement about 
these individuals who have volunteered their time to work and 
improve our system in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite is that we will fulfill 
the mandate as set out in the legislation to do a proper review of 
this personal injury protection plan because that’s what’s 
needed for the people in Saskatchewan. And if the lawyers want 
to participate, we’re happy to have them there. If they don’t 
want to participate, they can go and talk where they want. 
We’re going to do this review and we’re going to do it in a way 
that improves the system for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will tell that 
minister what’s offensive around here. It’s offensive that this 
government has spent $87,000 on a committee that hasn’t even 
met. I’ll also tell you what’s offensive in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And that’s setting up a committee to review 
PIPP (personal injury protection plan) and not put a single 
person from the victims of no-fault on that particular 
committee. That’s offensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s time that that minister stand up in his place, get 
rid of the committee as it is — as they’re leaving one by one on 
their own — replace it with a committee that has confidence 
from everyone in this province. When will you do that Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that that 
member opposite uses the figure of $87,000. I would like all 
people in Saskatchewan to know that we spend $87,000 every 
hour, everyday on interest on the debt that was rung up by those 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We in this province are trying to deal with 
all of that which we inherited from the people opposite. And we 
are going to continue to improve those things as we have 

brought forward in this province. 
 
One of the things that we did do was bring forward a personal 
injury protection plan that had a built-in review. That review is 
going to take place, we’re going to work with people from 
within Saskatchewan who are capable and who know what they 
are doing in assessing what they’re doing. We will continue to 
do that whether or not the lawyers are there. 
 
My final point is, has that member met with the committee yet 
himself because they have been working since January. I doubt 
that he’s had anything to do with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of a very 
open and accountable government, Mr. Speaker, and by leave of 
the Assembly, I would respond to questions 149, 150, and 151. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Written answers are given to questions 149, 
150, 151, and those answers are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000. 
 
For the past two years the Department of Health and the 
ministers of Health have been consulting with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses to 
develop this new Act. The current Act has become outdated and 
does not contain the necessary and standard provisions required 
in newer professional legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to say that this new Act 
contains some very positive changes for both the profession and 
the people it serves. In previous years we’ve made similar 
changes to update the legislation governing other health 
professionals in our province. Mr. Speaker, the new Act more 
closely links the care licensed practical nurses provide to their 
education and training. 
 
LPNs (licensed practical nurse) will continue to work alongside 
RNs (registered nurse) and RPNs (registered practical nurse) 
and other health providers to perform valuable public services 
within their respective competencies. 
 
This new Act does not change what licensed practical nurses 
can do in our province. It does allow these valuable health 
practitioners to more independently provide the full range of 
care and service that they’ve been trained to provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also retained scope of practice reference in 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

the new Act. These will help nurses and employers alike as they 
plan and manage staffing issues. This legislation will also 
ensure that licensed practice nurses are accountable to the very 
people they serve. 
 
The new Act contains a number of updated public 
accountability measures that are standard in today’s 
professional legislation. For example, the number of public 
representatives on the college’s council will be expanded, and 
the members of the public will be included on the disciplinary 
committee. 
 
The legislation sets out a clear and more effective process for 
responding to and resolving public concerns about licensed 
practical nurses. Disciplinary hearings will be open to the 
public and the entire discipline process will be transparent. 
 
This Act will also require the association to file an annual report 
with my office. As well, bylaws that may impact the public will 
require government approval. The approval process will allow 
for consultation with key stakeholders such as therapists, 
educators, physicians, and health districts. 
 
Finally, the new Act will ensure flexibility in setting 
registration requirements and issuing licences to facilitate the 
recognition of licensed practical nurses from other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are positive changes for Saskatchewan’s 
health system. These changes have been developed in close 
consultation with the profession and other stakeholders in the 
province. I believe that this new Act will serve licensed 
practical nurses, their clients, the citizens, and the people of this 
province well into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that this 
Bill is extremely important to the future of health care in this 
province, and therefore crucial to all of us. It is imperative to 
the future of our health care system that LPNs and RNs are 
fully employed in our health care system in such a manner as to 
make full use of their considerable skills, knowledge, and 
abilities. 
 
I understand that it is the intent of this Bill to do that and I 
applaud that goal. LPNs and RNs are among the most 
dedicated, hard-working professionals in this province, and we 
should all thank them for their great efforts on our behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — We are looking forward to meeting with their 
executive in the near future, Mr. Speaker, to discuss this matter 
more fully, and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
matter be adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to move second reading of amendments to 
The Irrigation Act, 1996. 
 
When The Irrigation Act was passed in 1996 it replaced The 
Water Users Act, The South Saskatchewan River Irrigation 
District Act, and The Irrigation Districts Act. 
 
This consolidation was intended to provide uniform legislation 
for all the irrigators in the province by simplifying the 
administration of irrigation and following the establishment of 
research projects funded, directed, and controlled by irrigators. 
 
It also instituted a user-pay model of irrigation development. 
This takes the burden of funding for operation and maintenance 
of irrigation projects off the shoulders of government, setting up 
a sinking fund to cover the infrastructure replacement. 
 
The Irrigation Act, 1996 achieved many of its original 
objectives. However, experience gained during the 
implementation process determined a need for changes and 
clarification. 
 
All 28 active irrigation districts and 2,400 individual irrigators 
were invited to participate in consultation meetings to review 
these changes. At these meetings, Sask Water together with the 
irrigators, discussed these issues and possible solutions, and that 
is the reason that I’m speaking about this today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendments of The Irrigation Act are necessary to simplify 
the administrative process for both the irrigation districts and 
for Sask Water. Changes are also being made to address 
potential liability concerns associated with existing and future 
irrigation developments. 
 
The first amendment related to liability ensures that when Sask 
Water grants an approval for use of water for irrigation, it will 
not be held liable as long as Sask Water acted in a responsible 
manner with the best available information. 
 
For example, if Sask Water issued an irrigation certificate to 
allow an irrigation project to operate, and then at a later date it 
is discovered there has been salinity damage to the land, when 
Sask Water doesn’t want . . . what Sask Water doesn’t want, I 
should say, is for the irrigator to be able to make a claim against 
the corporation saying there’s damage to my land; it’s your 
responsibility. Because when Sask Water approved the project, 
it acted in good faith, Mr. Speaker, using the best practices of 
the day, as I said. 
 
With respect to the cancellation amendment, as an example, if 
Sask Water issued an irrigation certificate to an individual and 
then down the line it’s proven to have a negative effect on the 
neighbouring property, other amendments will allow Sask 
Water to cancel the certificate. 
 
As well some of the province’s irrigated land developed prior to 
the coming into force of The Irrigation Act, 1996, does not meet 
today’s soil/water compatibility standards for continued 
operation. Under the grandfathering amendment, instead of 
forcing abandonment of these project, Sask Water will allow 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

the operator to decide if the project is still feasible. 
 
In turn, the irrigator accepts responsibility for any damage 
which may arise from the previous or future operation of the 
project. 
 
Why is this necessary? Well, Mr. Speaker, the alternative to this 
approach is to soil test all existing projects at significant cost 
and time, and force abandonment of projects which don’t meet 
standards, even though the project may still well be 
economically viable for that irrigator. 
 
The Irrigation Act, 1996 also required non-district irrigators 
who wished to continue irrigating, to sign an irrigation service 
agreement prior to December 31, 2001. The administrative 
costs of obtaining these agreements within that time frame were 
prohibitive. With the passing of these amendments, all those 
who were irrigating as of January 1, 1997 may continue to do 
so. The irrigation service agreement will be obtained for these 
projects over a longer time period at a considerable cost saving, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendments also clarify the conditions under which 
provincial irrigation districts will assume responsibility for 
irrigation works owned by the province. The Act requires a 
water supply contract that lays out the details of operation, 
maintenance, and replacement of the works. And it also clarifies 
that the quality of water delivered to the project is the 
responsibility of the irrigation district. 
 
(1445) 
 
Essentially this provision says the people of Saskatchewan 
initially paid for the infrastructure and now it should be the 
responsibility of the districts to pay the full costs of operation, 
maintenance, and replacement. Another reason for the 
amendments, Mr. Speaker, to the Act, came at the request of the 
Irrigation Crop Diversification Corporation (ICDC). 
 
And for those of you who may be unfamiliar with this group, 
ICDC is a producer organization responsible for irrigation 
research, demonstration, and education in Saskatchewan. 
Essentially, Mr. Speaker, ICDC understands irrigation research, 
and demonstration benefits all the irrigators, and it is therefore 
unfair to only collect levies from district irrigators, as has been 
done in the past two years. ICDC wants the authority to assess 
all intensive irrigators for irrigation research and demonstration. 
 
In recognizing the need for these changes, Sask Water went to 
the people most affected to seek their input. As I mentioned 
earlier, all active irrigation districts and 2,400 individual 
irrigators were invited to participate in the consultation 
meetings held in Moose Jaw, Outlook, and Swift Current, to 
review the proposed changes and solicit feedback. 
 
ICDC and SIPA (Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects Association) 
also participated. Mr. Speaker, most irrigators who participated 
in the consultations agree with these changes . . . agree that 
these changes are needed to allow them to meet the economic 
challenges of the future. 
 
In closing I’d like to remind you that irrigation is a key factor in 
the economic growth of rural Saskatchewan. Currently 

approximately 300,000 acres of land are under irrigation in 
Saskatchewan. Provincially there is the potential for an 
additional, believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, 1 million acres. 
Around Lake Diefenbaker there is certainly potential for an 
additional up to 150,000 acres of irrigation. 
 
These amendments will ensure expansion of the irrigation 
industry is viable, sustainable, and beneficial to the provincial 
economy. 
 
How is irrigation beneficial? Irrigation adds jobs, increases 
output, and increases diversification in the rural economy. In 
fact irrigation gross returns are four times that of dryland crops, 
and that means irrigation has the potential to generate far more 
rural jobs and businesses than a less intensive dryland 
agriculture. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in making 
a few comments regarding the current Bill, Bill No. 25, 
certainly as the minister indicated in his wrap-up, the irrigation 
sector of our province is certainly an important area in the 
agricultural field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are many producers across this 
province who would just give their eye tooth at times to be in an 
area where they would have access to irrigational opportunities, 
especially when we look at the difficulties that arise from 
dryland farming. And this spring is just another indication that 
there are areas in this province that are really struggling where 
irrigation would really be a benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well though, we understand why the 
government and then the department have been taking a close 
look at the old Act and have been updating the Act, because of 
the areas where the Act certainly has lagged behind the progress 
in the area of irrigation. I would have to suggest that the 
expansion of irrigation land in this province is something that’s 
really been a benefit to the province. 
 
It certainly, to the producers who have the advantage of taking 
advantage of the opportunity to irrigate, it’s created a real 
economic opportunity for them. 
 
I might add as well, though, that anyone who gets involved in 
agriculture and expands and certainly moves into the irrigation 
sector, there’s also costs involved. So we want to make sure that 
the regulations that people are dealing with are such that they 
can work with, and the regulations and legislation is compatible 
so after they’ve invested substantial sums of money and time, 
they don’t find themselves in an awkward position because 
maybe the Act is out of date. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly important that we 
take a careful look at legislation, that we look at the changes, 
that we talk to the industry and to individuals that are involved 
and make sure that we’re not putting impediments in place that 
would really impede the progress and involvement. But as well, 
that we’re also protecting the environment and the stakeholders 
as well in regards to pieces of legislation such as the one we 
have before us today. 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest we 
need to review, as an opposition, review this legislation very 
carefully before we just say we’re going to move it forward to 
indeed see to it that all of the concerns have been addressed. 
And my colleagues will certainly — and I — will be taking the 
time as well just to do some more in-depth research and 
following up with the stakeholders to see to it that the 
legislation, as been mentioned by the minister, certainly meets 
the requirements of the industry as we see it today. 
 
Therefore having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 
1993. There have been no substantial revisions to The Crown 
Corporations Act, 1993 since it was created in 1993. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill will make several amendments to allow 
Crown Investments Corporation and its subsidiary Crowns to 
operate more effectively and efficiently. 
 
The first amendment will remove the mandatory requirement 
that the minister responsible for a CIC Crown corporation serve 
as a member of that board. In the spring 1998 legislative 
session, we amended the Act to remove the requirement that the 
minister responsible serve as chairperson on the boards of the 
major Crown corporations. We are now extending this to the 
boards of Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund Management 
Corporation, and our newest Crown corporation, Saskatchewan 
Land Information Services Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is the direct result of the Crown 
review conducted in 1996 and 1997. During the talking about 
Saskatchewan Crowns public hearings in 1996, people raised 
concerns about political interference in our subsidiary Crown 
corporations. They had the perception that our Crowns were 
acting like arms of government rather than like businesses. 
 
They said that one way to change that perception would be to 
remove the requirement that cabinet ministers chair individual 
Crown boards. They said that it would be more appropriate to 
designate a Chair from among the private industry members of 
each board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government agrees. We have seven cabinet 
ministers on the CIC board of directors of which I am the Chair. 
This board, as the holding company board, oversees decisions 
of individual Crown boards. As well, there is accountability of 
the Crown corporations to the Crown Corporations Committee 
of the legislature. 
 
With these checks and balances in place, the requirement for the 
cabinet ministers responsible for each Crown to chair their 
board of directors is no longer there. That role can be better 
fulfilled by any of the highly qualified business people who 
have agreed to serve on these boards. However, the amendment 
does not prohibit the appointment of cabinet ministers as 

members of those boards if desired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment follows through on a commitment 
made by this government. The change has been working well in 
the Crowns in which it was implemented two years ago. We are 
pleased to extend it to the three Crowns that I have just 
mentioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second amendment that I would like to speak 
about continues the theme of balancing the need of our Crown 
corporations to have greater autonomy with the need for them 
to be accountable to the public. Broadening the definition of the 
type of business with which the Crowns can invest will allow 
our Crowns to enter into relations with not only bodies 
corporate but also with such entities as limited partnerships. It is 
just common sense to make this change. 
 
We are introducing an amendment to change the tabling 
requirements for contracts with commercially sensitive 
information. This will provide the minister with discretion as to 
what will or will not be tabled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is designed to protect our Crowns 
and our investment partners from having their commercially 
sensitive information made public. There will still be several 
opportunities for public scrutiny of the actions of CIC and its 
subsidiary Crowns through the publication of the order in 
council, through reporting of significant transactions with the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, and through 
tabling of annual reports and financial statements of the 
Crowns. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, some amendments would put into 
legislation what we have already put into practice. 
 
In the past two years, we have taken several measures to 
improve the governance of our Crown corporations. We have 
introduced the balanced scorecard for CIC and its subsidiary 
Crowns as a performance management tool. This is a system of 
objectives, targets, and performance measures set by the CIC 
board of directors. It is designed to identify and to balance 
competing interests from the perspectives of public policy, 
financial performance, innovation and learning, and customer 
satisfaction. 
 
I’m pleased to say that The Conference Board of Canada has 
concluded that the governance practices of CIC Crown boards 
are among the best in Canada. In fact, they have scored in the 
top 25 per cent of Canada’s public and private sector boards. 
 
The amendments that we are introducing will continue to 
strengthen governance within our Crown corporations. They 
will require that CIC review and approve the Crowns’ capital 
and operating budgets, their goals and objectives, and their 
administrative policy and management practices, systems, and 
plans; and that CIC review and approve the results of the 
Crowns’ operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these measures are already in practice. The 
amendments will simply put them into legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 65, The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2000. 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just a few comments on this piece of legislation before 
we move an adjournment to review the legislation. 
 
As the minister indicated, there are a number of substantive 
changes in the Act. The minister was referring to the fact that 
the Act certainly hasn’t been changed substantially over the past 
number of years, and as a result, there will be a number of 
changes that are coming forward in the Act. And it would 
certainly be appropriate for the opposition to review this Act a 
little more in depth before it certainly moves ahead. 
 
I must compliment the minister though as well for the fact that 
the government is recognizing again that private individuals 
have the capabilities and the ability. And we have certainly 
qualified people who have . . . if given the opportunity to, can 
be excellent chairpersons on Crown Corporations Committee. 
So we see that as a positive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think on review we’ll need to take a 
careful look as to exactly all the areas that the government is 
looking at in regards to this piece of legislation and why the 
changes are necessary. No doubt over a period of years there 
will be changes that take place that would call for changes in 
legislation, to update legislation. And I understand that’s 
exactly what . . . or a fair bit of the current Act before us is 
doing, is actually updating a lot of the Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well I think it’s important for us to 
realize that the Crowns in this province certainly have played a 
role. But I believe as the minister had indicated the public is 
also recognizing the fact that there’s a dependent and almost a 
business-like role that the Crowns have to play as well, whether 
or not they continue to exist as they currently exist or if there 
are changes to make them more accountable. 
 
I think those are areas that need to be certainly looked at, 
reviewed. And the public has certainly indicated to the 
government, as they have indicated to us, that there are areas 
that they would like to see the Crowns being acting more 
responsibly in their role that they play in delivery of services in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe though it would 
be appropriate to give a more in-depth review of this Bill before 
us, and therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2000. 
 
The purpose of this Act, Mr. Speaker, is to repeal 11 obsolete 
statutes. And you’ll be glad to know I’m going to briefly 
describe each of them. The Act also makes consequential 
amendments to other statutes to remove references to these 
statutes. The 11 statutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are being 

repealed because they are no longer used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first Act is The Grain and Fodder 
Conservation Act. This Act was passed in 1946 to provide 
powers for the Minister of Agriculture to lease, purchase or 
build accommodation for the storage of grain for use in 
emergency as seed or feed at times when crop production was 
abnormally low. Mr. Speaker, this Act has not been used in the 
last 10 years. 
 
(1500) 
 
The Minister of Agriculture and Food has the power to respond 
to grain and feed shortages under other legislation. Therefore, 
The Grain and Fodder Conservation Act is redundant and can 
be repealed. 
 
The second Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Horticultural 
Societies Act. Horticultural societies may now be incorporated 
under The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995. As the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food is no longer involved in the operation 
of these societies, the Act is no longer required. 
 
Under the transitional provisions in this Act, societies will have 
a two-year period in which to register as a non-profit 
corporation, and the cost of registration will be paid by the 
Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 
The third Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Industrial 
Development Act. The Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation or SEDCO was created by this Act in 1966. 
SEDCO was dissolved in 1995, therefore this statute is 
redundant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Oil Well Income Tax Act was passed in 1978. 
This is the fourth of the Acts under this particular Bill to be 
repealed, Mr. Speaker. The oil well income tax system was a 
direct tax on income derived from the production of oil in 
Saskatchewan. In 1983 this system was replaced by a simpler 
production tax system under The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act. The Act has not applied to oil well 
incomes since 1982, therefore the Act can be repealed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, number five, The Pioneer Trust Company 
Depositors Assistance Act. Pioneer Trust Company went into 
liquidation in 1985. This Act was passed in 1986 to provide 
payments to depositors who were not covered by the Canada 
Deposit Insurance Corporation. Mr. Speaker, as all depositors’ 
claims have been satisfied, the Act is no longer required. 
 
The sixth Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Pyramid Franchises 
Act. This Act is being repealed in light of amendments to the 
Competition Act — federal legislation — which prohibits 
pyramid franchises and regulates multi-level marketing firms. 
Prior to these federal amendments, the Competition Act 
exempted multi-level marketing firms that were provincially 
regulated. As a result of the federal amendments, licences under 
The Pyramid Franchises Act terminated on January 1, 1993. 
 
Multi-level marketing companies previously licensed under The 
Pyramid Franchises Act are now licensed provincially under 
The Direct Sellers Act. Therefore consumers will continue to be 
protected. 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

The seventh Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Road Allowances 
Crown Oil Act. This Act was passed in 1959 to authorize the 
collection of a 1 per cent levy on the production of oil from 
under Crown road allowances. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the road 
allowance levy was eliminated in 1983 and the Crown royalty 
and freehold production tax systems were adjusted to capture 
the foregone revenues. Therefore this Act can now be repealed. 
 
The eighth Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Seed Grain 
Advances Act. This Act was passed in 1908. It gave a special 
lien and priority to mortgages that provided loans to mortgagors 
for the purpose of purchasing seed. The amount borrowed was 
added to the mortgage at the interest rate of the mortgage. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, with numerous other financial options 
available, this Act is no longer used. 
 
The ninth Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is The Small Business 
Investment Incentives Act. The small business investment 
incentives program provided grants to investors who invested in 
a registered small business incentive corporation. This program 
was discontinued in 1990 and all of the projects have been 
wound down. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, number 10, The Stock Savings Tax Credit 
Act. The stock savings credit . . . tax credit was implemented in 
1986. It provided income tax credits to investors who made 
equity investments in the shares of eligible public companies. 
The program was terminated in 1990 and therefore the Act is no 
longer required. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act. 
This — the venture capital program — allowed investors to 
receive provincial tax credits if they invested in a registered 
venture capital corporation. The program was discontinued in 
1990 and therefore the Act is no longer required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the eleven Acts which are being repealed 
by this Act. I move second reading of An Act to repeal 
miscellaneous obsolete Statutes and to enact transitional 
provisions and consequential amendments with respect to 
certain Statutes being repealed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I was . . . first glance at this piece of legislation and 
the first comments that the minister made, I was thinking that 
maybe this is a piece of legislation that could just go through 
into committee. But having listened a little more carefully, I 
think it’s certainly a statutory Act that needs to be looked at a 
little more carefully, especially with the number of changes and 
regulatory reform changes that the Act is going to be making. 
 
The minister talked about the fact that some of the pieces of 
legislation were going to be redundant and no longer necessary, 
such as the Pioneer Trust Act. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had it 
not been for that Act, there’s many public employees, teachers 
especially, who would have been out substantial, if not all of 
their pension fund. And it’s unfortunate that that had to be dealt 
with at that time. 
 
But certainly we . . . while we would like to believe that 
everything has been addressed, the auditor certainly pointed out 

yesterday that we are still looking at a major shortfall in regards 
to the unfunded pension liability that needs to be addressed in 
the future. But that’s just one of the number of Acts that the 
minister talked about in this piece of legislation that are going 
to be dealt with. 
 
He talked about some of the reforms that will be brought 
forward in a number of Acts for the protection of consumers. 
And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think that is very 
appropriate. 
 
And it certainly is important in today’s society especially with 
the technological changes that we have seen, access to the 
Internet, and a certain number of different areas that people can 
find themselves in grave difficulty. And I think it’s going to be 
incumbent upon us to look very carefully at bringing in 
legislation that controls the airways and makes, if you will, 
vendors more responsible for their actions and the services they 
provide. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just on the news at noon there was 
another situation in regards to use of cameras and the Internet 
that we begin to look at. And it’s amazing to see as a result of 
technology, as a result of computers, as a result of the Internet 
what people can do and what they can get away with unless we 
put in place strict guidelines. 
 
So it would seem to me that with the number of changes that are 
actually being brought forward through this piece of legislation, 
Bill No. 62, it would be important for my colleagues and I to 
review this legislation a little more carefully and not just take it 
for granted. And therefore, at this time I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. It is 
indeed an honour to stand here today to speak to Bill No. 17, 
The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Most members know that at this time I don’t have young 
children to worry about, but for many years I did have. In fact 
most members on this House have either older children or 
young children at this time that are the important part of their 
lives. 
 
I think when I was in need of babysitter or someone to look 
after my children, I was on the farm and at that time I was 
fortunate enough not to have to be one of the people that were 
out working off the farm. So I didn’t have the opportunity or the 
need to use child care in the official sense of the term. At that 
time, and that was probably three decades ago, we had 
neighbours who were our child care providers. When we needed 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

someone to look after our children for a few hours or a few 
moments, we just had to run them over to the neighbour’s place 
because there was someone on the farm to look after the 
children. And we took them for granted. 
 
And we did the same thing in return. If somebody needed their 
children looking after, we were there to do it for them. So rural 
areas have that benefit. We know the people down the road, at 
that time and even now, and so we have the fortunate exercise 
in our lives of knowing the people down the road. 
 
At that time, when I was on the farm, we helped on the farm, 
and maybe it was being in the hog barn and if I needed 
somebody in a hurry, I knew that my neighbour was over there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, things have changed a lot. The children, my 
children, now have to worry about daycares. They are the 
keeper of my grandchildren and I know that there’s very many 
difficult challenges they face as young parents nowadays. The 
economic reality in Saskatchewan today is that both parents 
have to go to work. 
 
And so there’s many hours spent labouring over the decision of 
who’s going to look after the children. Who can they place their 
children, their care of, knowing that when they go home at 
night, their children are going to be happy, well looked after, 
and they’re provided for with the love and care that they would, 
if they had the opportunity to stay home. I think that is probably 
the biggest decision that young parents have to make nowadays. 
 
And I don’t think there’s anything that a young parent likes to 
hear more than when they go to pick up their child from the 
babysitter to hear the child say, just let me stay for a few more 
minutes or when do I get to come back again. I think, for as 
much as parents sometimes feel a little bit put out wondering 
why they aren’t glad to go home, it’s still a good feeling 
knowing that their children are happy. 
 
Looking after the child is not just looking after their physical 
needs, but we also know the young parents want the children to 
be challenged and they want to be . . . their concerns addressed 
when it comes to learning as well. And the child care providers 
that we have in this province, the ones that are trained for that 
job, undertake a lot of learning so that they can be sure that the 
children are learning in another environment other than just 
home. 
 
In urban centres where parents actually have the opportunity to 
choose different sites, I know it’s a concern, but in rural areas 
there often isn’t even a choice. If you can find somebody to 
look after your child, you’re fortunate. And I’m hoping that 
some of the changes that we are seeing in this amendment will 
address some of the concerns that young parents have. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the Act in the current state 
says that children . . . a child care home must be operated out of 
the operator’s principal residence only. The amendment 
changes this and now it’ll permit individuals to provide family 
child care in settings other than their principal residence. 
 
I think that this is really something that’s very important to be 
happening because so often now the circumstances change with 
seasonal work and with rural work; with people in their 

different lifestyles, we know that there isn’t always something 
that’s going to happen at a set time during the day. I think this is 
a very important change to the Act. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other aspect of this Bill is to 
allow the operation of group family child care homes for up to 
12 children with two caregivers. All group family child care 
homes, unlike family child care homes, must be licensed. I 
know that there is also . . . depending on the age, there may be 
some flexibility. But this is something that I will be looking 
forward to discussing further with, not only my own daughters 
but with other young people. 
 
I’ve had so many young people come up to me and say, that 
they dream of the day when they can stay at home and choose 
whether they actually — or both of them — want to go out and 
work, or whether they’ll have the opportunity to build a career 
or whether they consider their career as family . . . building 
their family foundation at home. 
 
Until the time comes when child care is actually a choice for 
young families in this province, I am pleased that this 
amendment is brought forward. 
 
And it’s not very often that we see a Bill brought forward in this 
House that actually mentions rural Saskatchewan and so many 
of the hardships that we find. And especially when it comes to 
raising a family in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I do commend the minister for recognizing that this is a 
concern of young families — the few that we do have out in our 
area. 
 
So with these few words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do appreciate 
the opportunity to rise on this Bill and ask that the debate be 
adjourned so that we can continue to discuss it with other young 
families in this province. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Department of Justice Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise today to speak on this Bill, Bill No. 15, an Act to 
amend the Department of Justice. There are a couple of issues 
that give us some concern that we would like to talk about. 
 
One concern of the Act is the part of the Act under 
confidentiality when it talks about confidentiality for an 
individual who has been charged with an offence and it talks 
about when they are under the age of 18. I guess we have some 
concern that we’re only addressing those that are under the age 
of 18 where there are many instances where adults also need to 
have access to information, and issues explained to them 
regarding the justice system. 
 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

And so this is one of the concerns, that a courtworker would be 
available to someone who is deemed not only under age but 
also an adult if they so require. So I think that this needs to be 
clarified. I don’t think it’s clear enough in the Act whether it is 
going to be accessible for everyone regardless of age or whether 
you must be under the age of 18. 
 
The justice system must achieve equality and fairness and with 
some of the court cases that we have seen to date, today and in 
the past, this has not always been the case. Many lives are 
negatively affected when justice is not served properly and so 
we need to be very concerned about this. 
 
The whole intent of the justice system should be and must be to 
achieve fairness and justice. Justice should not entrap because 
of a lack of knowledge of the system. It should provide fairness 
so that those that are truly guilty are convicted; but at the same 
time we must be mindful that those that are innocent must also 
be treated appropriately. 
 
As an official opposition, we appreciate the fact that there needs 
to be some special needs and requirements regarding Aboriginal 
and Metis communities’ specific cultural aspects. And it’s good 
to see that the government has acknowledged this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we agree with this. However, at the same time 
assistance and help should be extended to all citizens of 
Saskatchewan who require further information and assistance 
when they are accessing the justice system. 
 
Another concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there is no place 
in the changes that states, under confidentiality, that the 
information that the courtworker may be holding confidential in 
a solicitor-client type of privilege condition was acquired in the 
performance of their actual duty. Earlier it talks about 
performance of their duties, but in the confidentiality section it 
does not refer to, in the performance of their duties. Perhaps it 
has been referenced to in some other part of the Act or it has 
just been missed. 
 
Our MLA from Cannington previously asked the minister to 
take a look at this and ensure that the information that these 
people are to keep confidential is actually acquired in the 
performance of their duties. And so we would hope, Mr. Deputy 
Minister, or Deputy Speaker, sorry, that this is being addressed 
and that we will have some clarification also on this issue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before the Bill proceeds onward, we 
believe that third party groups that are directly affected or 
would like to have input into this Bill must have a chance to 
come forward and to review the Bill and give opportunity for 
them to have their say. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 16 — The Justice 
Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise this afternoon to make a few 
comments and to expand upon the debate on Bill No. 16, An 
Act to amend the miscellaneous consumer protection statutes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to look at the Bill, or 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to look at the Bill somewhat, to some 
extent here, to try to get a better grasp of what it is the NDP 
government is trying to do here for — for or to as it may be — 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I notice that in many 
cases it seems to be in the Acts that are being talked about — 
The Direct Sellers Act, The Motor Dealers Act, The Sale of 
Training Courses Act, The Credit Reporting Agencies Act, and 
The Collection Agents Act — that there seems to be some 
clarification that is going to be taking place to help agents who 
may be involved in having to deal with bonds, and what have 
you, in this province. And that will certainly be of some value, 
of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now what has happened in the past, of course, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a lot of these responsibilities of course were the 
responsibility of the Lieutenant Governor. And of course that 
provided a great deal of extra red tape in the process by the time 
everything went through cabinet and got to the Lieutenant 
Governor, in helping people having to deal with bondsmen and 
what have you. So as it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what it is, is 
what the government seems to be trying to do here is to try to 
shorten the process. And for that we have some enthusiasm for 
this Bill. 
 
Now by turning the responsibility over to a local registrar of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench, well then of course what it does, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is to speed up the process or the appearance 
that it would speed up the process. 
 
But also what this Bill seems to speak or not to speak about, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is some real good solid policy. In order to 
help the registrar out in helping to pay any monies that are 
recovered under a forfeited bond. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the problems that we have of 
course in this province, and we’ve seen it in many areas 
whether it’s in the Department of Agriculture, or whether it’s in 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), or it’s in Education, there seems to be a real lack 
of direction from this government. And of course they don’t 
have the policies in place that really help out their employees to 
make good sound decisions in regards to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see that kind of loophole in this Bill again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Here an opportunity has been presented. They’re 
trying to streamline the system a little bit, and for that we do 
want to applaud the government for making some sort of a stab 
at this. But unfortunately it only goes half way. In fact it 
probably doesn’t even go half way it probably only goes a 
quarter of the way to where it has to get to, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So what we have here is someone, a registrar, who has been 
appointed into a position by the government to look after any 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

monies that are to be recovered under a forfeited bond while 
realizing the sale of any collateral security is going to be given 
a bit of carte blanche opportunity to be able to decide who 
should benefit from this monies that are recovered. So we don’t 
know how this is going to help anyone out should they be in a 
position that they’re receiving any of these monies. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the way it works here is that under 
this Act is that — and this Bill that applies to several Acts in 
this province — is that what’s going to happen here is someone 
is going to be given such an extreme an amount of 
responsibility and very indiscretionary responsibility that we 
feel very concerned that at some way along the process 
someone is going to get missed. Now when people are given the 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank you 
very much for allowing me the opportunity to again participate 
in this debate. Obviously it must be raising a great deal of 
concern for the members opposite on the government side to 
have someone speaking to this Bill. 
 
But to go back to where I was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here again 
we’ve got a Bill brought forward that is covering off several 
Acts in the province of Saskatchewan here in The Collection 
Agents Act, The Credit Reporting Agencies Act, The Motor 
Dealers Act, The Sale of Training Courses Act, and of course 
The Direct Sellers Act. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in order to remind everyone here that 
we need to be able to have a process that is transparent. We 
don’t see that in here. It’s got to be open and above-board. 
 
There’s a great deal of concern in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that in many times in the past we’ve seen that this government 
on many, many occasions has taken upon themselves to be . . . 
to work behind closed doors, refine deals that are done in the 
dead of night, arrangements that are made with other political 
parties in order for them to retain power, and then come forward 
with Bills such as this that actually attack the human rights 
again in this province. 
 
Here we have an opportunity for the government, through their 
own self-appointed agents, the opportunity to make 
indiscretionary decisions about how monies are to be 
distributed when they are recovered under a forfeited bond or 
realized from the sale of any collateral security. 
 
So in the cases like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to have 
this government, this NDP government, being able to take the 
bull by the horns so to speak, and be able to establish some sort 
of credible policy in this province. We’ve seen time and time 
again — whether it has to do with agriculture or whether it has 
to do with the management of our forests or the management of 
our non-renewable resources — there’s a clear lack of direction. 
 
And we see that again in this Bill, covering off these five Acts 
that I’ve mentioned previously, that the lack of direction in this 
Bill is going to provide for some very uneasy processes in this 
province where unfortunately it’s going to leave people wide 
open for abuse. And we’re very concerned about that. 

Now unfortunately of course with this government always 
coming up with the idea that no one’s at fault here — kind of a 
no-fault government — shouldn’t we have a registrar then in 
this province who is collecting monies recovered from a 
forfeited bond or realized from the sale of any collateral 
security to be able to indiscretionate . . . through indiscretionate 
methods, being able to distribute these monies as they see fit 
rather than set down, through very clear policies, so that 
everyone who needs to benefit from these realized monies being 
able to share on an equal basis. 
 
But does that say that in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No, no 
I’m afraid it does not. In fact this is a bit of a Bill that talks 
about “may” clauses here. A registrar “may” be able to 
distribute money as he deems appropriate to those persons who 
are to receive monies that are recovered under a forfeited bond 
or realized from the sale of any collateral security. This person 
would be allowed to distribute those monies to anyone that he 
feels comfortable with. 
 
And actually nowhere in this Bill does it talk about that it’s they 
“shall” distribute this money to those people who are deserving 
of it, but rather that this money may be just distributed to 
someone who says they may want to have some of those funds. 
And that’s very unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This Bill should set out very, very clearly who is to receive 
those monies. It does not. It’s just far too indiscretionary. This 
is a bit of a problem for those of us on this side who are trying 
to . . . (inaudible) . . . the concept of an open and transparent 
government; and that the people who work for this government 
and are trying to do their best for the peoples of Saskatchewan, 
that they too are open and transparent. 
 
But do we see that in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No, we do 
not. In fact we see several . . . every section that is covered in 
here, through all five of them, whether it’s The Sale of Training 
Courses Act or The Motor Dealers Act, or whether it’s The 
Direct Sellers Act or even, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Credit 
Reporting Agencies Act or The Collection Agents Act, that 
they’re all saying exactly the same thing — that the local 
registrar “may” pay any money recovered. 
 
Now this is a great deal of a concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How 
is it that a registrar will not receive the clear policies necessary 
for him, enable to . . . so that he may carry out his job in a type 
of manner that would be open and transparent so that the people 
of Saskatchewan will be able to feel very comfortable that this 
Act and this Bill and the Acts that it covers off will be handled 
in a professional and an appropriate manner? 
 
(1530) 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we want to take some time here 
before we move on with this Bill. We need to be able to have 
the time to debate it to the extent. And so that’s why this 
afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that as we 
talk about this Bill and its effect upon these five Acts and how 
this government operates under and in a very clouded 
atmosphere, often behind closed doors and in the dead of night, 
making deals that no one ever gets to see. We’re never really 
sure what they’re going to do next. 
 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re always aware that 
they’re not sure what they’re going to do next. And when we 
read a Bill such as this, Bill No. 16, we’re very concerned that it 
certainly points out that they have actually no idea what they 
should be doing here. 
 
Here’s a government brings a Bill forward like this, is unable to 
set forth clear policy. All they want to do is be able to ram 
something through in hopes that the opposition party will, 
because of the mass amount of Bills that are being presented, 
that the opposition party will not have the time or be able to put 
the effort into examining these Bills. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to give the government of 
the day, this NDP government, a clear forewarning that yes, we 
are going to take the time to look at these Bills, have them 
debated thoroughly, and so that when we get to . . . the 
government wants to get to the point of trying to pass them that 
they’ve been well examined. 
 
And maybe when we get to committee we’ll be able to propose 
the appropriate amendments that will give this type of Bill the 
teeth that is necessary so that a register will be able to — when 
he recover monies under a forfeited bond or realize from the 
sale of any collateral security — be able to distribute those 
monies in a professional and transparent manner. 
 
But rather instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we see in this Bill 
of course again is something that this government is again 
doing. It’s going to be operating in the dead of night and behind 
closed doors. And we need to assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that the opposition party, the Saskatchewan Party 
in the province of Saskatchewan is going to be able to hold this 
government up to the light and hold them accountable for the 
Bills that they bring into this House. 
 
Because we’ve seen many times in the past, whether it’s in 
agriculture or whether it’s in the non-renewable resource sector, 
that there’s so many deals are made that we’re unable to find 
out about it. 
 
In fact it’s been clearly indicated to us from the government, 
it’s not their responsibility to report their actions; it’s the 
responsibility of the opposition party in the province of 
Saskatchewan to be able to ask the right questions and then 
they’ll report on what it is they’re doing. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s one thing we’ll never have to 
worry about once the opposition, the present opposition party 
becomes the government and the present government becomes 
what’s left of an opposition party; that we’ll have open and 
transparent government; that people will know what’s going on. 
 
The cabinet of the day will have the ability to be able to report 
to the legislature what is going on and that the people of 
Saskatchewan will have confidence that there will be no more 
deals made in the dead of night and behind closed doors. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel very strongly 
that more time needs to be spent on this Bill before we move it 
on to committee, and that I would ask that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 19 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2000 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I certainly 
appreciate the opportunity to make some remarks to Bill No. 
19, the Saskatchewan telecommunications Act, 2000. 
 
It doesn’t take very long and it’s not very difficult to read this 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It only contains six short sections to 
it. One would think that this is an Act that we could move along 
quite readily; but if you look closely at the Act, it refers to of 
course an existing Act and there are quite a number of sections 
of the existing Act that are being repealed. And of course that 
has some major implications for telecommunications in our 
province and major implications with SaskTel. 
 
So therefore I believe that this Act needs, you know, to be 
reviewed and studied and consulted with, with various sectors 
of the society and the economy for its ramifications and impact 
and so on. Because, as we all know, telecommunications has 
become and will continue to become very important to 
especially a province like Saskatchewan where we have a large 
area where we have people occupying. And quite often it’s 
sparsely settled and there’s fewer and fewer people out in some 
of the areas, but yet they depend very heavily on the telephone 
and Internet and those sorts of things. 
 
I may not have as many white hairs as some of the members of 
this Assembly, but I can remember back to the days when . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — At least you have hair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — As the hon. member from the opposite mentions, I 
do have some hair, and they are all laughing. But nonetheless I 
did lose some of . . . I used to have a lot more hair but dealing 
with some of the telephone service we had out in rural 
Saskatchewan in my early days of farming, it did cause me to 
lose some hair. 
 
I go back to the days where we had the party lines. I can 
remember as a young person growing up in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Whether we’re follicley challenged 
. . . Members, order. Whether we’re follicley challenged or not 
is somewhat irrelevant to the debate on the Bill before us. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was saying, 
I can remember the days growing up as a young child in rural 
Saskatchewan where we had the old party lines with the central 
operator in the local community in the old . . . you’d hear the 
long ring and then quite often, hopefully . . . We were always 
fearful when we heard the general ring or long ring or whatever 
you wanted to call it, that perhaps there was a fire at a 
neighbour’s or whatever. 
 
But quite often it was simply only an information call to let you 
know that there was an anniversary at a neighbour’s or what 
have you. 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

But we’ve come a long way since those days, where we now 
have cellular service and Internet service available in all parts of 
the province. And it is very, very important that we do, since 
that is a very important component in enabling businesses and 
individuals to compete in the global economy that we must 
compete in today, and particularly so in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think oftentimes our relatives and neighbours in urban 
Saskatchewan take good telephone service for granted because 
they’ve had good reliable service for quite a number of years. 
Whereas those of us in the other parts of the province, we know 
what conditions were like when we didn’t have good telephone 
service. 
 
I must say that telephone service has improved. We were very 
happy to see, upon implementation of . . . or changes in the 
environment that telephone companies have to operate 
nowadays with competition and so on, we were happy to see 
some fairly significant changes in the rates that we have to pay. 
And we certainly hope that that will continue. 
 
And in fact I guess that’s one of the greatest fears of those 
people who aren’t in the major centres, that under revisions 
incorporated by this Act and under the new atmosphere in 
which telephone companies will operate, that there may be 
some significant cost increases in telephone services to those 
more remote areas. And by remote I mean those areas outside 
the major urban centres. 
 
So I might just take a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to perhaps 
explain the importance of good telephone and Internet service 
to a small business, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, whether 
it be a farm or a small business, that is competing in the global 
economy. 
 
Under today’s conditions it’s vitally important for managers to 
have access to up-to-date information, whether that be the 
current quotes on the Chicago commodity exchange or news 
releases by suppliers of inputs and that sort of thing. 
Availability of production information and all those sorts of 
things are available via the Internet, and also by making 
long-distance telephone calls but more so by the use of your 
home computer and the Internet. It’s amazing the number of 
producers, farm producers and farm managers in particular, who 
have adopted this latest technology and rely on it on a daily 
basis. 
 
In fact, I know several people who use the Internet several times 
a day, particularly in those periods of time where prices for 
products that we produce are moving either up or down on a 
daily basis because of weather or shortage of supply or what 
have you. And without proper information, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you can lose a lot of money or you can at least make 
enough to show somewhat of a profit. And quite often it’s the 
marketing aspect which plays a large role in that area. 
 
So these remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are intended to 
emphasize the importance that the whole province have 
affordable, reliable telephone service that is available to all 
people. 
 
Some of the concerns with regards to telephone service and the 
implications of Bill 19 that have a direct impact on areas of my 

constituency — if you will look at the brochure that SaskTel 
Mobility puts out as far as their coverage, you will see that there 
are sections within the Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency 
that have either no cellular service or very poor cellular service, 
areas such as the Bulyea to Govan area along Highway 20. 
 
Through personal experience I know that the cellular service 
there is very poor, and it extends west of those communities to 
the resort areas along Last Mountain Lake. And I think we find 
that people utilizing those recreational areas along Last 
Mountain Lake, who are accustomed to having good cellular 
service, find it very unsatisfactory to utilize those areas. 
 
And in fact, local business associations such as the Strasbourg 
business association are very concerned because of the fact that 
there’s poor cellular service in their area, and they feel that it is 
directly impacting on the viability of their businesses. It is not 
enhancing their businesses. It’s causing people not to use the 
recreation areas which are close to these communities, and who 
these businesses depend on for part of their clientele. 
 
So I would urge SaskTel and this government to do as they say 
of in their recent news release — to improve service throughout 
the province, to use the latest technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to provide such services. 
 
Another area within my constituency that also is . . . has a large 
white spot — the areas that the SaskTel Mobility map shows it 
has coverage is coloured in yellow — and there are some large 
white areas within the constituency. And that is the area of, 
along Highway No. 15, east of Raymore to Lestock, Kelliher, 
and that area. And I know again, through personal experience, 
that that’s an area where there are pockets in there where there 
is virtually no cellular service. And in today’s age where people 
depend on mobile service and telephone service, I think that’s 
certainly an area that SaskTel needs to pull up its socks and 
have a look at. 
 
So, with having expressed these concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we would like to take some more time to consult with 
individuals, businesses, and various stakeholders in the 
economy. So I would move adjournment of debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 20 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’ve had an 
opportunity to review the amendments proposed in Bill No. 20, 
The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Act, 2000. 
 
And some of the comments from my colleague, the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood certainly applies to these 
amendments, and I have a couple of other concerns that I would 
like to highlight. 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

But when I read through this Bill a couple of things came 
forward that I thought was very encouraging. I noticed that on 
June 30, 2000, SaskTel will be like any other 
telecommunications company in Canada and will be directly 
under the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) regulations. And I think 
that’s something that will likely bring some changes, maybe 
some uncertainties, but certainly some changes and probably 
will encourage the competition in that particular industry. And I 
think that it’s important that we try to adapt as quickly as we 
can to these changing conditions. 
 
I know that June 30 or July 1 is rather an important date 
because there is a lot of uncertainties on that particular day. One 
of them is, as we had learned from budget day, there will be an 
implementation of some of the services and expansion of the 
PST (provincial sales tax) on certain aspects on July 1. 
 
And I wanted to thank the Hon. Minister of Finance for 
referring some of the . . . by responding to some of the concerns 
that I had with a particular issue regarding that uncertainty. But 
the point, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that as we’re moving into that 
new era, past June 30, these kind of uncertainties are bound to 
occur and we need to address them in an upfront and in a 
professional manner and I appreciate what the hon. minister did 
recently in my query. 
 
However, in this particular case I think it’s even a greater 
uncertainty because we’re going into an era now that we have 
started in, and that is in terms of wireless communication. Up to 
date we have been looking at . . . certainly we’re knowledgeable 
about the telephone system as we know it today. That has 
evolved considerably from the time that I was young and 
growing up, from when telephones . . . then a signal was passed 
along fence wires from farm to farm, in the rural communities 
in particular. 
 
It certainly has moved ahead and even when I was a younger 
person all we could do is look at some of the popular cartoons 
where people would project as far as they could think into the 
future and talk about Dick Tracy type of wrist radios which was 
a total imagination at that time. Well we’ve leaped past that 
already in my time and I can’t imagine what my grandchildren 
are going to be confronted with in terms of technology when 
that happens. 
 
Where we are right now though is we have to adapt to this new 
technology of wireless communication and it is becoming so 
critically important in our society. I think we’ve just opened up 
the door. There is going to be a huge revolution in 
communications generally. The technology of communications 
is changing so very rapidly, but also the business of information 
and information exchange is going to depend so very much on 
that particular technology. 
 
So I’m glad to see that the amendments that are coming forward 
are in fact addressing that aspect of the industry and through 
SaskTel and their holding corporation. I think that that is very 
timely. 
 
What we have to be sure of when we’re moving into this 
direction is that we make sure that when we try to put 
something in place we can try and anticipate further down the 

road than it’s maybe impossible for some of us to be able to do. 
So when we look at the opportunities for new competition in 
this particular field, it almost . . . the boundaries are almost 
infinite in terms of what can be achieved. 
 
What we’ve achieved so far in terms of becoming competitive 
in this province with our telephone service has been quite 
phenomenal. As you know the competition has allowed us to 
put together a system of telephone communication, both hard 
line and wireless, but particularly hard line. 
 
In long-distance rates the competition allowed there has shown 
that it can be achieved. And it has shown that we can have 
long-distance rates that are so very competitive that other 
jurisdictions actually look to some of the packages that have 
been put together in Saskatchewan and are trying to emulate 
them. 
 
So the aspect of competition under the CRTC I think is an 
important aspect. How it’s going to apply to wireless and 
mobile communications is going to be, like I mentioned earlier, 
very important. 
 
I know we’ll be able to see lower rates. That seems to flow 
directly from an opening of the competition rules and under the 
general regulation of the CRTC. Lower rates is a very important 
aspect of the competitiveness that we’re going to be witnessing. 
But we’re also going to witness other things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re going to see for sure a wider selection of 
products coming very, very quickly. 
 
When you look at the ads that you’re seeing in the papers now, 
some of the technology that is available and the selection of the 
different technology is so wide that it almost defies our 
comprehension to keep up to it. Fortunately the manufacturers 
are making them very friendly for people like myself to use. 
And we’re finding that they are in fact achieving a sense of 
freedom, a sense of instantaneous information that all of us will 
need and will continue to need and probably be even more 
critical in the future. 
 
Another aspect of the competitiveness will be the products and 
services that will be put together so that they will attract new 
customers and be competitive against other competition in the 
market. 
 
I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the aspect of 
mergers that are certainly overcoming and overtaking a large 
part of our commercial world as we know it — not only in 
telecommunications but in other aspects as well, be it financial, 
in oil and natural gas mergers, all of those areas. They seem to 
be the way that commercial activities are being conducted. 
 
What I’m afraid of is that the independent telephone companies 
such as we have here in Saskatchewan, not being much smaller 
in scale, are going to be certainly at a disadvantage to merge 
companies that have a much broader financial base than a 
commercial base, and also a technology base than we have here. 
That means that we are probably going to continue to be 
uncompetitive unless we also look at ways to improve, but also 
expand. 
 
And I guess what I was somewhat disappointed in, Mr. Deputy 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Speaker, when I looked at the amendments, was the fact that we 
need to have enabling legislation — which I didn’t see in these 
amendments — but enabling legislation to facilitate the kind of 
mergers that will allow us to be competitive in this province to 
expand. And also enabling legislation that will allow us to 
facilitate the private investment in these kind of ventures in 
Saskatchewan and not focus specifically on government 
funding of these new ventures. I think that’s very critical to be 
moving forward with those kind of permissive legislations. 
 
I see that in these legislations there is any rate increases or the 
rates as to be charged will be in fact taken away from the 
cabinet decision and put in fact under the control of CRTC and 
a more competitive environment. And I think that’s very 
positive. And the schedules I notice have to be published, they 
have to be put together the rates, the charges. 
 
And I was pleased though in that noticing particularly that in a 
case where there is competition in this particular industry, the 
rates and charges do not necessarily have to be put in . . . don’t 
have to be published because that would then be a competitive 
disadvantage. So there is a hint of anticipation of competition in 
this industry, and I think that’s very important. 
 
Another aspect that I could see here was that we can strike . . . 
actually strike private deals between the telephone company or 
the wireless communications company and private customers. 
And I think that that’s also important. That’s a very important 
aspect of competition where you don’t have to have a 
standardized rate but you can in fact make a particular deal. 
That’s the competitiveness and that’s the advantages I think 
we’re going to need as we move ahead and expand into this 
new world of wireless communications. 
 
What I hoped to find out when we finally get into the estimates 
that pertain to this particular aspect, I hope that we’ll be able to 
develop or solicit what the overall direction is. I hope that we’ll 
be able to find that from some of the questions we’ll be able to 
direct to the minister. I think we would like to find out how 
these particular amendments and changes are going to affect the 
customers that they have in this province, how it’s going to 
affect the future plans. 
 
Some of those things, Mr. Deputy Chair, are very important to 
these amendments and to the future of the competitiveness of 
this telecommunications and wireless industry. 
 
So because we need to do a little bit more work in trying to 
prepare for the estimates and do a little bit more research, I 
would move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we adjourn debate on 
this particular amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 26 — The 
Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s a 
pleasure to speak to this Bill as the Justice critic for the official 

opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of my colleagues have spoke to this 
particular piece of legislation and they have outlined the 
highlights of it. And I think it’s worth noting though, that we 
should probably just quickly run over those again. 
 
Basically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you read the Bill, the 
amendments therein are simplifying how documents are tabled 
in this legislature. This Bill will allow for a document to be 
tabled to the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly when the House 
is not in session in order for the document to be made public. 
 
And I think members on both sides of the House would agree 
that this is a positive development. It provides some 
accountability and some public information for people, whether 
or not the House is in session or not. 
 
Currently the agency that’s filing those documents has 210 days 
to table the document, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And over the next 
four years they’re going to phase in a period of four years, 
wherein that amount of time will be trimmed from 210 to 120 
days. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the spirit of these amendments are, I think, 
are well placed. And members on this side of the House have 
spoke to that. 
 
There are some issues though that we will be getting into in 
committee, I think. And that is . . . primary among them is the 
fact that information that is provided in documents that are 
tabled are not always adequate. For example, annual reports 
from the Crown Investments Corporation, they do not always 
include all of the activities that the Crown may be engaged in. 
 
And I can think of a couple of examples now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I can think of the example of Channel Lake. I don’t 
recall that the annual reports tabled in this House by 
SaskEnergy clearly laid out for taxpayers the very, very serious 
situation revolving around the misuse of taxpayers’ dollars as it 
relates to Channel Lake. And this Bill, of course, would not be 
able to address that. 
 
(1600) 
 
Similarly in this particular session not long ago, the official 
opposition raised a number of concerns about a $114 million 
pipeline that was constructed by SaskEnergy for which there 
appears to be no use. The capacity of the pipeline is greatly 
underutilized and we have asked some very pointed questions 
about what taxpayers got for $114 million at a time when 
energy rates, gas rates for Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan small-business men and women are on the rise. 
And unfortunately this Bill wouldn’t be able to deal with that. 
 
What we need to deal with those issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
more than a piece of legislation, than any particular piece of 
legislation. What we will need to deal with those issues is a 
government that is committed to being truly open and 
accountable; to letting the taxpayers know exactly what is 
happening with their dollars. 
 
And we need a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

approaches tax dollars with that attitude, that it is not the 
government’s money, it is the people’s money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That is what has lacked over the last nine years, and 
that is what the official opposition will correct in a few short 
years when it becomes the government of this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — In recent events also, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, his report from the interim Provincial Auditor 
was made public yesterday. And that report brought to light 
some very interesting information as well. 
 
And in that report you will recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
interim Provincial Auditor . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I just wish to remind the 
member that the Bill before us is The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 as opposed to the details of any 
documents that are tabled. Now to the extent that the hon. 
member would tie his remarks into the Bill before us, I know 
that all members would appreciate. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important when we’re 
debating about the tabling of public documents in this 
legislature and this Bill specifically, which does make some 
improvements to that process, I think it’s also important for us 
to point out where further improvements can be made in terms 
of the dissemination of public information. 
 
And as it relates to the document that was tabled yesterday by 
the Provincial Auditor, he has highlighted, I think, a number of 
areas where improvements can be made by this government in 
terms of being open and accountable. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 
that the legislation that’s currently before us will probably be 
best dealt with at this point in committee, where we will want to 
get into the very specifics of the Bill and ask some very specific 
questions. There are some concerns that we have on this side of 
the House that can be best dealt with in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
And so with those very few brief remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I would move that we now move immediately to Bill No. 231, 
The Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Swift Current has 
moved a superseding motion which the Chair needs in writing 
before the Assembly can deal with it. We’ll pause for a minute 
to allow the hon. member time to put that in writing. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly do now move to debate of Bill No. 
231, The Fire-fighters Protection from Liability Act. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:07 p.m. until 4:17 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 19 
 

Hermanson Elhard Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud McMorris 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — 26 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Yates 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is lost. Debate continues 
on Bill No. 26. The motion, members — order, order — the 
motion has been lost. Debate continues on Bill No. 26, The 
Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The question before . . . question being called, all those in 
favour of second reading of Bill No. 26, please . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, is it . . . I’m sorry. 
 
Members let us start this vote over so that it’s not as awkward, 
with apologies to members of the Assembly. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Justice 
to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Let me introduce 
the officials: John Whyte, deputy minister of Justice and the 
Deputy Attorney General on my right; Doug Moen, the 
executive director of public law and community justice on my 
left, quite appropriately, I’m sure. Colleen Matthews, the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister behind; and Elizabeth 
Smith, the director of administrative services. As well of 
course, Mr. Chair, we have other officials at the back who may 
assisting from time to time. 
 
(Subvote JU01) 
 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, through you, welcome to the officials from the 
Department of Justice that are with you today. If you don’t 
mind, today I’d like to spend some time on the issue of child 
maintenance enforcement. 
 
Since assuming these duties that I have as the Justice critic, if I 
had to identify an issue that seems to have generated the most 
inquiries and most concern from people across the province, I 
think it would have to be issues surrounding the whole child 
maintenance enforcement area of your department. 
 
I know I don’t need to tell you and I certainly don’t need to tell 
officials in your department that this particular issue can be 
very divisive for those who are involved in a situation where 
there’s been a marriage breakup and there are children involved. 
Emotions run deep and strong. And just before we get into this 
particular issue, I’m sure we’ll have some disagreements, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Chair, I do want to recognize the fact that this 
area of the Department of Justice I believe, is very, very busy. 
In fact, I’d go so far as to say that this area of the department, I 
am convinced, is probably overworked. I am not sure that there 
are the resources committed by the government that perhaps 
could be committed, given the demand in this area, to properly 
deal with the issue of child maintenance enforcement. 
 
And I’d like to start along those lines if I could, Mr. Minister. 
Specifically, I wonder if you could detail for me the size of this 
area of the Department of Justice, the number of people 
involved, and the number of dollars that are committed to it. 
And in so doing, Mr. Minister, could you please contrast, or 
compare and contrast that with last year or perhaps even the 
year before, the last maybe three years of this particular area of 
your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, let me just respond 
to the member’s question about staffing and the department’s 
investment in maintenance enforcement. And I’d like to share 
the member’s view that this is a very hard-working department. 
We have Lionel McNabb, the director of the department, here 
with us today. 
 
And it’s a department which as you know is . . . can only be 
regarded as extremely successful in terms of the numbers of 
dollars that it has enabled . . . or that it has transferred from 
parents who are not custodial parents to those who are. The 
numbers as you know are extremely significant. 
 
The full-time staff this year, 2000-2001, is 31.6 full-time 
equivalents which is up one from last year. And indeed there is 
. . . we are in the process of adding I think two extra people to 
that number. The numbers in the past beyond that I’ll have to 
get for the member as soon as I can. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, Mr. 
Minister, could you please tell me whether or not the positions 
that you just mentioned, the additional position, or the two, I 
think you mentioned two then, what will be their role within 
that area of the department. Will they be handling . . . actually 
handling case work, or will they be administrative, or what will 
be their role? 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. The 
member will know that there have been concerns about access 
to telephones in the maintenance enforcement office, problems 
with the line being busy and so on. In order to address that the 
two new positions will be allocated to the phone line, which 
should facilitate that process considerably and ease the burden 
on those who are affected. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, or, Mr. Deputy Chair. In 
reviewing some past exchanges on this particular issue with 
various members of the Assembly I can reflect back specifically 
on an exchange that I read between your predecessor and I 
believe the member from Moosomin, where these same 
questions were being asked on behalf of . . . primarily on behalf 
of mothers because that’s who seem to be the custodial parents 
here by a great proportion. 
 
And there were questions being asked on behalf of mothers who 
are rightfully and truly frustrated with the inability for 
themselves and, frankly, for the department to try to get some 
maintenance support from their husbands. And I guess that’s 
the bottom line in all of this. And I noted in that exchange that 
your predecessor highlighted a very recent development within 
this area of your department. Another tool, I guess, that the 
maintenance enforcement office has as it relates specifically to 
drivers’ licences of parents who are not meeting their 
obligations. 
 
My understanding of that is that it’s sort of a last resort. And 
during the course of that exchange I recall your predecessor 
indicating that certainly while this is a step in the right 
direction, even enforcement of that particular measure, in other 
words the ability for the government, for that office to use that 
tool, is sometimes difficult for various reasons. Perhaps they 
can’t locate the parent — whatever the reason is. 
 
I wonder, could you give us an update on that particular 
measure that the department now has at its disposal? How often 
is it used? How often is it used successfully? And maybe also, if 
you could, some of the reasons why it may or it may not be 
working that well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member is quite 
right that the withholding of drivers’ licences has been an 
effective tool in ensuring that recalcitrant, non-custodial parents 
meet their financial obligations to their children. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairperson, that the — Mr. 
Deputy Chair — that the default rate on maintenance 
enforcement has reduced from about 85 per cent in ’85-86 to 24 
per cent this past year. I mean a considerable change and a 
considerable improvement to those people that we’re both 
concerned about. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that the driver’s licence withholding 
program has been really very successful, in particular with 
regards to self-employed people. But it will always be 
problematic when dealing with someone who will ignore the 
fact that they need a licence to drive or will ignore the 
inconvenience of not having a licence. So there’s obviously a 
limitation there with regards to how people will react. 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

But I might just give the member some numbers to give him the 
scope of licence withholding. Since November 1996, there have 
been 2,491 letters, warning letters, issued to non-custodial 
parents, 1,416 final notices, and altogether 1,053 drivers’ 
licences have been suspended for those who are not paying their 
obligations. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I want to come 
back to the issue of the withholding of driving privileges. 
 
But you raised the question of default rates here in the province 
versus where they were 13 or 14 years ago. And I wonder if you 
outline quickly for the committee members an answer to that — 
to a question of just the casework that the department, that this 
area of the department currently faces. What kind of numbers 
are we talking about? Not percentages, but what kind of 
numbers are we talking about and how does that compare with 
previous years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I can tell the 
member, if I can read this graph properly, that in 1999, this last 
year, there were almost 10,000 cases which were active and 
about 1,200 new cases. And that number has steadily increased 
over the last 10 years, and . . . actually I can probably make sure 
the member gets this graph and he can see. 
 
But the numbers are significant, as I say — almost 10,000 
active files. And I might also indicate that over the last two 
years, roughly the same amount of money has been collected by 
the office. And that is just about $27 million. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of committees, Mr. Minister, 
thank you for that information. And now if I can, I just want to 
return to the driver’s licence question. 
 
Could you please outline any measures that this particular 
branch of your department takes in the case of this particular 
step being taken on a parent who relies on his or her driver’s 
licence in terms of making a living and being able to actually 
support the kids in the first place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. As I indicated, the driver’s licence withholding program 
has been particularly successful with self-employed people. 
And perhaps that’s a large group about which the member is 
concerned. They who need their cars for work to earn their 
living are more likely to respond. In effect, that’s the case. 
 
What happens is first of all a letter is . . . a warning letter is sent 
asking the non-custodial parent who’s not paying his or her 
obligations to come and discuss the payment schedule. After 15 
days if they haven’t done that, a final notice is sent out to 
remind them that they will lose their licence unless 
arrangements are made to pay the amount that is outstanding. 
And in the event that they don’t respond to that, then their 
licences will be withheld. And as I mentioned, it’s about 1,050 
since 1996. 
 
So the opportunity is made available to those who need their 
driver’s licence in order to make their living, to come to make 
arrangements with the office to develop an approach to pay the 
backlog. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
wonder if the minister could inform the committee members 
whether or not SGI has had any communication with your 
department, with the maintenance enforcement office, whether 
or not they have any concerns or suggestions regarding this 
particular tool that the office uses to try to provide maintenance 
enforcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to that 
question, SGI and maintenance enforcement discuss these 
matters on a fairly regular basis. It plainly is a question of 
concern as to whether or not someone who has their licence 
withheld will simply ignore that and drive in any event. 
 
But I might say that — and this is a matter for all of us in many 
respects — as SGI does respond . . . or as we do respond by 
withholding licences for now quite a wide range of traffic 
offences and so on if fines aren’t paid. 
 
But I might perhaps provide some comfort to the member on 
this point: if the arrears are made up, the licence can be returned 
in as short a time as two hours. So there’s a very quick period of 
response from the office in the event that the person who’s 
losing his licence or has had his licence suspended as a result of 
not paying and does, in fact, come forward and make 
arrangements. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you for 
that answer. I guess I have now perhaps a little bit more general 
question in the whole area of child maintenance enforcement. 
I’ve also noted . . . I think I’ve . . . I don’t want to attribute 
remarks to you that weren’t made by you. But I believe you 
have said, and perhaps your predecessor has said, that one of 
the problems, one of the challenges that our province faces, and 
probably other provincial Justice departments face in this area, 
is interjurisdictional issues. And how you either locate, and then 
once you’ve located, how you force compliance with someone 
who’s left the province and possibly even left the country. 
 
And I wonder if you’d comment a little bit on that. And I also 
wonder if you would also comment on whether or not at Justice 
ministers’ conferences in this country if this issue has been 
raised about interjurisdictional compliance and enforcement 
with respect to child maintenance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks. This, as the member knows, is 
a difficult question, primarily because of our division of 
powers. If a person moves from our jurisdiction to Alberta, then 
it’s not so easy to enforce the order, as the member knows. And 
indeed, some non-custodial persons make it quite difficult to 
track them down. 
 
But the member’s question specifically was is this something 
that ministers of Justice across the country are considering? 
And the answer to that is yes. There is a draft Act in process 
which it is anticipated — provided agreement can be obtained 
— would be then introduced into each provincial legislature. 
Basically the reciprocal enforcement of maintenance orders Act 
would be introduced into every province to provide for the 
enforcement of orders in other parts of the country. 
 
So this is a matter which has received the attention of 
maintenance enforcement offices and officers across the 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

country and ministers of Justice too. It is not immediate but it is 
not very far away. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, I guess I 
would ask a follow-up question in this area. What has been our 
position? What has been the province of Saskatchewan’s 
position when this issue has come up at Justice ministers’ 
meetings? 
 
And I would hope, sir, that the position of the province of 
Saskatchewan has been a very aggressive one. Because it 
strikes me a little bit strange that we as a dominion can come up 
with interprovincial agreements and protocols with respect to 
trade, with respect to tendering of, you know, public tenders, 
but as it relates to children and as it relates to the proper support 
of those children in our province and across the country, I 
would hope that you can stand in the Assembly today, sir, and 
confirm that the position of the province of Saskatchewan has 
been to aggressively pursue some sort of protocol with your 
counterparts across the country. 
 
I’d ask as a corollary question when the next Justice ministers’ 
meeting is upcoming, and I’d ask for your commitment to 
ensure that that position is made at that meeting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well you have that, Mr. Member. 
That’s about as polite as we need to be. I would say, and I 
certainly share the member’s view that this is a matter to be 
aggressive about, and indeed, we are aggressive about it. 
 
And the province has been very aggressive about enforcing 
maintenance orders from other provinces here in Saskatchewan 
should someone move from another province to this province. 
And indeed, other provinces respond. 
 
But I don’t think the member underestimates how difficult 
sometimes it is to track somebody down who doesn’t want to be 
tracked down, even within this province. And as you know, 
some non-custodial parents go to considerable length to avoid 
their obligations. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that here we do, as you mentioned 
earlier, we do a really terrific job of enforcing maintenance 
enforcement orders — 24 per cent default rate compared to 85 
per cent before the introduction of the legislation. And we’re 
working with other provinces and other ministers of Justice to 
ensure that the experiences of those who are leaving the 
province and those who are coming to the province can be dealt 
with as well. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, as it 
relates to a future protocol or agreement between the provinces, 
I wonder if you can tell me the differences that exist across the 
country. And I’m not asking for a list here in the province. We 
have a measure with respect to driver’s licence, for example. 
 
I’m wondering if that’s a tool that other provinces have, that 
most other provinces have, that some have? But could you 
provide some general commentary on whether or not there is a 
lot of similarity between maintenance enforcement tools at the 
disposal of people like Mr. McNabb across the country? 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the approaches 
across the province are — across the country — are quite 
similar. There are a couple of provinces that don’t provide for 
withholding of drivers’ licences. 
 
But I think it’s important to note that Saskatchewan has a 
number of tools which other provinces don’t have. One in 
particular is the ability to — which is shared with Manitoba — 
which is the ability to collect public locked-in pension plans . . . 
to, I’m sorry, to collect locked-in pension plans to free up the 
resources so that obligations can be addressed. And also the 
ability to access joint bank accounts. 
 
So those are two things that some other provinces don’t have 
which we have. But it’s, I think, fair to say that we’re constantly 
looking at what tools we can use in order to make sure that 
these obligations are fulfilled. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I know from the 
caseload that I deal with, and I think my colleagues would 
agree, a large number of the cases that come before them in 
terms of maintenance enforcement that involve this 
interjurisdictional issue are non-custodial parents who are in 
Alberta. That’s a particular . . . I think that’s . . . Probably if you 
had to pick a province, clearly that would be the province with 
the highest number of non-custodial parents from Saskatchewan 
who have obligations back home here. 
 
You commented earlier in one of your answers about the 
relationship that Saskatchewan has with other jurisdictions in 
terms of helping them with maintenance enforcement. I wonder, 
could you comment specifically on the relationship that we 
have with the province of Alberta, both in terms of us helping 
the Alberta Department of Justice with their issues, but also — 
and clearly more important for our taxpayers and mothers and 
fathers here at home trying to support their kids — the 
relationship that Alberta Justice has with us in terms of helping 
us with maintenance orders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the working 
relationship between the two provinces is a good one. The 
member’s right that that is the largest group of out-of-province, 
non-custodial parents that we are concerned about in this 
context. 
 
So Alberta does respond well to the requests for assistance, 
although it is the case that the Alberta legislation is not as 
effective as ours, which doesn’t make it any easier. But the 
main issue with Alberta is, with the large numbers of people in 
that province who are in this category of non-custodial parents, 
mostly men, it’s not always as fast as we would like it to be. 
 
Mr. Wall: — With respect to the Alberta situation, Mr. Deputy 
Chair of committees, Mr. Minister, while we wait — and I think 
we’re all encouraged — while we wait and hopefully not very 
long, for something to come before this Legislative Assembly 
from a Justice ministers’ conference on the issue of a provincial 
agreement on co-operation with respect to maintenance 
enforcement, what specific agreements . . . do you have formal 
agreements in place with the province of Alberta, or is it an 
informal relationship that our two maintenance enforcement 
offices have? 
 



May 31, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The legislation that we have in place, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, provides for reciprocal arrangements with 
each of the other provinces, and there is no need within the 
provinces to have anything more specific than that. The 
provinces work through those arrangements without any written 
arrangements. But we do have written arrangements with every 
state in the United States and also with some other countries to 
provide for enforcements . . . reciprocal enforcements. 
 
But I would say that the measure which is being considered or 
will be considered by deputy ministers of Justice and then 
ministers of Justice will speed up this process quite 
considerably. 
 
So the arrangements that we have, the reciprocal arrangements 
we have, are with all the states of the Union plus some other 
countries. And the arrangements in Canada are just as effective 
but not as formal as that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, a final question 
on this particular issue, and I will want to come back to the 
issue of child maintenance enforcement at a future date. But 
we’ll defer to a few questions for the member for Cypress Hills 
with his one last question on this area. 
 
Alberta and Manitoba would clearly be the provinces where 
there’d be more non-custodial parents that we are working with. 
Could you please tell me the differences in legislation in 
enforcement tools in those three . . . well in our three 
jurisdictions — Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, in fact Manitoba is not such a popular spot 
for non-custodial parents who are not meeting their obligations, 
but Alberta and British Columbia are. 
 
And I can say that with regards to Alberta, in terms of driver’s 
licence withholding as an enforcement tool, it’s not as . . . the 
Alberta legislation doesn’t permit it to be as fast or as 
straightforward as it is here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And one other matter which makes it more difficult with 
regards to Alberta is that the Alberta legislation limits by 
percentage of income the amount of which can be captured 
from the non-paying, non-custodial parent, whereas ours does 
not. 
 
In terms of British Columbia, I might just say that the process 
by which to withhold drivers’ licences is really quite 
cumbersome and not as quick as ours. 
 
No, I know he mentioned Manitoba, but Manitoba is not as 
pressing a . . . Oh, you want to know about Manitoba? Well it’s 
just to the west of . . . to the east of us. 
 
Maybe I should think a bit more carefully before I make 
comments like that. Essentially the Manitoba legislation and 
ours is very similar. So there’s not anything really I think which 
causes us any difficulty there. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and your officials, thank you for allowing me an 
opportunity to ask you just a couple of questions before the 

clock runs out. One of the issues that has been brought to my 
attention by community leaders in my constituency has to do 
with the cost of policing to their community specifically. 
 
And while they find the policing costs quite high, what is 
particularly galling I guess is that they are asked to pay for 
policing that is not actually being provided. In many cases there 
are staffing shortages and unfilled positions in these 
communities and yet their costs are not adjusted accordingly. 
 
And I’ve had a couple of questions directed to me by leaders of 
these communities and they would like me to address this 
specifically today. They feel that the charges that they are 
receiving for the unstaffed officer positions are totally unfair as 
they stand now. And what really upsets them the most is the 
fact that the surplus dollars are not being refunded to the 
communities experiencing the shortages but instead are being 
applied to the total provincial RCMP cost pool. 
 
So since they feel this practice is unfair, I guess they would 
want me to ask you, what do you plan to do about this 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. As the 
member probably knows, the arrangements regarding costs of 
policing in the province has been under constant review by the 
task force which comprises, amongst others, members of 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
representatives from SUMA, and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). And the arrangements for 
costing . . . for charging for RCMP policing services has been 
worked out in that task force with those representatives from 
SUMA and SARM, as I say. 
 
So to the extent that there are problems experienced by any 
given municipality, it would be appropriate for them to raise 
them with that task force. And I think all of the municipalities 
are aware of that route to address this concern. 
 
I should say that the costs this year will be the same as last year. 
There won’t be any increase and there will be credit for 
vacancies, which the member raised, credit for vacancies to 
those municipalities whose detachments were below full 
complement. 
 
I should say that there are about . . . there are I think 65 
highway patrol vacancies in the province. You know, I’m sure 
that the vacancies have been as high as 147 in the past. The 
numbers have reduced significantly, and by October of this 
year, the RCMP expects to be at full complement for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, may I follow that up with a request for more information 
on the credits that you talked about. How will those credits be 
addressed to the communities that have been adversely affected 
by the costing of this police arrangement? Will that come 
directly in terms of a refund, a rebate; or will they be given 
credit toward the billing for policing services in the upcoming 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well that is a good question, Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Deputy Chairperson. It enables me to clarify 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2000 

what I was saying. 
 
As the member properly indicates, there have been vacancies in 
a number of detachments, and as I said, around 65 vacancies at 
the present time down from 147. Because of increase in costs of 
the RCMP as a result of increases in salaries and so on, the cost 
to the province would have increased. 
 
The credits that would have been . . . the monies that represent 
reduced numbers from last year will enable us to hold the line 
on costs this year. So to be clear, the experience of 
municipalities in the past being below complement will enable 
the costs to each municipality this year to be the same as last 
year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 
 
 
 


