





























































Hansard: April 04, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 449 
 April 4, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have in my hand 
today a petition decrying the possibility of forced legislation, 
forced amalgamation, and it’s from citizens of this province, 
most specifically from Guernsey, the community of Middle 
Lake, St. Brieux, and others around the province. 
 
It reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation on municipalities. 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
petitions from citizens throughout our province who are very 
upset with the possibility of forced amalgamation of 
municipalities. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation on municipalities. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Burr, from Middle Lake, and Pilger, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today 
calling for cellular coverage for Watson and area. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Watson, 
Watrous, and Eatonia. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of people of my area, in particularly concerned about the 
high cost of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition are mostly from my community of 
Melfort, but also, Mr. Speaker, from Moose Jaw. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, and presenting a petition in regards to the tax on fuel. 
Reading the prayer, it reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound your petitioners will every pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Melfort, Saskatoon, and Weldon. 
 
Mr. Peters: — I also present a petition in regard to fuel costs. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce the fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And it’s signed by people from Melfort and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan residents 
regarding the 10 cent per litre reduction in fuel tax. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the people of Melfort, Star 
City, and Weldon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of the people in Swift Current and area who are 
concerned about the Swift Current hospital. And this petition is 
regarding funding for the hospital. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital for approximately $7.54 
million, thereby allowing the Swift Current Health District 
Board the opportunity to provide improved health care 
services in the region. 

 
The petition is signed by people from Swift Current and 
McMahon in the Swift Current area. 
 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan regarding 
their disdain for municipal amalgamations, especially forced 
municipal amalgamations. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
These petitioners are from the cities of Regina, and the towns 
and hamlets of Gray, Estlin, Wilcox, Lang, and many, many 
more. 
 
I so do present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to read a petition 
against proposed restructuring of Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
From the citizens of Guernsey and Grayson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise. I have a petition here 
against forced amalgamation of rural municipalities. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamations of municipalities. 

 
The petitioners are from Plunkett, Humboldt, Lanigan, various 
other places from Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition about 
citizens concerned about the lack of cellular services in the 
Watson area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The petitioners are all from the Watson area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition against the proposed restructuring of Saskatchewan 
municipalities. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 

amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

Signatures come from the Plunkett area. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens of the province. It deals 
with the restructuring of municipalities. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Humboldt. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition here regarding concerns about forced 
amalgamation: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals for any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

And I have petitions from Guernsey, Drake, and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board’s decision with regard 
to the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to halt any plans to 
proceed with the amalgamation of municipalities; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to provide funding for 
the Swift Current regional hospital. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Thursday 
next move first reading of The Fire-fighter Protection from 
Liability Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly an individual who really isn’t a stranger in this 
Assembly as he served the constituency I believe of Regina 
South from the years of 1978 through 1985. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to a gentleman currently sitting 
behind the bar, Mr. Paul Rousseau. And I’d like to ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Mr. Rousseau back to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
point out to the members the presence in your gallery of the 
mayor emeritus of Saskatoon, Mr. Cliff Wright. Mr. Wright, of 
course, has served Saskatchewan and Saskatoon in many ways. 
We’re happy to have him here with us today. 
 
I believe that he is serving in his capacity on the Joe Garcea 
committee studying municipal renewal. So I’m particularly glad 
that’s he’s in the House today to hear some of the petitions and 
to hear comments from members in the legislature, in meetings 
outside of the legislature on that very important issue. 
 
Would all members extend a welcome to the mayor emeritus of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Cliff Wright. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to join with the 
Leader of the Opposition to welcome Mr. Wright to the 
Assembly today. I know that Mr. Wright has been described . . . 
as having a illustrious career as the mayor of one of our finest 
cities here in our province, and is serving Saskatchewan people 
very well these days as he travels the province with the Garcea 
committee and discussing a very important issue about the 
strengths and the importance of municipalities into the future. 
So, I too welcome you to the Assembly and ask all of my 
colleagues to join me in recognizing Mr. Wright. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Cancer Month 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1999, Mr. Speaker, 
an estimated 129,300 new cases of cancer were diagnosed and 
64,000 Canadians died from cancer, making it our second 
leading cause of death. Two more startling facts — one in three 
Canadians will develop cancer during their lifetime and 
approximately one in four will die of cancer. 
 
This not very happy news, Mr. Speaker. It is the reason April is 
traditionally designated as Cancer Month, the month in which 
we rededicate our efforts to raise money for the elimination of 
cancer, spearheaded by the work of the Canadian Cancer 
Society. 
 
This month hundreds of thousands of volunteers will be 
knocking on doors and organizing special events to reach the 
Cancer Society’s targeted goal of $20 million. I know all 
Saskatchewan people will be generous in their donations. 

And, Mr. Speaker, despite the alarming statistics I began with, 
there is good news. Research and education have changed the 
face of cancer control. Today 55 per cent of all people found 
with cancer live at least five years past their initial diagnosis. 
New treatments and new drugs are constantly being discovered. 
 
The daffodil — the sign of spring and a sign of hope — is the 
emblem of Cancer Month; a fitting symbol for the hope that one 
day this scourge may be a thing of the past. 
 
On a personal note, I know all members will join me in sending 
best wishes and a get well soon to my seven-year-old niece, 
Sarah, who is battling leukemia and got out of the hospital 
yesterday. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Facilities at Shaunavon Industries 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, March 
30, I had the great pleasure of attending the grand opening of 
the new facilities of Shaunavon Industries in the town of 
Shaunavon, that’s one of the trading centres of the great 
southwest. In spite of the fact that the community of Shaunavon 
lays just outside of the boundaries of Cypress Hills, it does 
serve as an important economic and business centre for many of 
my constituents. 
 
And having worked in the community for nearly 14 years and 
having developed many fine friendships and acquaintances 
there, I often feel like I am actually the member representing 
Shaunavon. Consequently I was doubly pleased to be invited to 
address the audience assembled for the grand opening of the 
new facilities of that John Deere dealership. 
 
The new structure is state of the art design and construction and 
has set a new higher standard for farm machinery dealership 
facilities throughout the nation. A service shop of 20,000 square 
feet, a parts showroom of 6,000 square feet, a mezzanine for 
administration of 2,500 feet, and too many other features to 
enumerate. 
 
But not only is this a great new facility, it’s also the sales point 
for many fine products from short-line companies that this 
Assembly moved to protect in legislation last December, and 
during the grand opening event I received a grateful thanks of 
company representatives in attendance: Bourgault Industries, 
Highline Manufacturing, Honey Bee Manufacturing, and Farm 
King which have a distribution centre just outside the city of 
Regina. 
 
It’s my pleasure to be able to recognize the substantial 
contribution the building of the new facility has had on the 
economy of the area and the enthusiasm generated among the 
members of that farming community. They have shown 
tremendous faith in the community and their customers in spite 
of the adversity faced by the agriculture sector. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

Local Economy Booming in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to hear 
the good news from Shaunavon and as the member for Prince 
Albert Carleton, I’d like to share some good news about one of 
Saskatchewan’s most dynamic and progressive communities, 
and of course I’m referring to the city of Prince Albert whose 
citizens are enjoying a vibrant local economy. 
 
In Prince Albert, new home construction is a way up in the last 
few years. New condominiums are also ahead of the previous 
year’s pace. Commercial activity in Prince Albert over the last 
year exceeded $5.2 million. Many new businesses have 
established themselves in Prince Albert in the last year, and 
existing local businesses are expanding. 
 
For example, I’m pleased to mention the opening of a new 
Boston Pizza, an exciting new Humpty’s restaurant, a new 
Co-op touchless car wash, a new Staples, an expansion of 
Minute Muffler, an expansion of Smitty’s, a new Anderson 
Motors dealership, and a recent 1.2 million to the Prince Albert 
Credit Union, a new A&W. And I could go on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Needless to say, 1999 was a great year for Prince Albert and 
2000 will be even better as new opportunities in forestry will 
attract skilled workers and entrepreneurs to our city. Downtown 
redevelopment is proceeding nicely with a construction of a 
new provincial court house and they are continuing planning for 
a new performing arts centre. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to 
speak on behalf of the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elk Breeders Association Annual Meeting 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Elk Breeders Association held their annual 
meeting and banquet in Saskatoon over the weekend and during 
their banquet, they made a special presentation to their former 
executive director Terri Harris. They presented Terri with a 
special award of merit for her service to the association for a 
number of years. 
 
During Terri’s tenure at the association, it grew dramatically 
and now plays a major role in the livestock industry here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The elk breeders association’s loss 
is the Saskatchewan Party’s gain because Terri now works in 
our office as a very capable communications person. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, and I’m sure the 
government members as well, I would like to pass on our 
special congratulations to Terri for her recognition of an award 
of merit from the Saskatchewan Elk Breeders Association. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Pee Wee Broncos 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to ask my colleagues of the legislature in joining with 
me in giving a huge congratulations to a group of 17 boys. 

The Swift Current Pee Wee Broncos hockey team has just 
wrapped up an impressive season. For only the third time in the 
last 26 years has the Swift Current Pee Wee Broncos won this 
triple crown. This means they won first place in the league 
regular season; they won the league playoffs; and after 
defeating the Saskatoon Knights last Thursday, they have won 
the Provincial AA Championship. 
 
The team was blessed with two excellent goal tenders, Anthony 
Huer and Michael Houde. Out in front of these great goal 
tenders were 15 of the most focused, 
driven-by-the-desire-to-win bunch ever to hit the ice. 
 
They are Cade Slusar, Blair Stengler, Nate Wilson, Evan 
Vossen, Cody Thoring, Devon Shanks, Mark Schweitzer, Justin 
Menke, Brady McMillan, R.J. Larochelle, Scott Janke, Tanner 
Gillies, Jarod Erikson, Shane Baum; and of course, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be remiss not to mention my own son, Carson 
McPherson, who has enjoyed an excellent year with the Swift 
Current Broncos. 
 
A team can only have this amount of success with the 
leadership, devotion to the boys, and love of the game their 
coaching staff has shown. And congratulations to head coach, 
Gary Janke; Dale Slusar, Kent Woods, and Al Larochelle; and 
team manager, Melinda Baum. 
 
I would ask everyone here to join me today in congratulating 
the Swift Current Pee Wee Broncos. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1999 Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
today to rise before this Assembly on behalf of one of my 
constituents in Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Howard Gange of Anglin Lake, a small 
community near the Prince Albert National Park was recently 
named the 1999 Prince Albert Citizen of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gange has been a very dedicated volunteer for 
35 years. He was a teacher in Prince Albert at which time he 
volunteered his time coaching football, volleyball, and curling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gange has also been involved in many 
monumental projects. They include, the Skates North Summer 
Figure Skating School, from 1978 to 1982. At that time he was 
also president of the Prince Albert Figure Skating Club. 
 
Mr. Gange was also involved in the 1992 Saskatchewan 
Summer Games in Prince Albert as sports chairman. Mr. Gange 
helped raise funds in 1994 for the Harry Jerome track, and Mr. 
Gange was facilities coordinator for the Western Canada Figure 
Skating Championships in 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Howard Gange was also chairman of the games 
committee for the 1999 Western Canada Summer Games. Mr. 
Speaker, this event attracted top-notch athletes from across the 
west to Prince Albert to compete for gold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Howard Gange was chosen Citizen of the Year for 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

his many tireless efforts that make Prince Albert a better place 
to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating Mr. Howard Gange on the remarkable 
achievement of becoming Prince Albert’s 1999 Citizen of the 
Year. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Postal Employees Curling Classic 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on Sunday I was very 
happy to represent the Premier and the Government of 
Saskatchewan at the opening ceremonies of the 34th annual 
Canadian Postal Employees Curling Classic. This friendly 
competition amongst rinks from all provinces and territories 
began on Sunday and will conclude on Saturday. 
 
The competition takes place at the Highland Curling Club, 
which is in my constituency, so you can be assured the good 
folks at the Highland under the direction of President Doug 
Kirk will provide a good show. 
 
This is the fourth time the curling classic has been held in 
Saskatchewan — twice in Saskatoon, and now for the second 
time in Regina. Rinks from Saskatchewan have won four times 
so far and have been runners-up eight times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone who enjoys highly competitive and 
high-scoring curling games should come out. Because we all 
know the postal carriers always find the right house. 
 
We also want to welcome all the teams. And I wish them good 
luck and a safe trip home. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Student Loan Program 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Finance minister. Mr. Minister, I want to quote from 
your budget speech. And I quote: 
 

For post-secondary students, our student assistance 
programs are among the best in Canada. 
 
We want our graduating students to stay in Saskatchewan 
and contribute to shaping our future. 
 

Now I want to talk about what wasn’t in the budget speech. 
While you were crowing about your commitment to students, 
you neglected to tell the students a not so itsy-bitsy little detail. 
You forgot to tell students that you cancelled the six-month 
interest-free grace period for student loans following 
graduation. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you cancel the six-month grace period 
and why did you try to hide it in last week’s budget? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 
member for the question. And I want to assure the students and 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
is committed to the assurance of the security of the student loan 
program here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced two years ago the best student loan 
program in all of Saskatchewan. We provided a higher level of 
bursary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I want for the hon. member to know 
and the students of Saskatchewan to know, that when it comes 
to student loans in Saskatchewan, we, Mr. Speaker, we provide 
50 to $60 million in student loans. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year alone we provided over $22 million 
in bursaries to forgive student loans for the students of 
Saskatchewan. We are committed to the student loan program 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, you and the minister must 
not think that Saskatchewan students are so good at math. But 
they’re going to see right through this budget in a hurry. 
 
In the budget speech, the Minister of Finance bragged about a 
$350 tax credit for graduating students. But if a graduating 
student has a $10,000 student loan at the current student loan 
interest rate of nine and a half per cent, your latest tax grab will 
cost them 475 — $125 more than your so-called tax cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that a lot of students have loans 
greater than $10,000. Mr. Minister, the truth is your budget 
didn’t cut taxes for students — it increased taxes on students. 
 
Will you reverse the hidden tax grab on Saskatchewan students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat that the Government 
of Saskatchewan is committed to the security of the student 
loan program. Mr. Speaker, we look at our policies in the 
context of priorities, and having, Mr. Speaker, to be aware of 
the implications when the federal government, when the federal 
government is unable to get its renegotiated agreement with the 
banks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out that we make priority decisions and we 
ensure the long-term security of student loans, and we do it by 
dedicating as well, Mr. Speaker, to students in other ways: 
increases in money to institutions to keep the rates down, Mr. 
Speaker. Increases in funding to improve the access for people 
with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. Increase in funding protection of 
technology and enhanced learning to bring programs to rural 
and northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the graduate tax 
credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are dedicating money to the priorities of 
people of Saskatchewan to ensure the long-term access to 
post-secondary education and security of the student loan 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) budget tells students that they’re a low priority. Mr. 
Speaker, physics student learns about Newton’s law of physics: 
for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Now 
they have to learn the NDP law of taxes: for every tax cut there 
is an equal or greater tax grab. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people should be ashamed of themselves. 
They keep trying to treat last week’s budget as a tax cut, and the 
reality is it contains one tax grab after another. The PST 
(provincial sales tax) tax grab; the utility rate tax grab; the 
education mill rate grab; and now the student loan tax grab. Mr. 
Minister, taxpayers are demanding tax cuts and you keep 
bringing in one tax grab after another. Mr. Minister, will you 
reverse this attack on Saskatchewan students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the hon. members 
that when we went back to the provincial election last year, 
there were two parties that were committed to the priorities of 
students in post-secondary education in Saskatchewan; they sit 
on this side. There was one party which sat on its tongue, Mr. 
Speaker, when it came to post-secondary education; it’s over 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, Saskatchewan has the best student 
loan program in all of Canada. There is not a better place in 
Saskatchewan to be a student than here. Mr. Speaker, the first 
payment for graduates is not required for six months, that is true 
today, it’s true tomorrow, it’s true this fall, it’s true next year. 
Mr. Speaker, there is no better place in Saskatchewan to be a 
student than right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t that brilliant — 
wasn’t that brilliant, and this guy is in charge of education. Mr. 
Speaker, my mother taught me that people should not be 
greedy. She said, don’t be greedy — don’t be greedy as a pig. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is greedy and this 
budget is a pig. 
 
The minister has tried very hard to make the pig look good, but 
you can put lipstick on a pig but it’s still a pig. Why is your 
greedy government pigging out at students’ expense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by any measure, the best 
student loan program in Canada is right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is 
committed. It is committed to the long-term security of the 
student loan program. That is our commitment to the students of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Unlike those who said nothing about post-secondary education 
in the election, Mr. Speaker, there is a priority here. We will 
remain true to the priorities of the people and the students of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Tax Reduction 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Finance. It’s pretty clear that far too many 
businesses and organizations are now either planning or 
executing their exit strategy from the province of 
Saskatchewan. The news is full of them, Mr. Minister; you will 
know that. 
 
The official opposition has proposed an amendment to your 
budget that would offer some immediate, temporary relief for 
consumers across the province to reduce the gas tax by 5 cents a 
litre until the price comes down, which analysts say should 
happen by the end of summer, perhaps early fall. 
 
We would propose that that reduction would be conditional on 
the federal government making good on their own idea to match 
that amount. Over a six-month term, Mr. Minister, this would 
provide tax relief to Saskatchewan families of $120 million at 
half the cost. It would benefit all consumers of fuel in the 
province over the busy spring, summer, and early fall season. 
Business owners, both large and small, municipalities, school 
districts, and families would all appreciate a little bit of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the hon. member to 
go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, last week 
you said you would at least talk to the federal minister about 
this, or you were open to discussions. Have you done that? 
Have you talked to your federal counterpart about a tax cut, a 
gas tax cut, for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is just the same old, same 
old Grant Devine funny money, but it fits in well with what 
we’ve heard in just five days of sitting in the legislature. 
 
The member from Kelvington says $380 million more for 
school boards. The member from Rosetown says $40 million 
rollback on utility rate increases. The member from Saltcoats 
says increase funding for municipal infrastructure and roads — 
I think about 50 million, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Rosetown says no PST expansion — he says that in the House, 
not outside — $160 million. That adds up to 630 million. 
 
And I could go on, Mr. Speaker. And when I add up the 
promises and statements made by these members in this House, 
including the member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, total 
bill after five days — $1.272 billion. Billion, Mr. Speaker. The 
Tories are back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if you heard 
through the minister’s little trip through fiction there, but the 
Premier was calling from his seat again the old rant, the tired, 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

old, sad refrain about Grant Devine. 
 
It’s very ironic, Mr. Speaker, it’s very ironic because it’s this 
provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, that most closely resembles the 
last budget of the Devine government. The Devine government 
expanded the PST to used cars; this minister and this Premier 
have expanded the PST to used cars. Devine expanded it, Mr. 
Speaker, to professional services; this Premier’s expanded it to 
professional services. 
 
And the other analogy, Mr. Speaker, is that that budget 
precluded the death of that government and this budget is the 
harbinger of the demise of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You don’t have to be Nostradamus to see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta has said this morning that 
they will consider reducing the gas tax if the federal 
government is serious about matching the amount. Now what 
do you suppose that will do to Saskatchewan border towns, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member kindly go 
directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’d be happy to go to the question. It’s a very 
good one. 
 
In light of the fact that the Alberta government has said they 
will look at this proposal — they’re going to look at it — why 
won’t you do the same? Why won’t you contact through your 
federal minister and look at gas tax relief for Saskatchewan 
motorists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the member is a 
little bit sensitive when we start talking about Grant Devine. 
But it is hard to forget about Grant Devine because we’re still 
paying interest on the debt that Grant Devine ran up with that 
member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, working in that 
administration here in the Legislative Building and, I think, in 
Swift Current, paid by the Liquor Board as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member from Swift Current and the 
members opposite that there is a similarity to what they’re 
saying today and what happened when Mr. Devine was in 
office. And the similarity is this. When Mr. Devine was in 
office, $1 billion deficit every year; one year, 1.2 billion. 
 
These people in the last five days, Mr. Speaker, the cost of their 
promises and commitments for spending and additional tax 
cuts, $1.272 billion, Mr. Speaker. Same old Tories, same old 
deficit, same old debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week in Lloydminster the price 
of gas was 10 cents a litre . . . on the Alberta side than it was in 
Saskatchewan. If Alberta takes the federal government up on its 
offer there will be a difference between our two provinces of 20 

cents a litre — 20 cents a litre. People in border communities 
will go to Alberta to fill up their tanks and do their shopping. 
 
How do you expect Saskatchewan people and businesses to 
compete? Mr. Minister, the people of this province were 
looking for some immediate tax relief from your budget. Our 
idea, our proposal affords you the opportunity to give them that. 
Why won’t you do that, Mr. Minister? At least call the federal 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same politics you 
saw in the 1980s — trying to buy people’s votes with their own 
money, Mr. Speaker. On a short-term basis, the member said 
himself yesterday or the day before in this House, that if we 
took the tax off gasoline or reduced it, it would be a temporary 
measure, Mr. Speaker — a temporary measure that we would 
be paying for for a long time like it was during Devine. 
 
And I say this to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. What 
we’re doing with the gas tax is spending 78 per cent of that 
revenue on fixing the roads. That’s what we need to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when it comes to the federal government, which 
contributes nothing to fixing the roads in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we should be approaching the federal government all 
right, we should be approaching them to join with us in an 
infrastructure program to use the gas tax to fix the roads and 
highways in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Licence Fees 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Environment minister. Mr. Speaker, I have some good news, 
but as is typically the case with this government, there’s also 
some bad news. 
 
The good news is the weather’s getting a lot nicer outside. A lot 
of people will soon be looking forward to taking summer 
holidays, pulling out their fishing gear, getting out on the lakes, 
enjoy some fishing, and try to forget about how this NDP 
government has destroyed this province. 
 
The bad news is now the NDP have figured out a way to tax 
fishing. Effective immediately, the NDP has increased resident 
fishing licences by 50 to 57 per cent — 50 to 57 per cent, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, didn’t you raise enough taxes on budget 
day? Do you really need another tax grab on fishing licences? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I thank that member for his question, 
and it’s always good to be able to see that he is planning upon 
asking questions on a very important portfolio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) mandate to manage all the resources 
throughout the province and we’ll do our very best 
notwithstanding any advice from that old Tory group. And I 
want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we are doing this in 
co-operation with many people and some of them stakeholders 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

are involved, and we are advising people as we go along why 
these increases are necessary. These increases are necessary, 
and we’ll continue doing the right thing for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I challenge that hon. member to not add to the continual 
debt that that party wants to add to. These increases are fair, and 
they’re consistent with our policy of trying to balance off the 
incredible costs of managing all the resources of this great 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Minister, if this was such a good idea 
and it was so well thought out, why didn’t you announce it on 
budget day? Effective immediately annual resident fishing 
licences have jumped from 16 to $25 and three-day licences 
have jumped from 8 to $12. Altogether this amounts to a 
$450,000 tax grab hidden in the NDP’s so-called tax cut budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, on budget day the Leader of the Opposition 
predicted that the NDP would find a way to claw back every 
dime of its so-called tax cut, the PST tax grab, the utility rate 
tax grab, the property rate tax grab, the pet food and drill bit tax 
grab, and now the $450,000 fishing tax grab. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you cancel your new $450,000 fishing tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The obvious 
answer is no. And I want to thank that member for his question, 
and to also point out, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed 
with well over 60,000 beautiful, pristine lakes, Mr. Speaker, 
and we are the envy of Western Canada. 
 
And when you make . . . Mr. Speaker, when he makes 
references, when he makes references to other provinces, my 
point is this, is that we have twice as many lakes and twice as 
many users as in Alberta. And if he likes to make comparisons 
to Alberta fishing law, then I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, he 
pack his bag and takes the rest of his Tory cronies and head to 
Alberta. We live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP likes to do things 
in pairs. They have an education and a health tax. They have a 
SaskEnergy rate hike and a SaskTel rate hike. They have their 
two Liberal cabinet ministers, hack and flack. And so of course 
this isn’t just a fishing tax — it’s a fishing and a coyote tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has introduced a brand new $45 coyote 
licence — good for two coyotes. I guess that means if you go 
out and find four coyotes gnawing on one of your cows, you 
can shoot two of them, and then you have to run into town and 
buy another licence. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know full well that both your fish advisory 
committee and your wildlife advisory committee weren’t even 
advised of these new tax grabs. On top of everything else, why 

do you need a new fishing and coyote tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I thank 
the member for his question and again I want to point out that 
there are many demands within SERM. One of those is to 
balance all the economic interests as well as social interests 
associated with the wildlife and certainly with the land base that 
we enjoy in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And my point is this, is that we are going to continue balancing 
all the interests and all the demands on this great province of 
Saskatchewan and the rich abundance of resources that we 
enjoy. We’ll continue doing that, and we’ll continue working 
with all the groups that are involved. 
 
But sooner or later, Mr. Speaker, the point of the matter is that 
we have to make a tough position known. The fact of the matter 
is this province does and will always continue going along the 
way of balancing not only the interests on the monetary side, 
but certainly the wildlife and the protection of the environment. 
 
So my point is this, the only thing fishy going on at this 
question, Mr. Speaker, is their obvious effort, their obvious 
effort to try and discredit this government that has had seven 
consecutive balanced budgets. 
 

Executive Council Staff 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
year ago today we were all getting ready for a provincial 
election. The Liberals were promising to get rid of hacks and 
flacks. In fact the Liberal leader said he would cut the number 
of staff in the Premier’s office by 75 per cent — 75 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile the NDP were attacking the Liberal stand on health 
care. And the Premier was calling Liberal Health critic Harvey 
McLane, two-tier Harvey. Now just a year later, the Premier 
and the Liberal leader have joined forces. They’re expanding 
the size of the Premier’s office by appointing two-tier Harvey to 
advise the Premier on health care policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to either one of these co-premiers. 
Would either one of you stand up and explain this complete 
reversal of policy in your position? Why do you need Harvey 
McLane in the Premier’s office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
opposite, I think after a few years in the legislature should learn 
— if he doesn’t, I hope he takes some friendly advice from me 
— that the most important thing for any politician especially a 
remade Saskatchewan Party so-called member is some form of 
credibility. And that’s what the member does not have on health 
care, and that’s what that party opposite does not have — any 
credibility on health care. 
 
Here is what the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party says, quote: 
a plan to invite private health providers is one of the policies 
that they pass at their conventions. 
 
Here’s what they say on February 23, ’99, quote: 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

Hermanson also likes one of the new party’s first proposals 
to have the federal government surrender its responsibility 
for the Canada Health Act to the provinces. 

 
Here’s another one, quote from The Village Press: 
 

Saskatchewan is experiencing a serious health crisis and 
could do well looking at the Alberta government’s 
experience with private clinics, according to Ben Heppner, 
MLA from Rosthern. 

 
It’s them who believe in two-tier — not us. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, on September 16, the people 
of Arm River decided what role they want Harvey McLane to 
play in the provincial government — none. But of course, 
neither the NDP nor the Liberals were willing to accept the 
voters’ verdict. So they had to invent a new job for Harvey — 
special adviser to the coalition government. 
 
You know the NDP cancelled its summer job program for 
students, but it keeps coming up with make-work projects for 
defeated Liberals: Neil Collins on the SaskPower Board, David 
Huliyappa on the SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network) Board, and now two-tier Harvey in the Premier’s 
office. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you justify this make-work project for 
these Liberal losers when you won’t help students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, did I not 
hear just a few moments ago before question period, the hon. 
member from Kindersley praising the services of Terri Harris? 
What in the world is the Saskatchewan Party doing making jobs 
for these losers of the Saskatchewan Party in your caucus? 
 
Why do you waste taxpayers’ money on the losers that are over 
there? Why don’t you start spending money into proper policy 
development. Don’t lecture us about losers. 
 
We have the person who’s the president of SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), a member 
who’s had experience in health care policy, a member of this 
Legislative Assembly who has, while there has been 
disagreement in some areas, served well and honourably as a 
member and he serves a coalition government. 
 
That is the role of Mr. Harvey McLane, and he’s going to carry 
it out with distinction, unlike the losers that you have in your 
caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier took great 
pleasure for four years in calling Mr. McLane, two-tier Harvey. 
And you now are sitting there extolling his virtues. 
 
But I can understand why you have twice as many people that 
you need in your office — you have twice as many campaign 

promises to break now that you have this coalition. You have 
twice as many patronage appointments to hand out. You have 
twice as many things to tax. And you have not quite finished the 
job of destroying the health care system in this province. 
 
So the job description is pretty simple — breaking promises, 
handing out patronage, raising taxes, and wrecking health care. 
Maybe a defeated Liberal is the right person for the job. God 
knows they do enough of that in their own party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So when I think of it you’re also doing an 
excellent job, Mr. Premier; why do you need the help of Harvey 
McLane? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps Ms. Terri 
Harris is exactly the correct person for the Saskatchewan Party, 
making up all the wrong questions based on all the wrong facts; 
making up all kinds of requests for every kind of tax reduction 
under the sun now amounting to 1.2 billion debt, thanks to you. 
 
Perhaps Ms. Terri Harris, a defeated candidate that the voters 
rejected but finding her way back in government again, is the 
right person in propagating all the wrong, false information. 
 
And perhaps — not perhaps — she’s bang on in one thing. 
She’s onside with you and your Leader of the Opposition, the 
Reform Party member, formally as he was, and the supporter of 
the current Canadian Alliance Party — they’re onside for doing 
away with the Canada Health Act and the two-tiered system. 
 
We’re for health care, universal health care. You’re against it, 
you’re against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15  The Department of Justice 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 15, The Department of Justice Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill 16, The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment 
Act, 2000 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I’m 
prepared to supply the answer to question 43. And by leave of the 
Assembly I want to supply the answers to all of these questions 
starting from 44 through to 68, Mr. Speaker, from a government 
that’s showing itself to be open, accountable, and responsible, and 
very happy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to question nos. 43 through 68 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night 
after the House adjourned I received a number of calls from 
constituents saying that they’d heard what a wonderful speech I 
had made. How it was perhaps the most accurate and detailed 
historical account of a half century of failed socialism. There 
were in fact suggestions today that I should repeat it in its 
entirety, both for its educational value and for the further 
edification of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: —. Well, I’m tempted, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think instead I would like to speak to a couple of points that I 
think are the epitome of what this budget’s all about and what 
this government has done. 
 
The first is the hospital in Carrot River. With the closing of 
their hospital, for all intents and purposes, the community of 
Carrot River has good grounds to make an application to the 
Guinness Book of World Records because they’re really left 
with nothing more than the largest and most expensive 
telephone booth in all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other incident that came to mind was a couple of weeks ago 
in Saskatoon, I called for a taxi. The taxi was driven by a young 
Bosnian Muslim refugee — that’s a part of the world that I’ve 
always been interested in. And I was absolutely fascinated to 
get his first-hand perspective of the events over in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina over the course of the last 10 years and 
how it is that he managed to escape. And I really enjoyed my 
visit with him. 
 
I asked him, as we were nearing the end of our conversation, 
what he thought of Saskatchewan and I was shocked at this 

answer. Because typically when someone comes from the part 
of the world where they have experienced hardship to the 
degree that this young man had, you don’t expect an answer 
like: it’s okay, but you’re taxes are too high. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — So I think in a lot of ways these two 
things epitomize the very situation that we’re facing here. A 
young man who knows that there’s a cost of freedom, who 
knows that there is, but just didn’t expect that he was going to 
have to pay through his nose for the rest of his life. And a 
community with nothing left but a glorified . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask all hon. members to please 
come to order, in order to allow the member to make his 
presentation. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, and a 
building in Carrot River that is now nothing more than a 
glorified telephone booth. 
 
So for those reasons I will not be supporting the budget but I 
will be supporting the amendment as proposed by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I very much 
appreciate the opportunity to stand up today and address the 
budget for the constituents of Watrous. Congratulations to our 
government — finally the income tax cut that the Saskatchewan 
Party has been suggesting since the time they were founded. 
 
The members opposite implemented yet another innovative idea 
of the Saskatchewan Party. The only problem is they still don’t 
get it. They still don’t know how tax cuts will generate 
population and economic growth. So more true to their nature, 
they decided to tax somewhere else. 
 
And now they sit back pleased as punch with themselves and 
call it an historical budget. If they had indeed given the 
Saskatchewan people a straightforward tax cut, it would have 
been historical for this government. But that’s not quite what 
they did. 
 
Our net taxpayers in this province are far below the national 
average, and our non-taxpayers are far above the national 
average. And as our Health minister pointed out yesterday, our 
population is aging. In other words, our youth are leaving the 
province. 
 
Two tax cuts would have started to turn this around and the 
Saskatchewan’s economy would have grown because of it. But 
our NDP government chose to wipe out the hopes of this by 
expanding the PST. 
 
This government is truly amazing, Mr. Speaker. When the 
people of Saskatchewan have told the government loud and 
clear that they need tax relief today, they are being told in the 
budget: pay more taxes today; we promise relief tomorrow. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow may be too late for 
many of our Saskatchewan families and they’ll be gone to 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

Alberta. 
 
The nurses were on the steps of this very building just last 
spring telling our government that relief must come today. And 
the farmers were here this winter telling our government that 
relief must come today. And the teachers are right on the heels 
of the farmers, telling this government that relief must come 
today. And soon the different sectors of this province will have 
to take a number and line up to come to the legislature to 
protest; and yet this government says, trust us, relief will come 
next year. 
 
And why won’t the Saskatchewan people buy this? Well only 
last year the government told us that cutting taxes was reckless 
and unrealistic, good politics but not good government. And 
now today they say it is the best budget idea in the history of 
this province, just trust us. 
 
Only six months ago, this government promised tax cuts of a 
thousand dollars per family without expanding the PST and yet 
they still say, just trust us. Only three months ago, this 
government told us there was no money in the slush fund. They 
said in order to help the farm families, they’d have to borrow 
money and increase everybody’s taxes. 
 
Now they reveal that they actually have 700 million in their 
slush fund and they were hiding that from the taxpayers, they 
were hiding that from the Provincial Auditor. And yet they still 
say, just trust us. 
 
So the Saskatchewan people are expected to pay an additional 
$160 million in taxes in the upcoming year and they’re 
supposed to trust this NDP government that they will see tax 
relief in the years that follow. I don’t think they’re going to 
believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP government has difficulty remembering their 
promises for only sixty short months . . . six short months ago. 
Why on earth would the Saskatchewan people trust them to 
keep their promises four years from now? 
 
So what actually happened in Saskatchewan at midnight on 
March 29? Well according to The StarPhoenix headline, “PST 
confusion reigns in post-budget reflection.” The article goes on 
to say: 
 
(1430) 
 

Confusion and frustration reigned Thursday as 
Saskatchewan residents tried to come to grips with 
charging and paying the new expanded provincial sales 
tax. Business people . . . expressed outrage. 
 

An interview with an auto body businessman said: 
 

“It’s going to hurt the auto body business quite a bit,” said 
Mike Oleksyn, owner of Antique Auto Body in Saskatoon. 
“People are already not fixing most of their cars because 
they have a $700 deductible.” 
 
Oleksyn said many shops, particularly small ones . . . (like) 
his, do not even make a 13 per cent profit. Essentially, he 
believes the government is robbing Peter to pay Paul by 

charging more PST while reducing personal income tax. “I 
think I’m shutting down.” 
 

A furniture warehouse owner says: 
 

Rob Hill, owner of Great West Warehouse, says it’s going 
to be difficult tallying up receipts when people buy more 
than one item at . . . (a) store. 
 
Because the first $300 of every used piece of furniture and 
appliance is tax exempt, the cashier will have to assess the 
6 per cent PST on the amount above $300 . . . 
 

So that’s taxing $90 of a $390 purchase. 
 

“(We’ll) . . . have to go through that on every item,” Hill 
said. “Once again, we’re doing the government’s 
paperwork (for them). 

 
A greenhouse owner: 
 

Keith Clement, of Clement Farms Greenhouses, does not 
carry any items, such as fertilizer, on which he has 
previously had to charge (PST) . . . Now, his business will 
have to get a PST number from the province and learn the 
province’s system for charging PST. 

 
“It’s all that book work . . .” Clement said. “It’s going to 
force prices higher and that’s all it’s going to do.” 

 
A car dealer in my own constituency says: 
 

“They’re double-dipping,” said Don Campbell of Mainline 
Motors in Watrous. “I’ve got a yard full of cars, 3 to $4 
million worth of used inventory that the tax has been paid 
on and now they’re going to make the consumer pay the 
tax on that again. To me, that isn’t fair.”  

 
Because of the consumers’ resistance to sales tax, a car with the 
tax paid is more valuable product from the dealer’s point of 
view. As a result, the dealers are prepared to pay more to get 
them and are more likely to put money into them to prepare the 
cars for sale. But with the new tax applied, those cars have 
effectively devalued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for this dealership alone, he must overnight try to 
recuperate $240,000 of PST. 
 
The article goes on to say, by announcing a 6 per cent increase 
in vehicles, that doesn’t mean someone is going to pay it. 
 

Had the government simply declared that existing 
inventories would not be affected by this tax hike, the 
problem would not exist. For the accountants and lawyers, 
which is what a lot of these politicians are, they give them 
until July 1 before there is a change . . . or a charge on their 
services. 

 
“Why don’t they give it to us so that we can move our 
inventory out, or give us a 6 per cent tax credit?”  

 
Campbell took his concerns to the government this week, but he 
was told — and can you believe this, Mr. Speaker? — he was 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

told by this government, the train has already left the station. 
 
Yes indeed, Mr. Speaker. The train has already left the station. 
The socialist NDP train has already left the station, leaving 
confusion, chaos, and frustration in its path. 
 
I know the phone has been ringing off the hook in my 
constituency office in Lanigan, and it wasn’t calls from happy 
little taxpayers all excited about a truly historical budget. 
 
Implementing the tax cuts in this budget, an average family 
earning $25,000 will save $121 in taxes in the first year. That 
calculates out to approximately $10 a month. But wait, there 
was a $3 a month increase in SaskTel rates, so that reduces the 
family savings to $7 per month. 
 
And let’s not forget the $5 a month SaskEnergy increase, so 
that reduces the savings to only $2 a month. 
 
The PST on non-prescription drugs alone will snap the $2 back 
into the government coffers, and that’s not paying the taxes on 
the pet food necessary to keep little Scotty the dog. 
 
So in the fact the average family in Saskatchewan will realize a 
negative savings in the first year of this so-called historical 
budget. 
 
This whole shell game which the NDP government plays of 
now you see it, now you don’t, reminds me of an analogy that 
I’ve read on governments. 
 
In communism you have two cows; the government will take 
both of them and give you part of the milk. In socialism you 
have two cows; the government takes both of them and gives 
you part of the milk. 
 
In fascism you have two cows; the government takes both cows 
and sells you the milk. In Nazism you have two cows; the 
government takes both of your cows and shoots you. 
 
In bureaucracy you have two cows; the government takes both 
of them, shoots one, milks the other, then pours the milk down 
the drain. In capitalism you have two cows; you sell one of 
them and buy a bull. 
 
And in democracy everyone has the opportunity to have two 
cows and a vote is taken as to what to do with them and 
whatever the majority decides to do, you do. 
 
This budget demonstrates a few of these concepts but certainly 
none of those are democracy. The majority of Saskatchewan 
people did not vote in the last election for this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and I could assure they would not vote for an 
expanded PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been accused of many things by the 
members opposite throughout this budget debate. And I’ve 
repeatedly heard them chant the Saskatchewan Party only wants 
to spend, spend, spend. And quite truthfully, there are areas in 
the budget where we feel the NDP government should spend 
more money. However, there are many areas where the money 
should simply be managed more responsibly. 
 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite often 
talk about being responsible but they never mention it in the 
same sentence as good management. 
 
I’ve also heard the members opposite accusing us of being 
irresponsible to our children because of the debt we’ve created 
in this province. That’s very, very interesting considering that I 
have never met Grant Devine, and the majority of us were not 
involved in politics when he was premier and when the debt 
that the NDPs use as their excuse for every screw-up that they 
do, when it was created. I have small children at home, Mr. 
Speaker, and I take it as a personal insult when I’m accused by 
the NDP government of being irresponsible for my children’s 
future. 
 
How responsible was this government when it hid a $700 
million slush fund from the Saskatchewan taxpayers and the 
Provincial Auditor, when the farm families pleaded with them 
to spend only 250 million of it. 
 
They not only didn’t care about those farm children’s futures, 
they also set a fine example of honesty by denying the existence 
of the money in the slush fund. In fact they went so far as to tell 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan they would have to raise all their 
taxes by an additional thousand dollars if they were to help farm 
families. And if you doubt this, a headline in The Leader-Post 
today is an article on “Farm crisis may hurt children.” 
 
I wouldn’t exactly be sitting on the other side of this House 
accusing too many people of being irresponsible for our 
children’s future, not after what they themselves did just a few 
months ago. 
 
So now after all this time and all their promises, has the budget 
set out to help our vital agriculture industry? Very little, Mr. 
Speaker. There is actually less for agriculture in this year’s 
budget than there was in last year’s. There is no mention of a 
desperately needed safety net program for our farmers — 
another display of the NDP’s irresponsibility for our farm 
children and another promise forgotten. 
 
But there is the removal of the cap on the fuel tax rebate. That is 
a very positive step and it will be helpful to some farmers. 
However it will not cost the province a great deal of money 
because most farms operate on diesel and not gas. 
 
There’s also a 25 million per year reduction on property tax for 
the year 2000 and 2001 — an average of $440 per farm. Like 
the rest of this budget however, it sounds great at first, but it’s 
only more smoke and mirrors. 
 
Education’s getting desperate, Mr. Speaker. SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) is telling us that 
their increased funding in the budget is going to be absorbed 
very quickly by the increase for teachers’ wages, and the 
increased PST they will have to pay for services and 
transportation alone. The budget doesn’t even begin to address 
the need that’s grown in our education system. And our 
Education ministers simply brushed these concerns aside and 
suggested that the school districts will just have to up their mill 
rates. And again this NDP government claims the fame and 
passes the blame. 
 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

The government will take credit for their assistance for farm 
property taxes, and then they will deny responsibilities when 
it’s snapped away by the school divisions. It won’t be their fault 
— and it never is. I’m sure if they could find a way they would 
blame the unreasonably high education tax on agriculture 
property on the federal government — or better yet, let’s blame 
that on Grant Devine too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I told this government . . . I know this government 
cannot understand how we can praise some areas of the budget 
while criticizing others. I find this odd considering that they 
themselves chose to cherry pick Vicq. But since we have to 
vote on the budget on its entirety, I find I cannot do so. 
 
It does not offer any immediate tax relief for Saskatchewan 
families, and Saskatchewan families need tax relief today — 
not four years from now. The amendment put forward by our 
Leader of the Opposition does give immediate tax relief to our 
Saskatchewan families, and it is doable, and it’s affordable, and 
we can do it today. 
 
Therefore, I support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important debate — the debate on 
the budget. Because what this does is the debate lays out the 
government long-term plan, plus the plan for the next year, and 
at the same time it shows us, through their speeches and 
through their comments, it shows us where the opposition is 
going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want to know where 
this government is going. They also want to know where this 
opposition is going and what direction they propose to go in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listened, I have listened to many of the 
opposition comments, and I have summarized some of the 
comments, summarized some of the comments that the 
members have made. And I want to repeat some of these here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s any one thing that stands out in my mind 
after the first three days of debate is the figure $700 million. 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the Leader of the Opposition use that 
figure, $700 million, 12 times in three days — 12 times. I kind 
of got to thinking he must be, he must be obsessed. What is it, 
what is it that is obsessing him about $700 million? He cannot 
stand a surplus, Mr. Speaker, nor can he stand a long-term plan. 
He wants to spend it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I progress I want to mention that the 
government has budgeted for a surplus of nine and a half 
million dollars. And in addition to that, the government has 
budgeted to put $405 million into a stabilization fund to be 
drawn down over the next four years to 290 million. It’s to be 
drawn down, Mr. Speaker, in the case of forest fires, in case of 
drought, or some other disaster or unforeseen situation where 
the . . . in order to make sure that the services that the 
government provides will not be affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to check their comments and go 

through some of their comments because it shows their 
intentions. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has 
managed, has used the figure of $700 million at least 12 times. 
And you know what, the other members — along with him — 
have found a way to spend it and I’m going to detail it to you. 
 
What I’ve seen here, Mr. Speaker, is it, it’s like they’ve been 
given this debit card and they’re swiping this debit card through 
the swiper and each time, there’s a certain amount of money 
that goes out of the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the way it works. Swipe number one, the 
leader himself, the member from Rosetown-Biggar would do 
away with the PST expansions. Swipe number one — $160 
million. Swipe number two, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, $380 to education — swipe number two. 
Take that card now. 
 
Swipe number three, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 
Current. First it’s just a little swipe; he wants seven and a half 
million dollars for his hospital over and above any other 
hospital in the province. The member from Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker, swipe number two for him, the fuel tax reduction — 
60 million more dollars. The member for Swift Current again, 
Mr. Speaker. A swipe for the police officers — $14 million. 
The government has provided, Mr. Speaker, has provided $2 
million so far; part of the strategy to meet the province. That’s 
going to give us 25 more officers. He would do it all in this one 
year. Another $14 million. 
 
(1445) 
 
Of course they’d all like to get into the picture, Mr. Speaker. 
The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, swipe, partnership 
program back in — another half a million dollars. Not to be 
outdone, my friend and colleague from Sask Rivers wants to see 
that highway from Saskatoon to P.A. (Prince Albert) paved. So 
do I but he would do it now. Swipe — another $40 million 
gone. 
 
When you add them up, Mr. Speaker, when you add them all up 
— just those in three days in debate, $662 million — $662 
million. And that’s not counting the amount that the member for 
Saltcoats wants for highways in addition to this. That’s not 
counting the undoing or the freezing of utilities from the Leader 
of the Opposition. That’s not counting the hard decision about 
the court houses. That’s not counting what the member of 
Carrot River spoke about today, about fishing licences, Mr. 
Speaker, another half a million dollars. 
 
What’s the result, Mr. Speaker? These members — these 
members — would swipe out of the budget the entire 
stabilization fund of 405 million. They would swipe out the 
entire $9 million surplus. And, Mr. Speaker, together with that, 
they would swipe away our children’s future with a debt of 
$245 million. In how much time, Mr. Speaker? In three days of 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not to say that the ideas that the members have 
brought are bad ideas. But what I’m saying is there has to be 
some responsibility and there has to be some accountability on 
their side. Where will the money come from? What are they 
planning to cut back? Or what are they planning to tax to make 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

up for it? 
 
Because with seven swipes of this debit card they would create 
a Devine-type deficit. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very fortunate 
that the Sask Party is in opposition. Because I can tell you that 
this government will not allow anybody to swipe away our 
children’s future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of comments about 
the budget in general. First of all I want to say that it’s a 
sensible budget because it provides a sustainable plan for 
Saskatchewan. It’s fiscally responsible, it’s balanced, and it 
provides more money where it’s needed. 
 
I’m pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that the budget speaks directly 
to the problems faced by farmers in Saskatchewan. The crop 
insurance premiums are going down. That’s a big help to 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, all of the fuel taxes, all of the fuel taxes that farmers 
will have to pay, are gone in this budget. Farmers never did 
have to pay diesel tax for quite a few years, and part of the tax 
on gasoline was rebatable. But as of now, all taxes on fuel for 
farmers are gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a third thing that farmers are very pleased about is 
the help in this budget to deal with their property taxes. There 
are three things there, Mr. Speaker, that are good for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The third thing I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, about this 
budget is it addresses issues which are confronting health. 
Perhaps the biggest issue in health right now, Mr. Speaker, is 
the funding. This budget speaks to funding of this by adding 
$63 million more to the Health budget. But in addition, it 
speaks to the federal government and says please, please up the 
ante from 13 per cent to something approaching 50 per cent. 
And our Minister of Health ought to be commended for the 
tremendous job she did at the ministers’ conference this last 
week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I like the idea, Mr. Speaker, I like the idea 
of $150 million Health transition fund because there are areas in 
the province that have fallen behind. Some of the places and 
some of the building and the infrastructure needs some help, 
and that will certainly take care of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lastly, the new taxation system. What a great idea. 
That flat tax, eliminated. That debt reduction surtax, eliminated. 
That high income surtax, eliminated, Mr. Speaker. Now the 
income tax system, by being changed, is now much more 
progressive. The low-income people will be much better off 
particularly because of the PST rebate and because their 
exemptions are going up to $8,000. If you’re a senior, to 
$9,000. Middle-income people will be better off, far better off, 
and will save up to a thousand dollars per year after total 
implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an incentive in this budget for 

high-income people to stay in Saskatchewan. Without a doubt, 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and I will be 
urging all members in the Assembly to support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to say that it is indeed my pleasure to rise on behalf of the 
good people of the Humboldt constituency to comment on this 
so-called historic budget. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, the only 
history being written here is the final chapter of this NDP’s 
sorry regime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest 
yesterday to the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley as he 
told all of us a fairy tale about a big bad wolf. Now although I 
thought that the fable about the big bad wolf was going to be a 
commentary on the recent provincial budget. The only thing 
that relates to the big, bad wolf is the hot air that blows from the 
NDP members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Although, Mr. Speaker, it is noteworthy to 
mention that there were some significant, historic comments 
made recently by the people of Saskatchewan. And what they 
commented on, in fact 60 per cent of those people commented 
on, was their constant and ongoing support for the 
Saskatchewan Party which resulted in 25 members voted in to 
sit on this side of the House representing the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were hoping that last 
fall’s election would be a wake-up call to this government. But 
this government chooses to remain in a deep, deep fog. And it 
appears that the only thing that the people of our province can 
wake up to is to higher taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about how grateful the 
people of Saskatchewan should be that this socialist regime is 
cutting their taxes. When in fact, the only thing that people will 
remember is the $160 million tax grab that was crammed down 
their throat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister has been gloating about his 
income tax cuts, but the fact of the matter is that the people of 
our province here just simply don’t believe him. Because they 
know that when it actually comes down to it, and time to cut 
taxes by the minister, this government will find one way or 
another to once again backdoor tax the people of the province. 
 
Since last fall, Mr. Speaker, we have seen in Saskatchewan a 
continual and gradual decrease in the lack of confidence for 
NDP governing philosophy. This budget does absolutely 
nothing — nothing — to reverse that trend. 
 
Where is the hope for the people of our province? Where are the 
dreams? Where is the optimism? No where, no where to be 
seen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, they were looking for a change. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

They were looking for tax relief, looking for hope. Instead, we 
got a tired, old administration trying to convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that an immediate tax increase, the PST 
expansion, was good for them. And the promise of tax cuts in 
the future. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter — no one believes it. 
No one believes that this government will do anything good for 
them any longer. 
 
All the talk about goodwill by this administration has 
evaporated. I believe it is the result of the NDP’s continual 
cynical moves. 
 
The closure of hospitals. The downgrade of hospitals to health 
centres and then forcing those health centres to cut services. 
The underfunding in education and health. The delusion that 
they impose upon people about health services they may or they 
may not get. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this point I know that the people of the 
Humboldt constituency are wondering whether or not they are 
in fact going to have the services in place at their hospital that 
they do have now. Because the antics of this government in the 
past are giving them some indication that their area there is not 
valued by this government either. 
 
They have had the promise in my constituency, by this 
government, of a farm safety net. And what has the government 
delivered? They’ve delivered nothing. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party opposition have proposed that a 
10 cent tax reduction on fuel be put in place. Will this 
government do that for the people of this province, for the 
farmers of this province, for all people in this province? We are 
hoping that the Minister of Finance will look at that. Because it 
truly does mean whether people will have the opportunity to be 
able to continue with their operations and their work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen recently the closure of some of 
the Queen’s Bench court houses in our province. Humboldt has 
seen that. It really does shock me that that happened because in 
the past the government of the day have constantly said that the 
Humboldt area is thriving. The Humboldt area is an area of 
economic development. Even the Stabler report mapping out 
the areas that are viable economically have situated Humboldt 
right in the middle of economic viability, economic growth. 
 
And what do we have now? We have this government cutting 
out Queen’s Bench court. What do you think is going to happen 
to the people of that constituency, of that area, that need court 
services? What do you think the lawyers are going to think? 
What do you think they’re going to do eventually? What do you 
think the businesses there, in that community, are going to do 
when they have to access a lawyer and they have to access court 
houses? Most likely they are going to bypass the lawyers in our 
good community of Humboldt and go to Saskatoon. 
 
That is not any indication of your government giving 
credulence to the viability and the economic success of 
Humboldt. Just a couple of years ago the highway maintenance 
office was closed in Humboldt. What kind of commentary is 
that on a growing community? 

How do you expect the people of the Humboldt constituency to 
believe that you are really looking out for and considering 
economic growth and considering the people in those areas that 
are trying so very hard in every way that they can to continue 
their growth. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have to wonder what is 
going to happen with our hospitals? What is going to happen 
with the services that we now enjoy? 
 
The trend gives me some indication that we are not going to be 
valued there either. So I wish that the minister would have 
spoken clearly about what is going to happen to some of these 
communities that are 5,000 or 10,000 like Humboldt and 
Weyburn. What is your intention for those communities? You 
seem to think that your government is the one that dictates 
whether these communities can continue or they cannot 
continue. 
 
That is not the Saskatchewan way. The Saskatchewan way is 
the people built those communities from the ground up. The 
people have the right to self-determination. They do not, and 
will not, tolerate a government with a heavy hand tearing them 
apart and pulling them down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cynical moves like we have seen from this 
government, like appointing Louise Simard as CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SAHO and expecting everyone to say it’s 
fine. Fine to a point. Former NDP cabinet minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the hon. 
member from North Battleford on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless I heard 
wrong, I distinctly recall the hon. member from Humboldt 
saying this government appointed the executive director of 
SAHO. This government of course has no input into the 
appointment of persons in SAHO. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the member’s opposite point of order is not 
well taken and in fact though, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, I will be giving the hon. 
member for Cannington an opportunity to make his point 
respecting the point of order raised by the hon. member from 
the Battleford, but I remind all hon. members that whether the 
point is well taken or not is a decision to be taken by the Chair, 
not by any hon. members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would argue that the point of order that the member raises is not 
well taken, not valid. And that SAHO, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
creature of the provincial government, funded fully by the 
provincial government with provincial tax dollars and, Mr. 
Speaker, does have a direct bearing on the operation of SAHO 
. . . 
 
(1500) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for North 
Battleford for raising the point of order, and I thank the hon. 
member for Cannington for speaking to the point of order that 
was raised. 
 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

There is, frankly, one fact that I will be checking, and then I’ll 
bring back a ruling as soon as is reasonably possible. In the 
meantime we’ll allow the member for Humboldt to continue her 
speech. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, whether or not we agree that the 
government has appointed this member as the CEO of SAHO, 
or whether we believe that the government has influenced this 
appointment, makes no difference. The fact is this is the very 
person who put the so-called helmet . . . health reform into 
place, the wellness model into place. The whole area of health 
care has been decimated under this person’s instruction. And 
now, the very person who closed 52 rural hospitals and told us 
it was good for us, is now being reappointed. That very person 
is the person we are now asked to trust to manage health care 
once again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised that he would never appoint 
former MLAs to government boards, and then he went and 
appointed Louise. I have to ask, Mr. Speaker, does that build 
trust? No, it certainly does not. Does it build confidence? I 
don’t think so. Does it build hope? No. But what does it do, Mr. 
Speaker? What it does is continue to erode the public’s 
confidence in government and the NDP. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there is more. Just last week, the 
Liberal candidate, Neil Collins, that was trounced in Estevan 
last fall, was appointed to the board of SaskPower. And again, 
we are all to believe that this is fine. 
 
Yesterday, Harvey McLane — two-tiered Harvey — the former 
member from Arm River who was soundly defeated in the last 
election, lands on his feet also with a big patronage job from the 
coalition. His yearly wage, Mr. Speaker, might end up to be just 
about enough to operate a safe house. But what does that matter 
to this government? 
 
We’re talking about the needs of children in this province. We 
have people being appointed whose wage is going to be 
comparable to many, many programs such as a safe house that 
could be put in place in this province to assist the disadvantaged 
children of our province. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we are asked to say it’s okay. We are 
all asked to say that all of those antics are okay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is all about power and the maintenance 
of power. That’s what it’s about. The politics of fear, the 
politics of diversion, the politics of divide and conquer, the 
politics, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister says this government wants 
to look towards the future. But when asked to defend his 
budget, he pulls out newspaper clippings from the 1980s — 20 
years old, 20-year-old newspaper clippings. When he is 
defending the PST expansion, he says that it was Grant Devine 
— that’s what Grant wanted to do. 
 
The NDP has been in office for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, and they 

still want to fight the battles of 1982 and 1991 again. Mr. 
Speaker, given the backward budget, I suppose that’s all that 
they have to cling to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children’s future is at stake, and this is all that 
we have to offer? This government has cut funding to K to 12 
education by hundreds of millions of dollars since 1991. And 
how does the Minister of Education respond to all of this? Well, 
he says, let’s raise the mill rate. All they have to offer our 
children is tax increases, Mr. Speaker. Tax increases in every 
area — expanded PST, exorbitant utility rates, and fees for 
everything from A to Z. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, we have seen how concerned this 
government is for our children’s future that they cut a job 
program that many students rely on for the summer . . . their 
summer employment. But then they blame the federal 
government for this because the NDP here are incapable of 
taking any responsibility for their own socialist actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has built walls around our 
province. NDP backbenchers there are giving advice to parents 
not to share the good news that other provinces like Alberta are 
experiencing. Don’t wish for anything better is what they’re 
telling them. Don’t encourage our children to look around and 
look beyond. Don’t encourage them to reach for success. Don’t 
provide them with any hope. In fact don’t tell them about 
anywhere, anywhere in the world or anything in the world but 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Where is the vision in that view of the world, Mr. Speaker? Can 
you imagine, can you imagine what the pioneers that built our 
great nation and our province would think about that ludicrous 
view of the future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, government is supposed to be about providing 
vision, but it is blatantly clear that there is none here on the part 
of the NDP. This is all about old-style politics. It’s about 
patronage. It’s about power and position: tax increases sold as 
tax cuts; splitting the urban and the rural; slush funds hidden 
from the public when farm families are suffering; $700 million 
and our farm families are suffering, their children are suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is underfunded. And the Minister of 
Education, the former leader of the Liberal Party, said to the 
school boards just raise your mill rate; it’s simple, raise taxes. 
So what he’s doing is he’s leaving that awful responsibility to 
school divisions. Download on them again. Blame them for it. 
This it totally unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Education campaigned last fall for exactly the 
opposite. That must have just been more political rhetoric, I 
guess; more broken promises. Mr. Speaker, this budget does not 
speak to the future; in fact it does the exact opposite thing. 
 
Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to mention the very grave 
concern that many of my constituents have about the 
recommendations, be they interim, on the amalgamation of 
rural municipalities and municipalities . . . urban municipalities. 
 
I have a letter I would like to read from here just to give the 
House an example of the kind of feelings that are put forth by 
some of the RM (rural municipality) councillors, RM reeves. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

And here is the response. I wrote to them and I asked them for 
their views on forced amalgamation. And here’s a response. 
 

There would be absolutely no benefits if amalgamation 
took place as suggested in the Garcea and Stabler Report. 
Rural ratepayers have never been disappointed with the 
services provided by their local RM. Do we want our rural 
ratepayers to be faced with the same situation that people 
in a large urban centre are faced with where snow removal 
on residential streets is done once a year? If we accept the 
Garcea and Stabler Report, this is exactly what will 
happen. All we have to do is look at what the government 
made of health care. The government is only concerned 
about having more provincial control, less local voice and 
more large urban and no rural. I would hope that we would 
give our heads a shake and not kill the best resource 
Saskatchewan has, our identity, heritage and rural make 
up. Lets remember, our neighbours to the west are only 
waiting with open arms to welcome the influx of more 
talented individuals from this great province. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely crucial in the view of my 
constituents that any decision made on amalgamation be made 
from the ground up — be made from local people, local 
councillors, and that being the voice of the people around them. 
 
There is no doubt in my mind that municipalities that can share 
resources are willing to do that. It’s already happened. There is 
going to be no cost benefit. We have learned that from Ontario. 
Can’t we take a lesson from another province that has already 
gone through this and is willing to advise us and has advised us 
that this kind of forced amalgamation absolutely is detrimental 
to the general population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other thing that I’d like to comment on is, as a 
critic for Aboriginal Affairs, I notice that the government of the 
day has put quite a bit of money into northern Saskatchewan, 
and so be it. 
 
But I want to also make comment to the members opposite of 
an article in the Prince Albert Herald, that I was just recently 
reading. This article states: 
 

Though the politicians called it a renewal of their 
commitment to meeting the housing needs of northerners, 
at least one mayor from northern Saskatchewan didn’t 
think much of the provincial government’s announcement 
of a 9 million package Thursday. 
 
The last news release was for 60 housing units and I still 
haven’t seen anything where I come from. 
 

And this is being said by the mayor of Stony Rapids, Joan 
McDonald. McDonald said: 
 

Stony Rapids is an isolated town of about 300 people 
located 680 kilometres north of Prince Albert. They were 
promised two new houses when the province made its last 
funding announcement in 1999. The houses never 
materialized and she has yet to get an explanation through 
the Minister of Housing or anyone else. She states there 
has been no work done. They’re just running around and 
blaming, and blaming everybody for who does what. 

McDonald said people in her community resent the 22 
housing units standing boarded up and empty in Stony 
Rapids, houses that have never been lived in. These houses 
were built by the government as future homes for 
employees of a hospital slated for construction this year. 
And those houses stand empty while residents of Stony 
Rapids crowd together in substandard housing. 
 
Now the community hears that southern contractors may 
be allowed to live in them while the hospital is being built. 
She also states, they won’t trust our own local people to 
live in them. What kind of respect is that for these people 
in Stony Rapids? I ask the government of the day that 
question. 

 
One other thing that has been brought to my attention, Mr. 
Speaker, by a member of . . . well I guess I can’t say the 
minister’s name in the House, but actually the member from 
around La Ronge was stating to me that Mr. Goulet is setting up 
a commercial fishery. This is supposed to be to help First 
Nations people process their fish, but the people there, the First 
Nations people say it’s not going to work for them. They say 
it’s not going to work because the transportation issue is 
important when you’re factoring in the costs associated with 
that processing. 
 
The transportation costs are just too many, Mr. Minister, and 
the roads aren’t there. The cost of processing does not net the 
First Nations people who are the producers anything. They will 
not be the beneficiaries of this so I hope you please take note of 
that and do further consultation with your people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to just mention for a moment a 
little bit about the comments in the budget about agriculture. 
We have, of course everyone knows, farmers in this province 
who are going out of business, who cannot bear the costs, 
mostly the tax costs associated with government placing 
exorbitant taxes on them. We hear an announcement that crop 
insurance premiums are going down but everybody knows so is 
the coverage. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Minister, the $25 million per year in property tax rebates 
that are going to farmers sounds like a good announcement. But 
it didn’t take long for my constituents to talk to me saying, what 
is this that we hear about mill rates going up. We are going to 
be just having to pay that tax in another form. We are not going 
to be better off in the long run. 
 
I would suggest that if the government is going to do anything 
for agriculture, they look at the Estey Report and possibly some 
real restructuring of the industry, restructuring of the 
transportation system. Other measures like that that would truly 
help our farmers in the long run. 
 
And I would suggest to the minister also, regarding Indian and 
Metis affairs, that if they really want to do some things to help 
the Metis people, it may not necessarily take any provincial 
money, but it would be very helpful if the minister would 
address the volatile situation in the Metis community today in 
this province. 
 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

He has . . . had mentioned me to him, of needing help to address 
the federal government on this issue and he tells me that no one 
has come to him. I know otherwise. So I think if the minister 
took his responsibilities a little more seriously, we would be 
able to get the kind of support and facilitation from this 
government that could help the Metis people. 
 
One more comment. I am extremely concerned about the health 
services that we will be receiving in the future in Humboldt and 
area. So I find it really important to bring up just a couple of 
things that I found through research. And one of them is that I 
understand from the Murray report, that had recommendations 
for future directions in health care, that health districts are 
supposed to be getting funding according to their population. 
 
The population of Central Plains Health District is 22,000. The 
population of Saskatoon Health District is 220,000. That means 
that the Central Plains Health District should be getting about 
10 per cent of what Saskatoon is getting. 
 
Well that is not what is happening. Last year Central Plains lost 
$1 million in funding from the provincial government at budget 
time. How on earth are we to believe, Minister of Health, that 
you really have a serious intention to ensure the people of 
Humboldt will continue to enjoy the services they have today? 
 
I would ask the Minister of Health to give us some written 
guarantees about the services that we are going to have there. I 
would ask her to give those guarantees to the CEO of the health 
district and the Chair of the health district so that they can relay 
that to all the people in that area who are depending on those 
services in this very viable community. 
 
I do believe that this government is centralizing services in the 
province — centralizing them predominantly in Regina and 
Saskatoon. I believe that the court house closure, the Queen’s 
Bench closure in Humboldt as well as other measures taken by 
this government, are just an indication that amalgamation is 
going to take place and it’s going to be benefiting Saskatoon 
and Regina mainly. 
 
I believe that rural people must be told the truth if government 
intends to go ahead with this amalgamation, with the 
centralization of services. Be at least so gracious as to let the 
people in this province know what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will close by saying that this budget does not 
speak at all to the future. This budget does not speak to the 
concerns of the people of this province. It speaks to the people 
of this province of more decimation, of total disregard, and of 
government putting down their agenda from the top. 
 
And that is why I cannot support the budget, Mr. Speaker. And 
I will support the amendment put forth by the Hon. Leader of 
the Official Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, before I recognize the next 
speaker, minutes ago there was a point of order raised by the 
hon. member for North Battleford and addressed by the hon. 
member for Cannington. I wish to thank both hon. members for 

participating in that point of order. And having confirmed what 
I needed to confirm, I wish to report the following: 
 
Having listened to the hon. member from North Battleford and 
the hon. member for Cannington and having ascertained there 
was no procedural breach that took place, what we have is a 
point of debate between members. Members are very capable 
and have a long-standing tradition of sorting out such matters in 
a orderly and normal fashion. 
 
To sum up there is no point of order; what we have is a point of 
debate. And I thank all hon. members for participating in that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to participate in this budget debate this afternoon 
representing my constituents of Saskatoon Greystone. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a positive budget. In total it represents a net 
reduction — a net tax reduction — of $43 million for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers in the year 2000. 
 
And I’ve heard members opposite refer to this budget as a tax 
grab. And I think, in all fairness, that’s not a fair representation 
of this budget. There are tax increases — and it’s fair for 
members opposite to point that out; but there’s a net tax cut, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — and members must be honest about 
pointing that out too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I think that’s only fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget also offers significant 
increases well above the rate of inflation for important public 
services like health and education and environmental 
protection. 
 
It offers realistic help to the farm community, Mr. Speaker. It is 
a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. The seventh balanced budget 
in a row brought down by this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — After seven consecutive deficit budgets from 
the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
now got seven consecutive surplus budgets from an NDP 
government and now from an NDP-Liberal coalition. 
 
And it lays out a clear plan for achieving the NDP election 
promise of a $1,000 per year tax cut for the average family by 
the end of the term of this government, Mr. Speaker. And 
finally, this budget offers a positive long-term vision for the 
future of our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say a few words about the tax 
measures in this budget. The significant tax reductions in this 
budget begin on July 1 with a 50 per cent reduction in the 
amount of the flat tax that Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay — 
50 per cent reduction. And by January 1, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
less than nine months from now, there will be further important 
tax reductions. The flat tax will be eliminated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — completely eliminated — $320 million of tax, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, gone in terms of the flat tax. 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

And the debt reduction tax will be cancelled. Gone completely 
as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we haven’t heard much 
acknowledgement of those two facts from members opposite. 
 
2001, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will mark the beginning of a 
three-year phase-in of a new personal income tax system. Each 
year tax rates will be further reduced. Income brackets will be 
expanded and personal tax credits will be increased. The result, 
Mr. Speaker, will be that 55,000 low-income seniors, single 
parents, minimum wage earners, and working families will be 
taken off the tax rolls of this province. And that’s an 
accomplishment I’m proud of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The second result is that the average family in 
this province will save well over a thousand dollars per year in 
personal income tax when this new system is fully in effect. 
Another very positive feature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
tax system will be indexed to eliminate bracket creep 
completely. 
 
Now in these past months our government has wrestled with 
some very difficult decisions around the PST, and members 
opposite have raised some of those. The Vicq commission 
recommended a decrease in the percentage of tax collected in 
income tax and an increase in the percentage of tax collected in 
sales tax. The Vicq commission also recommended that the PST 
be expanded to cover a very wide range of goods, including 
most family essentials. 
 
Members will recall that I said clearly in this Assembly during 
the Throne Speech debate that I opposed the Vicq committee 
recommendation to tax family necessities. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased that our government has largely adopted that 
principle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget there is no 
PST on residential electricity, no PST on residential natural gas, 
no PST on insurance payments, no PST on personal services 
like haircuts, no PST on reading materials, no PST on 
children’s clothing and footwear, no PST on used goods under 
$300, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a significant accomplishment. I 
am proud to be part of a government that still has one of the 
widest range of exemptions for the sales tax in Canada and, 
with the exception of Alberta, the lowest sales tax in the 
country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
Alberta chooses to raise that revenue by levying an $816 health 
care premium on every Alberta family — something on this 
side of the House that we’ve chosen not to do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, any expansion of 

consumption taxes can pose a disproportionate burden on 
lower-income people unless precautions are taken. And to 
protect the interests of low-income residents, our government is 
implementing a refundable sales tax credit, which families 
earning up to $35,000 a year will be eligible for it. 
 
Approximately 285,000 Saskatchewan people will receive the 
sales tax credit every year with rebate cheques of up to a 
maximum of $77 for individuals and a maximum of $264 for 
families. The tax credit cheques will not need to be applied for. 
They will be received automatically when income tax returns 
are filled out. 
 
As a result of this, many low-income residents of our province 
will be further ahead financially even after paying the expanded 
PST. For example, a family with two children earning less than 
$25,000 a year will usually have more money by year-end from 
the new provincial tax credit than they’ll pay out in PST, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, members of the 
opposition have been accusing our government of increasing 
the net tax burden on Saskatchewan people, and that is clearly 
not the net effect of what we’ve done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I believe members of the opposition know it. 
 
The net tax savings for Saskatchewan people in this budget are 
a little under $200 a family. On the average, net tax savings by 
2003 will be a thousand dollars a family, Mr. Speaker, just as 
we promised during the provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is being phased in 
gradually — not dramatically as members opposite would like, but 
gradually. And there’s a reason for that. Because it’s only by 
doing it gradually that tax cuts can be delivered in a sustainable 
way. It’s only by doing it gradually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that tax 
cuts can be delivered without jeopardizing social programs which 
I as a member on this side of the House am not prepared to do. 
 
And it’s only, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by doing it gradually that we 
can make sure that we keep paying down our debt and deliver 
balanced budgets, something that I believe members on the other 
side of the House are incapable of doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — With this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
provincial debt drops to $11.2 billion, down from $15 billion 
seven years ago. As a percentage of our total economy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, our gross domestic product, the debt has dropped 
from 70 per cent of gross domestic product now down to 38 per 
cent of gross domestic product, all just done in less than a decade, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by members on this side of the House. And 
that is a significant accomplishment. 
 
(1530) 
 
Last night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard the member from Carrot 
River Valley accuse our government of undertaking a social 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

experiment at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. And he 
spoke very passionately, opposing what he described as that social 
experiment. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s be clear about who undertook 
the social experiment. It was the predecessor of many of the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party, namely the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan. The Tory government almost bankrupt this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Its social experiment was one of spending money like water 
while cutting taxes and running a deficit that averaged more 
than a billion dollars a year. The interest payments on that debt 
alone, Mr. Speaker, the interest payments on that debt alone 
will burden us for at least another 30 years. That’s the 
experiment that members on that side of the House and their 
predecessors levied on us. That’s the experiment that we’re 
trying to deal with now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a failed 
experiment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But we’re left picking up the pieces after, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the experiment was a disaster. It was such a 
disaster that members on that side of the House had to change 
the name of their party to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They were forced to do that, they couldn’t get elected 
in any other context. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn to the expenditure 
side of this budget where I believe that its greatest strengths are 
on the service improvement side of the ledger. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we have a balanced budget; steady progress on debt 
reduction; a small net tax cut of $43 million; and at the same 
time we’ve made a number of important improvements to 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — All the key service areas are receiving budget 
increases above the rate of inflation. The health care sector 
receives a $63 million operating increase, an increase of well 
over 3 per cent, plus $150 million for transition planning. 
 
Post-secondary education receives a 4 per cent increase of $10.3 
million, again well above the rate of inflation. This is an 
increase that should help to minimize tuition fee increases for 
university students in my constituency and across our province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There is $7 million in capital funds in this budget specifically 
earmarked for renovations to the Thorvaldson Building at the 
University of Saskatchewan and for the construction of a new 
kinesiology building on the University of Saskatchewan campus 
that I’m pleased to represent. And there is $2.85 million in the 
budget to expand our nursing education program to provide for 
the graduation of 260 nurses in our province each and every 
year. 
 
The budget also provides all graduating post-secondary 
students, who stay in Saskatchewan after graduation, with a tax 
credit of $350 as a way of saying thank you to those who stay 
here and develop a career here. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget is also a step forward on the K 
to 12 education fund. There is a 4.7 per cent increase to school 
division operating grants for the year . . . for the calendar year 
2000. So school divisions receive a 4.7 per cent increase in their 
operating grants in this calendar year. The basic per pupil rates 
are increased by $262 per student. And there is an important 
increase in funding for the designated disabled program. 
 
There will also be 13 additional pre-kindergarten programs in 
community schools across our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
These are very positive initiatives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my children attend the Saskatoon public 
school system. The operating grant for that system, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will go up from $34.4 million to $37.5 million, or an 
increase of over $3.1 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What would have happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 
Saskatchewan Party was elected? If they had been elected — 
frozen, they campaigned on freezing education. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that now in the House, 
they’re complaining that our 4.7 per cent increase is not 
enough. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ll have to figure out 
which way do they want it. Do they want to freeze education, 
which is what they campaigned on during the election, or are 
they saying we should spend even more on education now? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members opposite can’t have it both ways. 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the real agenda is the one 
we saw in the election campaign — a freeze on education, a 
freeze on health care. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we won’t ever 
do that on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn to 
the issue of the environment, which is an issue that’s very 
important for me, and say that there’s some very positive 
initiatives around the environment in this budget. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget for Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management has been increased by 
15 per cent up to $116.924 million. 
 
And there are some significant increases here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I’m very pleased about: $2.5 million to meet our 
tree planting commitments is part of this budget; $2.2 million to 
further our efforts to reduce the danger from spruce budworm; 
$350,000 for a forest survey in the eastern part of our province 
to assess areas that need additional reforestation. Another 
$200,000 in this budget taking . . . for Dutch elm disease, taking 
our total commitment to fighting Dutch elm disease and trying 
to prevent Dutch elm disease up to $500,000. 
 
And $250,000 in this environment project to launch a project to 
clean up the abandoned tailings that the Gunnar and Lorado 
uranium mines, that I’ve long lobbied to have cleaned up, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased that our Minister of the 
Environment is moving ahead with that. It’s very positive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

Mr. Prebble: — There’s also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some very 
important capital announcements in this budget over and above 
the capital dollars that one finds in the regular line departments. 
And one of those capital announcements is that we’re going to 
have a new fund for transportation and environmental cleanup 
— $5 million a year to be spent on that for every one of the next 
four years. It’s a very positive move. Nice to see additional 
money for highways. Nice to see new dollars for environmental 
cleanup in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s another capital item I want to make reference to and 
that is that this budget restores funding for social housing in the 
province of Saskatchewan for new social housing construction 
— $5 million a year for the next four years for social housing 
initiatives in the province of Saskatchewan, including the 
northern part of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to see that. 
 
And also additional capital dollars for heritage properties, 
municipal infrastructure, K to 12 school construction; and an 
additional $5 million in capital for the universities and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
over and above their regular capital budgets. A very positive 
initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to return to 
the important issue of health care, and the importance of us to 
say no to the privatization of health care that is emerging in 
Alberta and that clearly some members opposite in the 
Saskatchewan Party want us to adopt. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as members will know, the Tory 
government in Alberta has prepared legislation to allow 
privately owned hospitals to provide surgery at public expense. 
This is clearly designed to open the door to US (United States) 
corporate health care providers coming into Alberta and into 
Canada. And once in the door it may be difficult to stop the 
spread of these US-based, for-profit health care corporations 
across the country because of the provisions of the North 
American Free Trade Agreement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud that our financing arrangements 
in this province do not allow this kind of two-tier heath care 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I’m deeply committed to a good quality, 
publicly funded, and publicly operated health care system and 
believe it’s critical for the federal government to say no to the 
Alberta model of privatization. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, no budget can address all issues in any 
one year. And there are some other important initiatives that are 
not in this budget that I’m anxious to see in future budgets. On 
the health care front, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m anxious to see 
the restoration of the children’s dental plan, especially for 
elementary school-aged children. 
 
I remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with pride when the New 
Democratic Party government set up the children’s dental plan 

in the 1970s. And I remember with dismay, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the predecessors of the Saskatchewan Party, the 
PC Party, when in government, laid off 400 dental nurses in this 
province and destroyed the children’s dental plan. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am committed to . . . (inaudible) . . . working, 
to rebuild the children’s dental plan in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to work to see full budget funding 
for a comprehensive program aimed at reducing child abuse in 
the home and in our communities. I would like to see us follow 
the example of the state of Hawaii and institute regular 
follow-up home visits and support to all families who have a 
new child and are deemed by their history and circumstances to 
be at higher risk. The state of Hawaii has reduced domestic 
child abuse rates by over 70 per cent using this home visitation 
and support approach and I think it would be very positive for 
us to adopt it here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I would like to see a major focus on cancer 
prevention in next year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a 
major initiative to promote lifestyle changes, including a 
healthy anti-cancer diet, exercise, and reduced exposure to 
cancer-causing substances. A wide body of literature has 
developed in this area and this information needs to be shared 
with all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Workplace wellness initiatives should be prioritized and a 
systematic attempt should be made by public health, 
Saskatchewan Environment, and the Department of Labour to 
reduce public exposure to carcinogens, including tobacco and 
pesticides. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on the social 
policy front, specifically with respect to poverty. 
 
And first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that it’s with pride 
that members of this House can point accurately to the fact — 
as the Canadian Council on Social Development has pointed out 
— that this is the only province in Canada that has had a 
reduction in family poverty in the last decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The only province in Canada where there’s a 
reduction in the number of children who are living in poverty, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about Alberta? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — In Alberta, poverty rates for children are up. In 
Ontario, where they’ve got a PC government, poverty rates for 
children are up. Only in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are poverty rates for children down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s not enough; we need to do more. It’s 
time for a major initiative to reduce poverty in our province. 
We need to launch major employment opportunities that are 
specifically targeted to low-income neighbourhoods where 
unemployment is very high. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we need to have a higher minimum 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

wage in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we need to 
increase social assistance rates, especially for families with 
children. In my judgment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
unacceptable for thousands of children and adults to be 
dependent on food banks in our province for their sustenance 
each month. 
 
And we need to bring every person with a serious disability to 
an income level above the Statistics Canada poverty line. Mr. 
Speaker, I advocate that we institute a disability pension that 
will guarantee a decent life for every person with a serious 
disability, who is severely limited in their ability to work as a 
result of that disability. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some of the steps that we can 
take to reduce poverty. 
 
And I hear the Leader of the Opposition say, what about job 
creation? And I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition that 
it is with pride that in this decade, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
created more jobs than the PC government opposite ever 
created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — What did we see in the 1980s? A loss of jobs. 
What have we seen in the 1990s? Across this economy with 
Saskatchewan consistently showing either the lowest or the 
second lowest unemployment rate in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition that not everybody can get work. 
People with a disability may not be able to work. And I say to 
the Leader of the Opposition that it’s time in this province that 
we provided those people with a decent income to live on — a 
decent income to live on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I’m determined to work for that on this 
side of the House. And I think the member opposite will find 
that I’ve got lots of support on this side of the House. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the 
environment and where we go in terms of environmental policy. 
And I’m anxious to see . . . first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
anxious to see our province give higher priority to a protected 
area strategy, setting a target of designating at least another 6 
million hectares for protected status prior to our centenary in 
2005. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would be an exciting contribution to 
the well-being of future generations in this province. It would 
be an exciting opportunity to protect biodiversity in our 
province. 

I also want to see us continue to develop a comprehensive 
provincial strategy to tackle Dutch elm disease. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Dutch elm disease has now struck in more than 20 
Saskatchewan communities and will pose a major economic, 
ecological, and aesthetic cost to our province unless it is 
contained. 
 
The disease has already hit northeast and northwest 
Saskatchewan very hard, is doing a great deal of damage in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley, is at the doorsteps of the city of Regina, and 
is moving into central Saskatchewan. 
 
In some of the worst hit communities like Carrot River, a large 
portion of the elms in the town are now dead. It would be 
particularly disastrous if Dutch elm disease claimed a large 
number of elm trees in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and 
Moose Jaw where elms are central to the beauty of each city. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need a comprehensive program to 
prevent Dutch elm disease in this province, particularly by 
pruning dead wood on elms so that the Dutch elm disease can’t 
establish itself. And we’ve made an important start to achieving 
this with an increase of $200,000 to fighting Dutch elm disease 
in this year’s budget. But we will need to do much more if we 
want to win the fight. 
 
Another important environmental and job creation investment 
we need to make, is in the area of energy conservation and 
renewable energy development. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember when the Tory government of 
Grant Devine destroyed the office of energy conservation we 
had in this province. And I am determined to see it rebuilt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And this time I also want to see our government move into 
green energy technologies with investments in wind power, 
solar heating, photovoltaics, and fuel cell technology . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Kindersley 
says uranium mining. 
 
And I say to the member of Kindersley, that my position in this 
House continues to be the same as it has always been. I don’t 
believe that the government should be generating revenue from 
uranium mining. I don’t want to see new uranium mines 
established in this province. Clearly my view is not a majority 
view in the government, and I accept that. But my view has not 
changed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is it? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — My view is that . . . The member from 
Kindersley says what is my view? And my view is that uranium 
mining . . . there should be no new uranium mines built in this 
province. 
 
That is my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, members opposite want to know why, and I 
say to them two very simple reasons. 
 
We have not solved the problem of disposing of high-level 
radioactive waste in the world; we have not solved that 
problem, and until we do, it makes no sense to mine more 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

uranium and contribute to more high-level radioactive waste 
which future generations will struggle to dispose of. 
 
And I’ll also say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I oppose an expansion 
of uranium mining very simply because there’s a 
well-established connection between the export of uranium and 
nuclear reactors and the spread of nuclear weapons technology, 
nuclear weapons proliferation. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is 
clearly very interested at what I have to say. And he’s saying, 
well, where do I stand on gambling. And I want to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition that I am not a supporter of video 
lottery terminals. I want to go clearly on record as saying that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This form of gambling in my judgment 
takes a disproportionate amount of money out of the pockets of 
the poor, promotes bad values, and results in unfortunate 
addictions. And I hope we will find a way as a government of 
phasing out video lottery terminals from our communities. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to be part of a 
government that allows me to express my views clearly, to 
lobby for those views in caucus, and not to limit my right to 
expression in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll see 
whether members opposite uphold that same right, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — we’ll see if they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of wanting to 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
members opposite are anxious to hear more from me — from 
their many questions — but I don’t want to continue any 
further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to respect the right of other 
members of this House to get into this debate. So I just want to 
close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying that I want to return to the 
budget and say that what the Minister of Finance has brought 
down is a budget that we can all be proud of. 
 
A $43 million net tax cut. A balanced budget, the seventh 
balanced budget in a row. Steady reduction in our debt — 
almost $4 billion knocked off the provincial debt. Steady 
improvements in public services, with education, health care, 
post-secondary education, and the environment all receiving 
funding increases well above the rate of inflation. 
 
Strong support for the farm community in this budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And all this done at a time of record low 
government revenues from the agricultural sector of our 
economy. Specifically the grain and oilseed sectors, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now to put together this kind of a budget in the face of that 
shortcoming in revenues from the agricultural sector, is a very 
significant accomplishment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 
one that will be recognized as very positive by all the residents 
of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to support the main 
motion and I will be opposing the amendment. Thank you so 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to stand in the House today and reply to 
the budget on behalf of the people of Redberry Lake. 
 
I’d like to begin by reading a number of responses to the budget 
by citizens of Saskatchewan. Star Phoenix: 
 

Businesspeople ranging from auto body shop owners to 
antique dealers, expressed outrage that formerly exempt 
goods and services are now taxable. 
 
“It’s going to hurt the auto body business quite a bit,” said 
Mike Oleksyn, owner of Antique Auto Body in Saskatoon. 
“People are already not fixing most of their cars because 
they have a $700 deductible.” 
 
Auto body shops will now have to charge the PST on 
labour and used and reconditioned parts. Because the GST 
is already charged on these goods and services, body shops 
will be charging 13 per cent tax on their bills. 
 
Oleksyn said many shops, particularly small ones such as 
his, do not even make a 13 per cent profit. Essentially, he 
believes the government is robbing Peter to pay Paul by 
charging more PST while reducing personal income tax. 

 
“I think I’m shutting down,” Oleksyn said in frustration. 
 

Can you believe that — he thinks he’s going to shut his 
business down. 
 

Rob Hill, owner of Great West Warehouse, says it’s going 
to be difficult tallying up receipts when people buy more 
than one item at his store. 
 
Because the first $300 of every used piece of furniture and 
appliance is tax-exempt. The cashier will have to assess the 
6 per cent PST on the amount above $300 such as taxing 
$90 of a $390 purchase. 
 
“You have to go through that on every item,” Hill said. 
“Once again, we’re doing the government’s paperwork.” 
 

Brian Hosaluk, antique store owner: 
 

“I’m totally, totally furious . . . I just can’t believe they’d 
implement anything of that . . . nature.” 
 
“What else are they going to do to drive everyone away 
from this province?” 

 
Tax: home buyers to pay more. 

 
Ron Shule, operation manager at Village Auto Sales, said 
the PST expansion will mainly affect low-income 
customers. 

 
Larry Stewart, broker and manager of a Saskatoon Re/Max 
Realty office, said charging PST on real estate fees will 
also affect first-time home buyers who are already 
scrambling to amass legal and other fees. 

 
“When the GST was in place, that put some hardship on. 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

Now they slap on PST — it’s just going to eliminate a lot 
of first-time home buyers.” 
 
First-time buyers usually buy homes ranging up to 
$100,000. At the upper end, buyers will be paying $450 
more than they are now on top of the $500 in GST, said 
Stewart. 
 
Ron Deutscher, advertising director of The StarPhoenix, 
said the advertising tax will affect media outlets, 
advertising agencies, and their customers. 
 
“Right now, advertisers have allocated so much of their 
advertising budget, so where is the six per cent going to 
come from? It’s going to come back in cutbacks 
someplace.” 
 
They’ll either (come back on their advertising or) cut back 
in their advertising or in their creative services, agency 
work, stuff like that. That’s bad for the (whole) economy 
as a whole.” 

 
View on the street of the expanded PST. 

 
Betty in Saskatoon: 
 

“It really is getting out of hand with all these new taxes. 
There are far too many taxes and no one can afford to buy 
things anymore. I can’t believe that they are taxing things 
like pet food and bedding plants. It really is a shame.” 

 
Kathy from Saskatoon: 
 

“I think the expansion of the PST is unnecessary and very 
harmful. Lowering income taxes is not good enough. It’s 
getting so one parent can no longer stay at home because 
the cost of everything is so great. Families are the real ones 
that suffer because of this. The change to the tax is really 
unacceptable.” 

 
Dwight Percy who does commentary with CJWW radio: 
 

No rhyme or reason to PST lists. The utter confusion that 
reigns today in our marketplace about the application of 
the provincial sales tax is the final piece of evidence that 
this piecemeal sales tax policy is fundamentally flawed and 
needs to be completely revamped. A whole host of goods 
and services not previously taxed whereas, of Thursday 
morning subject to PST. As you look through the list of 
what’s in and what’s out, you quickly realize one thing — 
this makes no sense whatsoever. 
 

Now this problem isn’t new. There should be a warning sign on 
the GST (goods and services tax)and PST legislation that reads: 
don’t look for logic. But that still can’t rationalize the complete 
utter mess that the sales tax system has become, because in the 
future it’s going to become worse not better. 
 
While the Minister of Finance on budget day spoke of a historic 
tax cut, what did the people of Redberry Lake and the people of 
Saskatchewan get? They got a historic tax increase, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes, a tax increase. This province is in desperate need 
of a vibrant, growing economy, desperate need to be in a 

position to compete not only with Alberta, who doesn’t have a 
PST at all, but also compete in a global economy. 
 
Let’s take a closer look at the NDP’s incredible vanishing tax 
cut. Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s so-called historic tax cut will save 
taxpayers virtually nothing this year. When the recent SaskTel 
and SaskEnergy rate hikes are taken into account, when the 
smoke clears, Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to realize 
they’ve been burned by this NDP government one more time. 
 
Let’s look at an example of a family with $25,000 total income. 
This year that family will save a total of $121 in taxes, a total of 
$10 a month. But when we subtract the $3 a month increase in 
their SaskTel bill and the $5 a month increase in the 
SaskEnergy bill, that family saves a grand total of $2 a month 
— $2 a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In total, the NDP’s incredible vanishing tax cut reads like this: 
total tax cut for this year, 43.7 million; SaskEnergy rate hike, 
31.2 million; SaskTel rate hike, 9 million; total utility rate 
hikes, 41.2 million. Tax cuts, gone. 
 
During the election campaign, the Saskatchewan Party’s 
election platform The Way Up laid out a common sense plan for 
the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. Our bold new election 
platform designed to create a brighter future for Saskatchewan 
— the Saskatchewan Party offered a realistic alternative. We 
believed then as we do now that Saskatchewan farmers will do 
a better job of spending their hard-earned money better than the 
government will every time. 
 
Saskatchewan still shoulders one of the heaviest tax burdens in 
Canada. Every month almost half of Saskatchewan families’ 
paycheques goes to pay their taxes. 
 
On election night the Saskatchewan people voted for lower 
taxes. On budget day, what did they get, Mr. Speaker? They got 
a tax increase with a promise of a tax reduction next year, 
maybe the year after that — who knows? 
 
Effective midnight budget night, the PST was expanded to 
apply to repair services, real estate fees, non-prescription drugs, 
maintenance contracts, bedding plants, pet food, dry cleaning, 
vet fees, security investigation services, credit bureau and 
collection services, telephone answering services. And on July 
1st, Mr. Speaker, the PST will be added to include professional 
services including legal, accounting, architectural and 
engineering services, building services, advertising services, 
and employment services. Yes, some tax cut. 
 
(1600) 
 
In Agriculture, the department was cut by $50 million; and a bit 
of good news, property rebate of $25 million per year over two 
years. Yes, a bit of good news until along comes the Minister of 
Education. Saturday April 1, StarPhoenix headline: “No cash? 
Hike the mill rate.” I quote the Minister of Education: “School 
divisions can raise mill rates if they’re having trouble meeting 
their budgets this year . . .” 
 
The article goes on: 
 

Responding to concerns from the Saskatchewan School 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Trustees Association (SSTA) that local boards will be 
forced to close schools and cut staff, Melenchuk said 
boards can look at raising local taxes to make up any 
shortfall. 
 

It goes on to read: 
 

Raising mill rates is a complete reversal from the promises 
Melenchuk made during the election campaign last fall, 
where he promised to increase the provincial share of 
education costs to 45 per cent from 40 (per cent). 

 
Well we can mark another Liberal campaign promise down to 
political rhetoric. 
 
One has to wonder where were the Liberal-NDP coalition this 
winter. Over the past few months there was tax revolt meeting 
after tax revolt meeting in the constituency of Redberry Lake 
alone which I am very proud to represent. I have attended more 
than a dozen tax revolt meetings and at every meeting the 
ratepayers have voted in overwhelming numbers to withhold 
their property taxes. 
 
The ratepayers at meeting after meeting were concerned if they 
actually withheld their taxes, what affect it would have on their 
services, and their schools, and RMs. But people wanted to send 
a message — yes send a message to the government that the 
education portion of the property tax was too high, much too 
high. Well once again the government did not listen. With one 
hand they put money in the property taxpayer’s pocket, and 
with the other hand they took the money out of the property 
taxpayer’s pocket. 
 
The Highways budget, Mr. Speaker, has finally reached the 
government’s commitment made many years ago. I hope for the 
good of the province and the good of the residents of Redberry 
Lake that it’s not too late. 
 
I would like to tell the House of a situation that has developed 
in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, Highway No. 40 running from 
Hafford to Blaine Lake has become virtually impassable. A 
number of trucks and trailers have been damaged driving down 
this stretch of highway due to the size and number of potholes. 
People are changing their patterns of business because of the 
condition of this highway. Residents on the west side of the 
potholes are shopping and delivering produce only to the 
Battlefords, and residents living on the east side of the potholes 
are now only travelling to Prince Albert or Saskatoon. 
 
In this world of global markets and the need for value-added 
products where marketing decisions can change with the push 
of a button to anywhere in the world, this Liberal-NDP 
government can’t even ensure that people that live along 
Highway No. 40 have the option of trading anywhere in 
Saskatchewan, let alone anywhere in the world. 
 
It is incredible, Mr. Speaker, that with the budget address we 
are told that the liquor and gaming fund now has 695 million in 
it. Where was the government when the farm leaders and farm 
community of Saskatchewan looking for 300 million of that 
fund to pry another billion out of the federal government for 
rural Saskatchewan and the agriculture community. 
 

And now to find out that the renamed Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
or fancy slush fund, now has 405 million in it, leaving a big 
question mark. Where did the difference of 695 million in the 
liquor and gaming fund and the 405 in the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund go? The sum of $290 million effectively disappeared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care department has had its spending 
essentially frozen in this budget, and again we are asked to wait 
and see what the federal government is going to do about it. The 
people of Redberry Lake are asking a different question. 
 
On their behalf I have written the Minister of Health. In this 
letter I have passed on the concerns — concerns that arise from 
the closure of the Carrot River Hospital, the uncertainty over 
the Shellbrook Hospital, and with the recent hiring of Ms. 
Louise Simard as CEO of SAHO, the architect of the 
present-day health boards, a person that closed 52 hospitals — 
some might say Ms. Simard is the mother of hospital closures 
— the people of Redberry Lake are asking: will the Health 
minister give a commitment that the Hafford hospital will not 
be closed and converted to a primary health centre or wellness 
centre this . . . or wellness centre. I await the minister’s reply. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has pitted urban against rural, 
farmer against non-farmer, old against young, union worker 
against non-union worker, doctor against nurse, nurse against 
nurse, and incredibly now has pitted man against the animals. 
 
It has come to my attention that a man had a sick dog. He 
brought the dog to the small animal clinic at the University of 
Saskatchewan. The staff checked the dog over and could not 
find out what was wrong with the dog. The vet suggested that 
they keep the dog overnight. The vet would take the dog to an 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) unit and have the dog 
scanned. The cost would be $750. 
 
The owner of the dog was outraged. He said his wife has been 
on a six-month waiting list for the use of the MRI. Further 
investigations confirmed that animals are usually in the human 
MRI two to three times a week, Mr. Speaker. Talk about a 
two-tier medical system. If a person has the money, they can go 
to North Dakota or Alberta for faster and better health care or, if 
you happen to be Puff or Spot or for that matter Scotty, and 
receive better health care than Dick or Jane can in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to touch on my critic area, labour, and particular, 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement). Mr. 
Speaker, the long-awaited cancellation of the CCTA has not 
taken place but will be extended to allow for an effective 
transition under the amended Act. Guidelines for the tendering 
of all government construction projects will also be adopted. 
All of these elaborate rules and regulations are to be put in place 
to, I quote: “reducing the tensions within the industry and 
having a level playing field in which to operate.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what tensions? The construction industry 
hasn’t had a strike since the late 1970s. And as far as a level 
playing field, we live in a global economy where countries 
compete with each other, industries compete with each other, 
and businesses compete with each other. We must give our 
homegrown companies — both union and non-union companies 
— the right to bid on all jobs in Saskatchewan, whether they are 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

government or non-government contracts. The taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan cannot afford to pay an extra 20 to 30 per cent 
per construction job just to keep peace between the NDP Party 
and a few union leaders and their financial support for the NDP 
Party. Let’s hope the son of CCTA is not worse than the CCTA 
itself. 
 
I’d like to read some comments from the Leader-Post: 
 

Construction companies threatening to leave province. 
 

Some construction companies are threatening to leave the 
province if the government follows through on proposed 
amendments to the Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Act . . . 
 
The Saskatchewan Construction Association, which 
represents both unionized and non-unionized contractors, 
is upset with the minister’s response to the industry’s 
concern about the proposed legislation. 
 
“We didn’t get a good hearing from Crofford.” said Brian 
Barber, vice-president of Dominion Construction Co. in 
Regina, following a meeting with Crofford Tuesday. 
 
The amendments to the 1992 legislation would eliminate 
‘grandfather’ provisions under the controversial . . . 
(CCTA) that allowed firms to operate double breasted. 
 
Manley McLachlan, the association’s executive director, 
said the amendments proposed by Crofford’s department 
would effectively impose unionization on employees of 
non-union construction firms. 
 
“She didn’t seem to be interested in letting people 
determine their own status,” McLaughlin said. 
 
The amendment would also prevent contractors from 
hiring non-unionized subcontractors. “It’s going to be 
severely limiting the opportunities for non-union trades.” 
 
McLachlan added, the amendments are supposed to ease 
“tensions” in the construction industry, despite the fact the 
industry has had virtually no strikes or lock-outs for 18 
years. “What problems are they trying to fix? The industry 
is doing very well.” 

 
I’d like to also read a letter from a journeyman with Christian 
Living in Saskatchewan: 
 

I am writing to express my disgust and frustration 
regarding the NDP government and their undemocratic 
plans to impose unionization of the construction industry 
. . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We’ve had interesting debate 
today on a fairly wide-ranging number of issues. I just wish to 
remind all hon. members that the matter before the Legislative 
Assembly is the budget for the year 2000 and 2001. And I’m 
trusting . . . 
 
Order. Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. I of course am 
going to be providing the hon. member an opportunity to tie his 

comments into the budget. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My comments concerning the CCTA I think 
reflect on the budget. When the government Crown 
corporations have to pay an extra 20 to 30 per cent and they 
increase the utility rates to the people of Saskatchewan, I 
believe that’s part of the increased cost of taxation in this 
province. I know it not only affects the taxpayer in particular, it 
affects the members of the construction industry also. 
 
I would just like to read one quick comment from a construction 
worker who phoned me, or contacted me, who was concerned 
with the CCTA legislation and how it reflects on the economy 
of Saskatchewan. It goes on to read: 
 

I seriously hope that you consider recent proposals to 
replace the CCTA with legislation changes to construction 
workers in this province will not be positive. The effect on 
the economy, Mr. Speaker, of this province will be that 
raised construction costs will make it less inviting for 
people to live and build here. 

 
I am wondering why I am not given a chance to vote if I 
want to be unionized. Do I live in a communist country? 
Why is my government sneaking this proposal to the 
House? Maybe they know the opposition to these proposals 
will be enormous. 

 
My livelihood depends on your decision and I may be 
forced to relocate in a different province to find a 
provincial government that will support me. 

 
I think it’s fundamental to this province and to the budget 
that when we bring in laws that cost our Crown 
corporations more money and the Crown corporations pass 
those utility rates onto the taxpayers, and also the potential 
loss of jobs and the loss of taxpayers to this province. 
 

And I believe that this gentlemen is right on course. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has broken its promise in the last 
election of reducing income tax without expanding the PST. 
The NDP also said they could run the province on $4.5 billion a 
few years ago, this budget is 6.4 billion. 
 
The budget does not meet expectations or requirements and the 
people of Saskatchewan are concerned about its sustainability, 
Mr. Speaker. This budget can be best summed up by the actions 
of friends of mine. 
 
They are medium-sized farmers, both husband and wife have 
off-farm jobs. They are selling their farm and buying a small 
business in Alberta. Yes, they waited until this budget came 
down and when they heard the budget they decided to sell their 
farm and buy a small business in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My friends don’t support this budget, my constituents in 
Redberry Lake don’t support this budget, and I will not be 
supporting this budget. But I will be supporting the amendment 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

moved by the member from Rosetown-Biggar and the Leader of 
the Official Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great, great 
pleasure for me to enter into this budget debate. 
 
But before I do so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a couple 
of guests who have joined us in the west gallery, Don Hallam, 
who is my constituency assistant and his young friend that has 
joined him here today. Dion is a student in the Imperial School 
and also had the opportunity to be . . . having my pleasure of 
entering the school and visiting with a class here a few weeks 
ago. 
 
So I’d ask all the members to offer our guests a warm welcome. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, it is truly a pleasure for me to 
have the opportunity to enter into this budget debate on behalf 
of the constituents of Regina Northeast. And this is truly a 
historic budget, Mr. Speaker. It is a budget that I take great 
pride in being able to participate in. It is a budget that is bold, 
thoughtful, forward looking, and visionary. And I want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate our Minister of Finance on 
putting together such a great budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Harper: — I believe that any time that you have the 
opportunity to enter into a debate on a budget that outlines 
growth and opportunity is something very, very positive and 
something I’m very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does what I think budgets should do. It 
outlines a very positive vision of the future. It outlines a very 
positive vision for Saskatchewan’s future — a future where 
people can live in this province, grow in this province, prosper 
in this province, retire in this province, and enjoy the bonds of 
family and community. 
 
It’s also a budget that outlines that available in this province 
will always be the effective public service that people have 
grown to get used to in this province, and enhance each 
person’s ability to live here with meaningful existence. 
 
It’s also, Mr. Speaker, a budget that outlines opportunity for our 
young. After all, the youth are our future, the youth of today are 
the leaders of tomorrow, and we want to make sure we equip 
them with the best possible tools to meet the challenges of the 
changing times. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that allows us to enter into 
the new millennium with change and opportunity. The key 
areas of plan of growth and opportunity are good fiscal 
responsibility and good government, sustainable and effective 
health care, an economy that’s growing with jobs and taxation 
reforms. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have always enjoyed the budgetary process 
that government goes through as it develops the budget. I’ve 
always enjoyed that process because to me that personally is a 
very exciting time. It’s a time when members of the government 
get to discuss ideas, get an interchange of thoughts. 
 
And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, it was even more exciting and 
more interesting because of our coalition makeup. And during 
the process of deliberation, the process of debate, both at the 
caucus level and the committee level, I found that very, very 
interesting. Because as that debate developed and went on, we 
had some very good ideas put forward by NDP members, and 
those ideas were used. We had good ideas put forward by our 
Liberal coalition partners and those good ideas were used. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to assure you that if the 
Saskatchewan Party ever had a good idea, we’d use it too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of this government stands alone. 
There’s no question about that. The record of good fiscal 
management, good fiscal responsibility, and good government. 
That’s clearly indicated. And what is really historic, and that is 
seven consecutive balanced budgets. That, Mr. Speaker, we all 
have to be very proud of. 
 
And I, Mr. Speaker, as a member of the government, will take 
my fair share of credit for that. But I also want to acknowledge 
that much of the credit goes to the Saskatchewan people who 
hung in there with us through the tough times after the 
devastating mess that we inherited in 1991. A government that 
left, a Conservative government that left this province on the 
brink of bankruptcy. Some $14.7 billion in debt. And to have 
taken this province and whipped that economy with that debt 
load and have brought it to the point it is today is truly a credit 
to this government, but is truly a credit to all people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reduced Saskatchewan’s debt from 
almost 70 per cent of the gross national product to 38 per cent 
today, and continuing to fall to 31 per cent by the year 2004. 
 
If that isn’t sound fiscal management, I don’t know what is. 
What this demonstrates is good solid confidence in our 
economy, the ability to manage things in this province through 
good times and bad. 
 
We’re doing this, Mr. Speaker, in light of some of the worst 
times in our agricultural economy since the 1930s. But still we 
have been able to grow the economy of Saskatchewan at a rate 
of over 2 per cent per year since 1992. 
 
And that clearly reflects in what the bond companies think of 
the job that we’ve done here in Saskatchewan. It clearly is 
indicated by the fact that we have a straight A credit rating with 
all the bond companies in Canada. That, we can be very, very 
proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — The responsibility for a balanced approach and 
support for long-term period sustainable economy and growth 
since the 1970s. We have, Mr. Speaker, despite the worst times 
in agriculture, we have the strongest economy that we’ve 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

experienced since the ’70s. Mr. Speaker, good government is 
something every citizen in a democracy expects and deserves. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are certain rules that any 
government of any particular stripe should follow. And I think, 
I think Tommy Douglas put it the best when he said that the 
true measure of the wealth of any country is not in how much 
gold or silver it may have, but rather on how it looks after the 
less fortunate in our community. And that, Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to say that is what this budget does. 
 
This budget brings forward continued increased investment in 
our health care system. Mr. Speaker, this year we are going to 
be increasing the base funding for health care by $63 million. 
An additional transition fund of $150 million will be added to 
the health care services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have sat in this House and listened to the 
opposition members wail away and suggest that we have a 
dilapidated, out-of-date health care system. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to draw to their attention a couple of situations 
which I have had a little bit of personal experience at. 
 
In 1992 when we — I mean my wife and I — were living on a 
farm just north of Norquay, Saskatchewan, my wife suffered a 
heart attack. And the only place that she could receive proper 
medical attention at that time was Yorkton, where she could 
receive the latest medicine that would reduce the effect her 
heart attack would have on her heart and reduce the amount of 
damage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to relate to you a story about 
Mrs. Dahlin at Norquay. She had her heart attack in October. 
Her husband rushed her to the health care clinic there in 
Norquay, where today she received that very same treatment, 
that very same medicine, reducing the time to receive that 
treatment by the time and distance it takes to travel from 
Norquay to Yorkton — some one hour. Anybody in the medical 
field will tell you that the sooner a patient receives treatment 
after a trauma, the better the chances are of that patient’s 
recovery. 
 
It gives me a great deal of pride to say that we have been able to 
expand the services in rural Saskatchewan so that people all 
over this province have real good emergency service cares at 
their local community and at their local health centres. And that 
gives me a great deal of pride, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say that I’ve 
heard many, many times from the opposition benches how 
dilapidated our health care system is; and how people are being 
neglected, and so on and so forth; and how they spend hours 
and hours, if not days and days and months and months, waiting 
for services. 
 
Well on February 20, Mr. Speaker, at about 11:30 in the 
morning, Sophie Burym who lives in Sturgis was found by her 
daughter, passed out on her living room floor suffering from a 
heart attack and a stroke. 
 
The daughter immediately called the Preeceville ambulance, 
which picked her up from her house — picked Sophie up from 
her house — transported her to Preeceville where she was 

stabilized, then transported to the Pasqua Hospital here in 
Regina. And by 4:30 that afternoon she was in intensive care 
receiving the services she required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a pretty good record considering that 
on a normal driving speed Preeceville is at least three and a half 
hours non-stop from Regina. I’m pleased to report, Mr. 
Speaker, that Sophie is on her way to a full recovery and soon 
on her way back to full, independent living. And I think that’s a 
good news health story. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker, has been done, has been done by the 
provincial government. When we take into account that in 1967 
when medicare was made a national program by the federal 
government of the day, there was a commitment by the federal 
government that they would fund 50 per cent of health care 
costs. That means, Mr. Speaker, that they would fund 50 per 
cent of every health care dollar spent here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it saddens me to report, Mr. Speaker, that today the federal 
government’s responsibility has only been 13 per cent of every 
dollar spent here. That means, Mr. Speaker, that the province, 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the people of this great province 
have been backfilling the difference. 
 
I think they’ve done a tremendous job. I think they deserve a lot 
of credit for the quality health care system we have here in 
Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the best health care system 
anywhere in Canada is right here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And that is, Mr. Speaker, as a result of 
continued support to health care system from this government. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we are spending over . . . in the last two 
years we have increased health care spending by over 17 per 
cent, and I think that’s something we can all be very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we grow the economy and at the same time we 
have a responsibility to those in our economy and in our society 
who are less fortunate. I’m pleased to see that this budget 
addresses that. 
 
And I’m proud to report as a part of the budget that today we 
have 6,000 less people on social services than we had five years 
ago. And, Mr. Speaker, that is positive. We’re giving a hand up 
to those people in our society, unlike the members of the Tory 
Party opposite. We’re not giving them the back of our hand as 
they would do. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, we also have a claim to Saskatchewan 
Action Plan for Children which plays a key role ensuring that 
Saskatchewan people and families have the support they need to 
develop, to live in dignity and independence. 
 
We have supplied support to children and families most in need 
through the services of nutrition programs, school allowances, 
infant care for teen mothers, early childhood intervention, and 
social housing. Very positive, personal, human things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as we all know, our youth are facing increasing costs in 
education and increasing need for training beyond the high 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

school years. I remember, Mr. Speaker — and this may date me 
a little bit — but when I graduated from high school some years 
back, with a grade 12, it was quite acceptable at that time to go 
out and get a reasonable, quality-paying job with a grade 12 
education. 
 
But as the world has changed, and I think over the long haul, 
Mr. Speaker, for the better, that no longer is the case. Today 
grade 12 simply does not give you the qualifications to meet the 
requirements of today’s workplace. So there is a desperate need 
to put into place a vehicle to encourage those of our young 
youth to seek education beyond grade 12 in a post-secondary 
field of their choice. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has outlined a very clear road to achieve that. 
 
Speaking of roads, Mr. Speaker, of course that brings me to our 
highway system — the highway system in which we are going 
to be spending $250 million this year in our budget. The largest 
expenditure ever on Highways and Transportation in this 
province. Good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I should probably break now. I 
should probably apologize to you. I know that the opposition 
members really get upset when they’re referred to as Tories and 
I have a tendency to slip into that every once in a while, Mr. 
Speaker. And that isn’t their name. Their name is the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And I suppose maybe the reason I have this problem is that 
every time I think of the Saskatchewan Party, I can’t help but 
think of the old car I drive. I drive an old ’85 Ford car, Mr. 
Speaker, and to be quite honest with you, that car of mine needs 
a tune-up. It’s not running too good. It needs a muffler and it 
has over 200,000 kilometres on it, and quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, it needs a paint job. And I know that if I took that car 
to Elite Auto Body on Henderson Road, they would do an 
excellent, excellent job of painting it. And I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that that car would come out of the body shop shining, bright, 
and looking as good as new. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it 
would still need a tune-up, it would still need a muffler, and it 
would still have 200,000 kilometres on it. 
 
(1630) 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is like the Saskatchewan Party. They 
have a new paint job, but when I sit in this House and I listen, 
it’s the same old Tory rhetoric, the same old Tory policies, the 
same old Tory suggestions; and if they were ever in 
government, Mr. Speaker, it would be the same old Tory results 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also sets up a Centenary Capital Fund 
of $30 million. Through the fund we will be building a bridge to 
a new economy. We will do that with $5 million a year more 
for municipal infrastructure; $5 million a year more for 
transportation and highways; $5 million a year more for capital 
investments for the universities and SIAST and regional 
colleges; $5 million more for school capital projects; $5 million 
more for social housing; $5 million more to upgrade our parks 
and heritage properties. Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t good news 
then please tell me what is. 

Mr. Speaker, we have outlined in . . . or I should say the 
Finance minister has outlined in the budget speech, A Plan for 
Growth and Opportunity, the need for a new tax system — a tax 
system that’s competitive, fair, and simple. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity the last couple of 
mornings to spend in my constituency office and field some 
calls and return some calls that had come in while I was out of 
the office. And for the most part those calls that I was getting, 
people were asking me why did we have to change the taxation 
system to make it competitive, fair. So I explained the situation 
around it and the circumstances we were facing in this province. 
 
But after about the fifth or sixth call that asked me why we had 
changed the taxation system or the need to a new taxation 
system that was competitive and fair, I asked them why nobody 
asked me about the simplistic part of it. And quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, the answer was that they understood why we had to 
make our taxation system simple. It was so the members from 
the opposition could understand it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is easy, it is easy for the opposition members to 
suggest that we should be spending money left, right, and 
centre. And I believe our Finance minister today indicated that 
their comments so far have added up to well in excess of a 
billion dollars over budget. Same old Tory policies of the past. 
 
But that’s not good fiscal management. That’s not what brought 
Saskatchewan to where it is today. What brought Saskatchewan 
to where it is today is the ability to manage the funds of this 
province properly, in the best interest of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is demonstrated 
very, very clearly in our budget. 
 
And what is also demonstrated here, I think, is the fact that 
through the price Saskatchewan people have paid to deal with 
the Tory debt that we inherited in 1991, and a sophisticated, 
methodical, thoughtful plan of addressing that debt, maintaining 
the growth of this province, we are able now to hand back to 
Saskatchewan people some very positive things. 
 
Such as effective January 1 of the year 2001, Saskatchewan will 
eliminate the flat tax. Saskatchewan will eliminate the debt 
reduction surtax and the high income surtax. They will all be 
gone, Mr. Speaker. That is going to put more money in the 
pockets of the people of Saskatchewan and not put at risk the 
future of this province, their future in this province and that of 
their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is certainly I think good news in our budget 
in regards to the taxation system having now only . . . we will 
have only three categories: 11 per cent on taxable income of up 
to 35,000; 13 per cent on taxable income over 35,000 and up to 
100,000; and 15 per cent taxable income over 100,000. These 
rates will be phased in over three years and then when fully 
implemented, over 70 per cent of Saskatchewan taxpayers will 
be paying income tax at the same rate as Alberta people are. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a positive step forward. 
 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

The base tax credit will increase to $8,000. The spousal, or 
equivalent to spousal credit, will also increase to $8,000. The 
child tax credit of $2,500 per independent children — pardon 
me — dependent children, and a senior supplement of $1,000, 
Mr. Speaker, all of this put together will mean 55,000 
low-income earners in Saskatchewan will come off the income 
tax rolls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be able to stand in this House 
and say that I’m a small part of that. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — The fundamental message here, Mr. Speaker, is 
that every taxpayer will pay less and that has to be good news to 
everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And for low-income people, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of the need to expand the PST, we have implemented a 
sales tax rebate program but for people under $10,000 — a 
family with an earned income of under $10,000 — will be able 
to receive $264 a year rebate. Mr. Speaker, this family in 
question would have to spend over $4,100 on taxable items in 
order to break even on that. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, there 
will be a net gain in income for those in our society who have a 
family income, an earned family income, of less than $10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear chirping from the opposition benches and I 
just wanted to share with you and my opposition colleagues that 
a while back here I had the opportunity to take part in a 
Commonwealth parliamentary tour to Washington, DC (District 
of Columbia) and Annapolis, Maryland. 
 
And on that tour I was fortunate enough to be joined by the 
member from Swift Current and his lovely wife Tami. And I 
think overall we had a great time because we had a great group 
we met with. We met with three elected individuals from New 
Brunswick and two from Quebec. 
 
And as well as the tour itself and the information, and the 
shared information with our United States colleagues, I think I 
enjoyed as much the opportunity to socialize with my 
colleagues from Canada here. 
 
And in our discussions . . . And we compared our legislatures, 
we compared the operations of government and so on, and one 
of the questions raised there in our little get-together one 
evening was if any of the legislatures in Saskatchewan here 
have a translation service. 
 
And I thought of course Quebec would. But I find out that in 
the Quebec legislature there has no translation services. 
Therefore, most of the members . . . in fact all the members 
predominately speak French. 
 
And I thought, you know, Mr. Speaker, it might be something 
that we would want to consider here in Saskatchewan in this 
legislature. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if we had a translation service 
here we on the government side might be able to understand 
what the opposition is saying. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity on Saturday 
last, before the rains came and chased me in, I had the 
opportunity to spend about four and a half hours out visiting 
constituents in my constituency. And I did this I suppose maybe 
a bit for a selfish reason — I wanted to say what they had to say 
as far as feedback to the budget was concerned. 
 
And I found, Mr. Speaker, that at that time of the day — and on 
a Saturday is a good time to call because you get the vast 
majority of people home — I was really, really pleased with the 
response that I was getting at the doorstep. Overwhelming, 
people were giving us two thumbs-up positive response on our 
budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I always enjoy getting 
out in my constituency and talking to people because you learn 
a lot. You learn what people are thinking; you learn some of 
their ideas; you learn a whole bunch of things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to close in sharing a little story 
with you that I ran into on Saturday. And I knocked on the door 
of a gentleman who welcomed me quite warmly in fact. We had 
a nice little chat. 
 
And then he says to me, he says, Ron, he says, do you know the 
difference between the Saskatchewan Party and a car battery? 
And I says, no, Mr. Speaker, sir, I certainly do not know the 
difference between the Saskatchewan Party and a car battery. 
He turned to me and he said a car battery has a positive side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure, on behalf of the constituents of Regina Northeast, they 
have requested, Mr. Speaker, that I extend my support in this 
legislature for the budget and against the amendment. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know if I can really say it’s a pleasure to stand in this Assembly 
to speak to this budget at this time. But certainly I consider it an 
honour to stand and represent the constituents of Moosomin in 
the Assembly and just address some of the concerns that we 
have with the provincial budget that was just brought down in 
this Assembly about four days ago. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, as we review the budget and we 
listen to the comments from the members opposite, we listen to 
the rhetoric coming from the Minister of Finance in telling the 
people of Saskatchewan how pleased they should be with the 
budget that’s been brought down. And yet, as you begin to 
dissect the budget, Mr. Speaker, and as my colleagues and I 
have been hearing over the past number of days, we’re finding 
that this budget isn’t all that it’s made out to be. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, as a Saskatchewan Party member and the 
MLA for Moosomin and one of the founding members of the 
Saskatchewan Party, we’re certainly pleased at least that this 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

government has in some ways listened to a lot of the proposals 
the Saskatchewan Party put forward. 
 
Now the government talks very strongly about tax reduction, 
and it brags about the fact that over the next few years the 
people of Saskatchewan will eventually see a net tax reduction 
and they’ll see actually some money in their pockets at the end 
of the day. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about that tax reduction, my 
colleagues and I take great pride in the fact that for the last two 
years — since the inception of the Saskatchewan Party — we 
have talked about the need for real tax reduction. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I say real tax reduction. Because as you look at the 
budget in front of us today and the budget that we’re currently 
debating, and you look at what the government has proposed 
and what the government is actually taking from people, behind 
their backs, there is no real net tax reduction. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what I find very interesting too — as we 
listen to this current government talking about their taxes, 
talking about the leadership — it’s interesting how they 
continue to go back to the former government of Grant Devine. 
And in many cases they continue to espouse the views of Grant 
Devine, but they neglect to tell us the number of benefits that 
they have received as a result of initiatives through the 1980s. 
 
They forget to tell us about the fact that they had the privilege 
of selling off assets and shares in a number of enterprises; 
actually netted $1.3 billion for the coffers of this treasury so 
that this minister could, indeed, bring forward what he 
considers a positive budget. 
 
They neglect to tell you as well — and they talk about the debt 
and they talk about the overall debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan — but they conveniently neglect to tell us about 
the debt that Mr. Blakeney started. The debt that Mr. Blakeney 
left us with. They continue to forget to tell us about the debt 
that the hon. member, the Premier of this province, already has 
passed on to the people of Saskatchewan since he was elected in 
1991. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that they totally don’t want 
to discuss is the unfunded pension liability, which since 1991 
has grown by over $1 billion. Mr. Speaker, eventually 
somebody’s going to be left holding the bag when people need, 
or actually require, and need to have their pensions covered, 
someone’s going to be left holding the bag. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the party that’s 
going to be left holding the bag is the Saskatchewan Party. 
They’re going to have to answer for the fact that that unfunded 
liability is now being drawn on and someone has to put the 
money into it. 
 
Just as Grant Devine had to face in 1982 with the demise of the 
Investors . . . not the Investors Group, but there was a group 
investment portfolio in this province that went under. And the 
only reason that it was bailed out was because of the unfunded 
liability. Pioneer Trust, that’s correct, Pioneer Trust. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, so I find it interesting, I find it very 
interesting that the members opposite continue to criticize, and 

like to criticize, but at the same time they’re sure grateful for a 
lot of the economic development and activity that they have 
taken advantage of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think about . . . we look at the budget, we talk 
about economic development in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, but one of the best and the 
loudly proclaimed opportunities that we may have had in the 
province of Saskatchewan was in the area of uranium 
development. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just recently a number of my colleagues and 
I had the privilege of touring the mines of McArthur River and 
McClean Lake. And I can tell you the employees and the 
management of those two mines think very highly of what 
they’re doing. And they’re very conscientious of the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, they’re very conscientious of 
protecting their employees. But however, Mr. Speaker, the 
thing that they really are disappointed in is the fact that we 
continue to be hewers of water and cutters of wood. 
 
(1645) 
 
We continue to send the raw product out to Eastern Canada 
when we had an opportunity back in the late ’80s, early ’90s to 
begin to add value added, which would mean real job creation 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Which would present the 
province of Saskatchewan with an added tax base with which to 
provide the services we have in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we take a look at this budget, we see 
a number of editorials that have appeared shortly after the 
budget. And, Mr. Speaker, are the editorials really praising the 
budget? Are the editorials really espousing the virtues of the 
budget, of the tax breaks? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the editorials, Tuesday April 4, 
Leader-Post editorial: “Tax comments get failing grade.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this one here comes from . . . actually it 
was . . . I’d like to quote: 
 

Education Minister Jim Melenchuk put his foot firmly in 
his mouth Friday when he told the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association (SSTA) that if they don’t think they 
are getting enough money from the provincial government 
for education, they always have the option of raising 
school mill rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the concerns that my colleagues and I 
have been hearing over the last few days; one of the real 
concerns out there. 
 
The Minister of Finance tells us he’s giving the people of 
Saskatchewan a real tax break and yet at the same time the 
increases in education. School boards across this province are 
finding themselves at the brink of either cutting programs, 
closing down schools, cutting jobs because they just don’t have 
enough money to raise — and in this budget, Mr. Speaker — to 
meet the needs, ongoing needs of the school districts. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we’re finding as well is, I think, the 
rural municipalities were hoping and were being led to believe 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2000 

by this NDP-Liberal coalition that after the budget they 
wouldn’t have to worry any more about any more tax revolt 
meetings, because the Minister of Finance has said he would 
put $25 million into the pockets of property owners in this 
province to offset the higher tax and the mill rate as a result of 
the education off-load onto local taxpayers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. My feeling and my view is 
that the tax revolt meetings will not cease. In fact they will 
begin to escalate as the ratepayers and the people who have 
been organizing the tax revolts take a closer look and as they 
talk to those school districts. And the school districts and 
divisions talk about reducing services or else increasing the mill 
rate, as the Minister of Education, the Liberal leader, the 
Minister of Education is saying if you don’t have enough 
money, then go to the tax base. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, our concern is that the school 
districts will eventually actually have to go to the mill rate. 
They’ll have to go to the property owner to increase the mill 
rate in order to continue to provide the services which, at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, will mean the $25 million . . . the 
tax credit or tax refund into the pockets of individuals may be a 
saw off. It may be a break-even but it won’t be a reduction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In fact as I read, as I read the editorial it says . . . it goes on to 
say: 
 

The Liberal leader’s statement certainly didn’t win him any 
friends with local ratepayers across the province or the 
SSTA and likely caused heartburn among his NDP partners 
in the coalition government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that: 
 

The minister might think $1 billion is enough to run the 
system, and indeed that is a substantial sum, but to suggest 
trustees increase local . . . (rates) to make up any shortfall 
was irresponsible. 
 

That’s what the editorials are saying about this government, 
saying about the Minister of Education, saying about this 
Finance minister. It’s totally irresponsible to think that if you 
haven’t received enough money, you can go back to the tax 
base. 
 
That suggestion, this editorial says: 
 

. . . ignores the reality that municipal taxes in the province 
are already onerous, with taxpayers in several rural 
municipalities already having voted in favour of tax 
revolts. 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the budget and we look at, 
we look at education, while we’re talking about education and 
the property tax on education, talking about the fact that this, 
“Tax comments get failing grade.” 
 
Another article and editorial says, “Budget confusing, auditor 
says.” Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that the Provincial 
Auditor would have had some positive comments for this 
government. I would have thought that the Provincial Auditor, 

deciding to leave this province to go to B.C., he’d be having 
something positive to say. 
 
But while the minister is trying to tell us that his budget is such 
a . . . has presented such a rainbow effect in this province that at 
the end of the rainbow, there’s that, there’s that golden pot — 
Mr. Speaker, it’s anything but. 
 
What is the auditor saying? He’s saying: 
 

Saskatchewan’s budget is as confusing as ever after the 
government closed out its old rainy-day fund but set up 
several new funds, the province’s auditor says. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what’s he talking about? He’s talking about the 
fact that the province is talking about putting its: 
 

Retained earnings of $695 million made up . . . of the 
money the government expects from its liquor-and-gaming 
operation, cleaning out what critics have maligned as a 
murky pool of taxpayers’ money. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion and in the opinion of my 
colleagues, that fund was nothing else but an NDP slush fund. 
And because it’s now become open, it’s out in the open, the 
NDP and this Finance minister are deciding they’ve got to find 
another place to put it. 
 
I’d like to continue to quote from this article: 
 

But the same budget directs $660 million towards several 
newly created funds in 2001. Wayne Strelioff, 
Saskatchewan’s provincial auditor, said the fresh crop of 
new funds only complicates Saskatchewan’s 
already-confusing budget reporting system. 
 

He says: 
 
“To me, it’s almost like you don’t have respect for 
taxpayers when you create all these things,” Strelioff said 
in an interview. “It means you have to do a lot of 
questioning to find out what’s going to happen this year.” 

 
After hearing those comments, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that 
Mr. Strelioff has decided it’s time to leave the province and 
pursue greener pastures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at this budget and to listen to this 
Finance minister and to listen to all of his colleagues tell us how 
good it is, I think what we’re finding out, and what my 
colleagues and I are finding out, that more and more people are 
beginning to realize that this is nothing more than another tax 
grab. 
 
The Minister of Finance can tell us that he’s giving you some 
money. But actually, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
basically believe that what the Minister of Finance is doing is 
robbing Peter to pay Paul. 
 
They’re pulling from one pocket and putting it in the other 
pocket, telling you, you should be thankful. You should be 
grateful that he’s actually given you back something that he 
pulled out of the pocket. Actually a little bit of what he took out 



April 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

of your pocket. 
 
And my colleagues have actually expanded on what the 
Minister of Finance is taking. And we’re also finding out, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s not just what we already know the Minister of 
Finance has taken out of our pockets, but we’re finding out on 
an ongoing basis that the Minister of Finance is actually digging 
deeper and deeper into our pockets to the point that there’s no 
bottom left in the pocket. There’s nothing but a hole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about this budget, talk about the tax 
increases . . . And my colleague from Biggar mentioned the fact 
that the utility rate increases already have eaten up the little tax 
saving there is this year. The fact that the expanded PST took 
place April 1, midnight April 1, took all of the few dollars that 
were left in your pocket — took it out of your pocket. 
 
Every fee we have in this province, every fee in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is going up. Which means more and more money 
out of our pockets so that measly $120 this year . . . Actually at 
the end of the day we’ll be fortunate if we’re even $30 short at 
the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we talk about the tax. And the 
Minister of Finance and the Premier and his colleagues would 
lead us to believe that this budget that was just presented the 
other day should be such a positive budget that people should 
be flocking to this province. 
 
But if you pick up The Leader-Post today, what do we have? 
The headline is “The last straw.” 
 

The NDP-Liberal coalition government has just slammed 
the door on me and my business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
For years now, I have been debating moving to Alberta 
because of Saskatchewan’s tax structure. Last week’s 
provincial budget has forced me out, no question about it. 
 
As of July 1, 2000, my business will be forced to tack on 
the six-per-cent provincial sales tax . . . to our bills, which 
will make our work six-per-cent more expensive than our 
competition. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this individual is talking about a company 
that’s been doing from 350 to $500,000 worth of business per 
year in the last seven years, and this individual is taking his 
company and moving it to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this budget was such a positive . . . had such a 
positive influence on the people of Saskatchewan, why are we 
continuing to lose, not only people, but businesses to Alberta. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because people look at Alberta and what 
they . . . at the end of the day, when they look at . . . take their 
bottom line, their bottom line, the moment they cross that 
border, increases by some 4 to $5,000 per family — 4 to 
$5,000. So what’s a thousand dollars four years down the road, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My guess, Mr. Speaker, is that the reason the Minister of 
Finance is talking a thousand dollar saving four years down the 
road is he’s hoping that the people of Saskatchewan will buy 
that when we get to the next general election. 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they will. I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan can hardly wait for this coalition to fall apart or 
for the next election to be called so that they can go to the polls 
and elect a real tax-slashing government to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Finance minister would like us to believe by 
increasing the provincial sales tax we should be grateful. And 
he condemns the Saskatchewan Party for the fact that we said 
you cannot lower income taxes, and not increase or expand the 
provincial sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our platform said we could lower the provincial 
income tax without expanding the sales tax. And we would 
work to reduce the sales tax so that people would have a real 
reason to continue to live and reside in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well, when we talk about what is this 
budget doing for young people to stay in the province, the 
Minister of Finance, the Minister of Education stand up, and 
Post-Secondary Education, stand up and tell us well we have a 
$350 bonus for you if you find a job in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day I talked to a number of students and 
they laughed at that. You know what they said? That was no 
different than the thousand dollar promise of tuition fees for all 
first year university students. Mr. Speaker, what they said is we 
want to see real job creation. We want to have an opportunity 
for real jobs, not $350 if you find a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my guess is they’re going to have a difficult time 
finding real job opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan 
as a result of this budget because this budget has nothing in it to 
give businesses a reason to come and establish and build the 
value-added that we believe is necessary for this province to 
prosper so that people can look at raising their families, living 
within the province, raising their families, raising their children, 
and building this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time that the people of this province had an 
opportunity to really elect a government that would work at 
building the province rather than tearing it down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about job creation, and we’ve 
certainly had in the . . . just on Tuesday, April 4th, The 
Leader-Post, “Summer job program axed in budget . . .” My 
son happens to be a university student here. He was telling me 
just recently, he said, Dad, you’ve got to do something about 
job opportunities. 
 
He was going . . . he’s been applying all over, and other 
university students have, and the comments at the university 
were: this is the lowest number of job opportunities for young 
people that they’ve ever seen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And what do we have this year as a result of the budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. It now being 5 p.m. this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 

 


