





























































Hansard: May 04, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1005 
 May 4, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to present a petition signed by the good folks of 
Tompkins, Saskatchewan, and it’s in connection with the 
request for reduction of fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

I so do present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present 
a petition and this is signed by the good people from Nipawin, 
Love, and Tisdale, as well as Prince Albert. And I read the 
prayer which involves the concern about the high cost of fuel in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce the fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are the communities in 
my constituency of Kinistino, Melfort, and Gronlid. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and reading the petition regarding amalgamations and 
it reads . . . the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the forced amalgamation of 
municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Eastend and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the high cost of fuel, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Weyburn, Swift Current, 
Tisdale, and Oxbow. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of the people in Swift Current concerned about 
their hospital, and the prayer can be summarized as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
for citizens who are opposed to forced consolidation in 
municipalities, and the prayer reads: 
 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the forced consolidation of municipalities. 
 

And it’s signed by citizens from Eastend, Tompkins, 
Shaunavon, and Consul. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition opposed to forced consolidation of 
municipalities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the forced consolidation of municipalities. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by a number of people in the 
Eastend area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. The 
prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people from Kinistino and Melfort. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce fuel 
tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal, provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents 
a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Bladworth, Davidson, and Langham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition from citizens concerned about forced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Kinistino, Melfort, and 
Beatty. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned with the 
high tax on fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Spiritwood, 
Mayfair, Shell Lake, and a number of other communities. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forth a petition regarding the reduction of fuel tax by 10 
cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And I have petitioners from Spiritwood, Saskatoon, and 

Leoville. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by Saskatchewan citizens concerned with 
enforced municipal amalgamation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens from the community of 
Drinkwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Star City, 
Nipawin, and Love, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
Provision of reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, 
Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth; 
 
Halting plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
Providing funding for the Swift Current Regional Hospital; 
and 
 
The reduction of fuel taxes. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan): what organizations did each of 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Saskatchewan’s CIC Crowns contribute money to in 1999, 
and how much; and what organizations applied to each of 
these Crowns for contributions but were rejected. 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another question. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

What organizations has each of Saskatchewan’s CIC 
Crowns contributed money to in the year 2000, and how 
much; what organizations have applied to each of the 
Crowns for contributions and were rejected. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: in 1999-2000, what 
events and/or organizations were approved by the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board for funding; in 1999-2000, what 
events and/or organizations were rejected by the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board for funding? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a privilege and an 
honour it is today to introduce to you and through you to all of 
the members of the Assembly, a very distinguished guest in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He is a community leader, someone who has contributed greatly 
to my home town, the city of Swift Current, and indeed to the 
province. Twenty-two years he spent on the city council in 
Swift Current and he was 12 years the mayor of Swift Current. 
His name is Mr. Len Stein, and we’re pleased to have him here. 
 
He’s also a long-time entrepreneur in Swift Current. He started 
his business, Sage oil well services, in 1962. It presently 
employs anywhere between 70 and 90 people depending on 
how busy they are. And I would just ask all hon. members to 
join with me in welcoming Len Stein to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members, a 
group of students who are seated in your gallery. 
 
These students come to us from Balfour Collegiate in the 
constituency of Regina Victoria. I believe there are nine 
students. They are accompanied here by their grade 11-12 
teacher, Karen Sherle. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that Balfour Collegiate and this 
particular class comes to us every year. Not all teachers make 
this effort, and in extending them a welcome I would also ask 
members to recognize this important contribution by teachers to 
civic affairs and social studies in our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As most members 
know, in a former life I used to be a school teacher and on two 
different occasions had the privilege of teaching in the 
community of Hague. 
 
We’re privileged today to have 42 grade 11 and 12 students 
with us from the community of Hague. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Margi Corbett, one of 
the finest teachers I ever taught with, and Scott Richardson — 
I’ve never had the privilege of teaching in the same school as 
he’s taught — and chaperons Ben Krahn, Doreen Fehr, and Eric 
Magill. And someone else called Bob the Bus Driver. 
 
I’ll be meeting with these students later on. And before the 
other members chirp out something insignificant, due to the 
austerity that we now experience due to the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) in this country, there won’t be any free 
lunch. 
 
So would you welcome them to the legislature, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to the members of the Assembly, it gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to introduce some very important 
visitors from northern Saskatchewan. They hail from Pinehouse 
Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
And with us today is 12 grade 11 and 12 students from 
Pinehouse School. And they have a couple of teachers who are 
also acting as chaperons — Gloria Belcourt and Neil 
Natomagan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping to attend the graduation in 
Pinehouse this summer, and to point out that we know it’s a 
long, long dusty road to come all this way to visit us. 
 
And I want to make sure that they know we appreciate their 
effort they made coming down here and to welcome them here 
once again. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too, as the Minister 
of Northern Affairs, would like to welcome our guests from 
Pinehouse. And I would say: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
In that, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I’m very proud to see 
them going ahead with their education and finishing their 11 
and 12. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that their younger brothers and 
sisters will be very proud of them because not only will they be 
graduating but they will also be getting a new school for 
Pinehouse. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Declining Population 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to recognize the historic visit by the 
Governor General of Canada, Her Excellency Adrienne 
Clarkson. During Her Excellency’s visit, she travelled 
extensively throughout the province visiting many groups and 
communities as well as participating in the honours recognition 
ceremonies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also feel that it’s noteworthy to mention that 
during her visit with us here at the legislature, Her Excellency 
saw fit to quote from two significant literary figures, both of 
whom have connections to the Cypress Hills constituency. 
Pulitzer prize-winning author Wallace Stegner and his family 
once lived in the community of Eastend before moving to the 
United States. And, Mr. Speaker, Sharon Butala, a current 
luminary in the world of Canadian literature, is also a resident 
of the Eastend area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of the voices in Cypress Hills have been 
saying for years now that people are leaving our province. This 
is something that we in the Southwest live with every day, and 
Her Excellency gave voice to this reality when she spoke to this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the fact that the Governor General made the 
comment make it any more true? I sincerely hope that this 
government takes note of this ongoing exodus and the burden 
that it creates in all of our communities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Development in Regina 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for the 
people and the economy of Saskatchewan. The local economy 
seems to be booming with all the building projects and 
expansions that are taking place in Regina. 
 
The Ramada Hotel, formerly the Sands Hotel, has completed 
the first of a three-phase, $3 million expansion program, Mr. 
Speaker. The hotel has gradually increased staff levels to about 
180, up 10 to 15 per cent from this time last year. Good news 
for Regina. 
 
As we all know, The Bay in Regina has moved into its new 
home in the Cornwall Centre. To fill the 90 new positions at the 
new location, The Bay held a three-day job fair to collect 
applications. Mr. Speaker, again good news. 
 
And even more good news for Regina, Mr. Speaker. Westfair 
Foods, the owners of the Real Canadian Superstore, have 
confirmed that they will be building two new Superstores in 
Regina. New stores in the northwest and southeast parts of 
Regina will be operating by late this year. Each of these stores 
will employ between 2 and 300 employees. That’s 5 to 600 new 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, in the city of Regina. 
 

And the Sherwood Co-op store in Regina’s northwest is 
expected to complete its 5 million food store expansion by 
mid-June, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With all these expansions, it is clear that Regina and indeed the 
province’s economy is booming. This is good news for the 
people of Regina and Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Stereotypical Terminology 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A common tactic of 
those who cannot defend the merits of their argument is to 
resort to personal attack. It is a despicable and cowardly form of 
argument. But for many, it is also the argument of choice in this 
age of political correctness. 
 
Shout racist, shout sexist, shout homophobe, shout it loud and 
long and often. And don’t ever stop because, heaven forbid, if 
you do, you might actually engage in some meaningful debate. 
 
Yesterday the NDP and some others chose this spurious 
argument to defend the funding of pornography in our province. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same NDP who would always hint at 
motives of racism every time the Saskatchewan Party raised its 
Aboriginal PST (provincial sales tax) policy. The same NDP 
who adopted that policy in the recent budget. 
 
Now the NDP and some others are suggesting the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena’s concerns about taxpayer-funded 
pornography is really an attack on the gay and lesbian 
community, even though they cannot point to a single statement 
by that member to support their claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have chosen to condemn the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena — not for her words, not for her actions, 
but for their preconceived stereotype of the Saskatchewan 
Party. Mr. Speaker, isn’t that the definition of discrimination? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Resident Receives Sterling Award 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, we should take every opportunity 
to pay tribute to those who devote their time to community 
service whether it be in volunteer groups, NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations), or arm’s length 
organizations. We would be the poorer without their energy, 
their expertise, and their dedication. 
 
I am pleased therefore to announce to the Assembly that on 
May 1, Shelley Brown of Saskatoon was presented with the 
Sterling Award for tireless service to the community at the 10th 
annual Silver Spoon Dinner. The Sterling Award is given 
annually to a local woman who “enriches the quality of life for 
residents of Saskatoon through ongoing volunteer work”. The 
award is presented by the Saskatoon Jewish Community and the 
Hadassah-WIZO organization. 
 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) know Shelley 
Brown as a member of the Vicq commission whose 
recommendations led to the most comprehensive and most fair 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

set of tax reductions ever. But this is only one line on her 
resumé. 
 
She has chaired the SPCA’s (Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals) finance committee, served on the board of 
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund), been instrumental 
in the establishment of Wanuskewin, taken a turn as president 
of the United Way, been on the board of St. Paul’s Hospital 
Foundation, a board member for Tourism Saskatoon, and 
appointed honorary Co-Chair for the Saskatoon community 
service capital campaign. She was also a member of the 
Saskatoon property tax review committee. 
 
All this as well as being a businesswoman and a mother. I join 
Hadassah-WIZO in honouring Shelley Brown for helping make 
Saskatoon the best city in the best province in the best country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Star City Resident Competes in 
National Judo Championship 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to recognize a member of my constituency that has gained 
national status. Fraser Will of Star City competed in the 
National Judo Championships held in Montreal, April 14 and 
15. 
 
Fraser captured the Gold Medal in the senior national division 
of the Canadian Judo Championships. This win gives Fraser a 
berth in the Junior World Championships in October in Tunis, 
Tunisia in North Africa. 
 
Fraser remained in Montreal until Wednesday to train with the 
national judo team. 
 
We commend his personal achievements and that of the Melfort 
Judo Club of which Melfort . . . of which Fraser is a member. 
 
Please join with me, Mr. Speaker, in congratulating this young 
man and the Melfort Judo Club. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Action Office Interiors Expands 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
pleasure of representing the Minister of Economic Development 
and the Government of Saskatchewan at the grand opening of 
Action Office Interiors in Regina. 
 
In the last 17 years, Action Office Interiors has successfully 
served its clients throughout the province from one location in 
Saskatoon. Now because their business is growing, a new 
location in Regina is necessary. This expansion means more 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. Action Office Interiors plans to 
double its workforce in the very near future. 
 
As we’ve already heard from the member from Regina 
Dewdney, we had . . . we’ve seen some dramatic retail growth 
in east, south, and northwest parts of Regina. We are now 
witnessing new industrial and commercial growth in northeast 
part of Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an exciting time to be in business in Regina, 
and we’re very pleased to have a company with action in its 
name to take part of that action. 
 
I want to congratulate Action Office Interiors for the opening of 
their new location, and wish them continued success in their . . . 
in all of their endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Announcements from SARC and SARCAN 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
had an opportunity to attend an event where the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres, better known as SARC, 
and its recycling division SARCAN made two very important 
announcements. 
 
SARC is an association of 36 member agencies providing 
service for citizens with disabilities. The association was set up 
to provide one common voice with which to lobby government, 
secure major contracts for workshop production, conduct 
continuing education programs, and research new employment 
opportunities for citizens with disabilities. In 1997, the 
membership was enlarged to include 19 additional associate 
members who provide residential services for citizens with 
disabilities. 
 
This morning SARC announced a week, May 8 through to the 
12, designated specifically to recognize community caring and 
commitment. The theme of the week is “United We Can.” 
 
SARCAN recycling is a division of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres and was set up to handle 
the non-refillable beverage container recycling program in 
Saskatchewan. SARCAN announced a new state of the art 
processing facility in Regina creating more employment for 
citizens with disabilities and creating a recycling system 
unequalled in North America. 
 
As a past president of SARC and SARCAN, I was very proud 
to be a part of this event and ask all members of the Assembly 
to join with me in congratulating SARC, SARCAN on these 
magnificent initiatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is again for the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday I distributed the titles of just some of the 
films that are being screened during the Queer City Film 
Festival this week. The names of these films are so explicit that 
they cannot be read out loud in this House. 
 
The organizers of this festival describe these films as 
pornography. They are promoting the panel discussions and the 
screenings as pornography. The film producers label these films 
as hard core pornography. Yet your Minister of Municipal 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

Affairs, Culture and Housing says the Arts Board has told him 
it’s not pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, you can’t hide behind the Arts Board. You can’t 
hide behind SaskTel. And you can’t hide behind SaskFILM. 
Taxpayers know this is pornography. The government is 
allowing taxpayers’ dollars to be used for the screening of 
pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing and ask the festival to 
reverse their sponsorship of this festival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, first I want to say to the 
member opposite that on this side of the House we don’t hide 
behind our third-party organizations. We believe in our 
third-party organizations, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we do on 
this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And I was most interested in the 
statements by members because I heard the member from 
Saltcoats get up and ask for a resumé of all of the different 
events and activities that the Saskatchewan arts council has 
been involved in, in . . . funds over the last year. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that was tabled in this House 
— here’s the document. And I say to the member opposite that, 
when you asked the question about the role of the Arts Board 
and all of the things that they do in Saskatchewan, you just need 
to review this document and you’ll see the broad range of things 
that they do. 
 
And I say to the member opposite we support, on this side of 
the House, third-party organizations that make decisions in the 
best interests of people. Whether they’re arts boards, school 
boards, municipalities — we believe in third-party 
organizations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does your book 
also say which ones were turned down? The Arts Board says 
they only approve 25 per cent of the applications that they 
receive. I’m sure that of the 75 per cent that don’t receive 
funding, there are some very worthwhile projects that don’t 
involve pornography. 
 
And I’m sure the projects would celebrate our culture and our 
arts in much more meaningful way than a pornographic film 
would do. You’ve got festivals, exhibition events all over this 
beautiful province that celebrate Saskatchewan’s culture and 
heritage. And you’ve got people trying to feed and clothe the 
less fortunate in this province, and many of them do it all 
without any funding from your government. 
 
If the festival organizations are right and this panel discussion is 
so important to have and the films are so important that they 
need to be shown, then the film festival should do it on its own 
accord and without any government sponsorship. 
 

Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing and stand up and say 
that you will not use taxpayers’ dollars to fund this festival any 
more? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 
member opposite that this morning I was reading The 
StarPhoenix, and it’s this morning’s article and it’s written by 
Mr. Burton. I want to say to the member opposite, read to the 
House what he says. 

 
So, are we to kill off the principle of arms-length 
administration of arts activities, which has enjoyed (in this) 
a run (in this province for over) 50 years, he says. 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

The alternative is to allow the government or politicians of 
the day to pick and choose those art activities (they) it 
deems politically acceptable. 
 
So who would you rather have deciding (on the funding) 
projects — a jury of artists and professionals, or the 
(Saskatchewan Party). 
 

Mr. Speaker, who would you choose to do it? 
 
Well I say to the member opposite that in this province the Arts 
Board and the people in the arts community want their own 
community deciding on the kinds of activities that they want to 
participate in. And maybe on that side of the House if you want 
to provide censorship . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister, and who is 
accountable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
You are. The taxpayers in this province are outraged that their 
money is being used in this way. They can’t believe that the 
government would sanction funding of pornography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, research shows that pornography contributes to 
sexual assault, including rape and the molestation of children. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter if it’s gay or 
straight — porn is porn. And as one caller said in a phone-in 
this morning, if you’re going to have a discussion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — One caller said this morning in a phone-in 
show, if you’re going to have a discussion on rape, would you 
show a film on rape so that people at the seminar would know 
what it’s all about. 
 
The members opposite and SaskTel and Sask Arts can call it 
anything they want to, but the organizers of this festival, the 
porn stars they are bringing in, and the filmmakers, are calling it 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

pornography. And government funding of it is just plain wrong. 
There are so many agencies that could be funded that have 
nothing to do with pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you please stand up in this House and say that 
today you’re going to pull all the funding that is from this 
government being used for pornography in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite. I 
want to say to the member opposite that in the province of 
Saskatchewan we have many, many organizations and groups 
who are called together at conferences or conventions, and for 
their own community they have debates and discussions about 
the future direction that they’re going to be going in and what’s 
acceptable and what’s not acceptable in terms of their futures. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that today, if you were to 
have an opportunity to talk to the people who are involved in 
the festival, they’ll tell you that they’re debating a very 
important issue regarding your own community. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite and to this House, that in 
Saskatchewan today we have third party organizations like the 
art boards. If you don’t believe in the Arts Board in this 
province, what you should be doing is you should be writing a 
letter to the Arts Board and you should be saying to them that 
they should no longer be funding the kinds of activities that you 
don’t believe in. 
 
And I say that to the member opposite. If you don’t believe in 
funding freedom of speech in this province, you should write 
those people and tell them that you don’t support that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oil and Gas Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Finance. Mr. Minister, the oil and gas . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Hon. members, there 
may be opportunities for debates from both sides at another 
time; this time is allotted to question and answer period. Kindly 
recognize and respect one another’s questions and answers. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, the oil and gas industry is big 
business in Saskatchewan, and a healthy oil and gas industry 
means big money for the provincial government. But thanks to 
the NDP’s disastrous decision to increase the provincial sales 
tax by $160 million, the biggest question in the minds of 
Saskatchewan oil and gas companies is what part of Alberta 
they’re going to move to. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, does the NDP have a plan to 
convince oil and gas companies not to flee from Saskatchewan 
as a result of your decision to increase the PST by $160 
million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 

very pleased to respond on behalf of the government and I want 
to say to the member from Thunder Creek that we have over the 
past few years had a very close working relationship with the 
oil and gas sector, and it’s resulted, Mr. Speaker, in some of the 
largest years of activity that this province has ever seen. 
 
With respect to the resource sector, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
we have made major changes to the oil and gas royalties. We’ve 
introduced high water cut; we’ve introduced deep rights 
reversion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the resource sector is more than oil and gas. We’ve revised 
the potash royalty rates. We have revised the base metals and 
precious metals royalty rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you and I say to members opposite that 
this government is very responsive to the concerns of industry 
when there are concerns that arise. We have fostered a good 
working relationship and that will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Minister 
of Finance. Mr. Minister, even your old buddies are sounding 
the alarm. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party caucus received a 
letter from Ken Kluz — you remember him, Mr. Minister? He’s 
a former NDP MLA. Ken also ran as a Liberal candidate in the 
last provincial election. 
 
Let me read . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order, order, please. 
Order. Order. Order! I would just remind the member to direct 
his question through the Chair, and ask all hon. members to 
kindly allow the question to be heard. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I read from the letter: 
 

In conversation with Doug Anguish, former (NDP) 
Minister of Energy and Mines . . . (he) tells me the oil 
industry is very upset with the Saskatchewan Government 
for the p.s.t. enhancement . . . (because it) will cost his 
company alone 1 million dollars. 
 
At this time they are discussing their options to include less 
activity in Sask. 
 

And that refers to Renaissance oil. And I’d be happy to provide 
a copy of the letter to the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, your $160 million increase in the PST is driving 
jobs and business out of Saskatchewan. What is your 
government going to do to stop the economic disaster you’ve 
created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
member a few things that we’re going to do to ensure that 
we’ve got a healthy industry in this province. The first thing 
we’re going to do is ensure that these people who wracked up 
$15 billion of debt in this province never, ever, ever sit on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first thing we’re 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this budget, this 
budget that was just passed in this legislature delivered the 
biggest personal income tax cut that this province has ever seen 
and those members voted against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this March compared 
to last March, 15,000 more people working in this province 
than last year; and, Mr. Speaker, 7,000 of those were young 
people who these people are trying to chase out of the province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as long as there is a breath in 
thinking people we will continue to balance budgets, reduce 
taxes, and create a positive investment climate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question for 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, your old buddy Doug 
Anguish is saying your $160 million PST increase may push 
Renaissance oil out of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your old buddy 
Doug Anguish says the entire industry is considering pulling 
jobs and investment out of Saskatchewan. Is that your idea of 
good economic policy? Is that the NDP’s master plan — to 
chase oil and gas companies out of the province with high 
taxes? 
 
Mr. Minister, haven’t you and your tax-happy NDP government 
done enough damage? Your decision to increase the PST by 
$160 million is fuelling the exodus of jobs and businesses from 
this province. What are you doing to stop the exodus? What are 
you doing to convince the oil and gas industry to stay in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin 
responding to this question by saying that members of this 
government, as we have done over the past number of years, 
have met with CAPP, the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers, their executive, and we will continue to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, because we believe that that kind of dialogue fosters a 
very positive environment investment climate in this province. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you and to people 
of Saskatchewan what doesn’t. Gloom and doom every day. 
Their sky is falling continually. Every day it’s another little 
disaster for members of the Saskatchewan Party. And you do 
more to foster a negative business climate in this province than 
any group of people in the whole province, the whole million of 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — But Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
what we will continue to do is dialogue, work towards a 
positive business climate and I just want to give a little quote 
from The StarPhoenix, April 14, 2000 from CAPP: “Is the 
province in jeopardy of everybody moving . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your decision’s government to slap a new 6 per cent 
sales tax on oil and gas industry is making it even harder for 
companies — especially companies around the Swift Current area 
— to compete with companies from Alberta. We heard the 
member for Thunder Creek talking about an oil-producing 
company. We have a number of oil and gas service companies in 
the Swift Current area. A few days ago, the member for 
Kindersley outlined a . . . highlighted a couple of oil companies in 
his area that have already made the decision to move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision to increase the provincial sales tax by a 
$160 dollars means many oil and gas service companies in my 
area face three choices: scale down, shut down, or move to 
Alberta. Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: which of 
these options would you have them choose? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is 
simple. There are none of those options that we would rather 
choose. We would rather choose to see a healthy industry where 
last year invested over $3 billion in this province, much of it 
right in his backyard. 
 
Renaissance Energy and the other oil producing companies 
came to us, if you want to talk about a responsive government, 
and asked if we could do something with respect to high water 
cut wells. And you living in an oil-producing area know very 
well about them. And we responded, we made changes that are 
going to keep very many marginal wells right in your backyard 
operating, producing royalties and taxation and jobs right in 
your own community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister just doesn’t get it. There could be a thousand new oil 
wells drilled in the next week in Swift Current, but if Swift 
Current companies can’t compete on your unlevel playing field 
because of your high tax policies, the only thing you’ve 
achieved is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, I would like to hear the 
question as I’m sure you would. Kindly allow the member to 
ask his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — As long as this government’s policies are creating 
an unlevel playing field in the oil industry in Saskatchewan. The 
only achievement that they will lay claim to is to get the Premier 
nominated economic developer of the year for the province of 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the same minister. 
Earlier in the . . . before question period I introduced Mr. Stein to 
the gallery. Mr. Stein’s company . . . Mr. Stein’s company, Sage 
well services, has been operating successfully and creating jobs 
since 1962. But thanks to the NDP decision to pile on a 6 per cent 
tax, Mr. Stein and other people in the industry are having to for the 
first time consider moving out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, is your NDP government simply going to wave 
goodbye to people like Mr. Stein who have created jobs and 
economic wealth in our province, or will you admit that your 
budget is killing oil and gas jobs, and will you scrap the PST 
expansion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would be more than 
willing to respond to this member because I’ll tell you the biggest 
detriment to investment and job opportunities and job creation is 
he and the government that he worked for — John Gerich in the 
1980s who created $15 billion worth of debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, would that we were not 
servicing almost a billion dollars in interest; we wouldn’t have a 
PST. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if we hadn’t had him and his ilk 
it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it’s true, it’s 
true, I did work for the . . . for that administration. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Hon. members, the level of 
enthusiasm is exceeding what’s acceptable. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s true I did work for 
that administration as a young person. I was fairly idealist . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask all hon. members 
to please respect one another when people are on their feet to be 
heard, on both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What was very 
disappointing to see in that administration is how that 
government and how key cabinet ministers grew out of touch 
and arrogant. And it’s déjà vu all over again, Mr. Speaker; and 
they’re going to suffer the same fate that that government 
suffered, Mr. Speaker — political oblivion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now . . . Mr. Minister, right now your high 
tax policy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, a question to the 
Minister of Energy and Mines. The fact of the matter remains, 
right now the PST policies of this government, the high taxation 

policies of this government are forcing companies like Sage 
Well Services, long-time companies in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to at least have to consider the option of leaving 
our province. That’s 70 to 90 jobs in the community of Swift 
Current; 70 to 90 families affected. 
 
Will you at least take steps to ensure that every company in the 
oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan is playing on a level 
playing field, Mr. Minister? Will you either scrap the sales tax 
or take steps to ensure that every company, regardless of where 
they’re from, pays that PST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is asking that we talk about taxation, so I will. 
 
We’ve just delivered the largest income tax cut in this 
province’s history. There are 55,000 families in this province 
who will no longer pay any income tax. Effective January 1, the 
flat tax — done. We’ve slashed the capital gains tax. The 
average Saskatchewan family’s going to receive a thousand 
dollar tax cut. Seniors in this province will receive a thousand 
dollar tax cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are these actions of an arrogant and an 
unresponsive government? Mr. Speaker, I say to you that we 
have listened to the people of Saskatchewan. They asked for tax 
cuts. This government, this Finance minister, and this Premier 
have acted. And I’m very proud of what we’ve done with 
respect to this year’s budget. That member should be ashamed 
of even mentioning his past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Transmission Contract 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve just had 
three answers that aren’t going to give any hope for the people 
that they were suppose to give some hope to. 
 
So we’ll ask a question of the Minister of SaskEnergy. Simple 
question, Mr. Minister, it’s about that $114 million pipeline. 
Mr. Minister, what is a transfer of demand clause in a gas 
transmission contract? And how was it used in that particular 
pipeline? A transfer of demand clause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number of days 
I’ve been answering some questions around a pipeline that was 
built, that was part, and is part of the SaskEnergy system of gas 
lines. 
 
One of the things that seems to be underlying this is the fact that 
maybe some of this line doesn’t return quite as much as what 
they anticipated. The original plan set out that they were hoping 
to have a rate of return of about 15 per cent. The rate of return 
over the last number of years and last year was 11 per cent. 
What we know, in Alberta, the rate of return on similar gas 
lines is 9.9 per cent. This is right in the ballpark of where it 
should be. 
 
We are going to continue to provide, through our energy 
company, the lowest natural gas rates in Canada. We’re going 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

to do it in a fair, efficient way providing for all . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, we had a 
poor answer to Monday’s question. Today is Thursday. So we 
will tell you what a transfer demand clause is. It’s a clause that 
allows you to transfer demand from one existing contract to 
fulfill your commitment to a new contract. 
 
We understand that all new contracts that you signed in 
connection with that pipeline left the gas companies that 
particular option, and they promptly exercised it by transferring 
demand from their existing contracts to meet the commitment 
with the new contracts. Isn’t that the case, Mr. Minister? Your 
so-called firm commitments, that you said you had, left the gas 
companies with a trap door to back out through. And that’s 
exactly what they did. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that the only reason gas 
companies are meeting their commitments under these new 
contracts is because you left them a loophole that they could 
back out of their existing contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1996 and 1997 there were 
significant declines in the natural gas prices and that happened 
in Saskatchewan. Natural gas drilling went down . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In that time, the Saskatchewan gas 
consumers asked that TransGas would make some changes 
around in the export commitments that they had so that this gas 
could be supplied to Saskatchewan. This allowed for transfer of 
gas to Saskatchewan consumers. This provided some of the 
cheaper prices of gas for Saskatchewan people. 
 
This was also then part of a plan that SaskEnergy has had for a 
number of years, which it continues now, that they will provide 
the lowest natural gas prices in Canada for this year. They will 
continue to supply it to all of their consumers around the 
province. We will continue to do this as a very good corporate 
citizen of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House 
to introduce some special guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks 
to all the members of the Assembly. I would like to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the House, seated in 
your Speaker’s gallery, some very distinguished visitors and 
guests. These visitors are senior executives from Hitachi and 
Marubeni Canada Ltd. 

Mr. Speaker, members will know that Hitachi for many years 
has been an honoured and respected contributor to 
Saskatchewan’s growing and diversifying economy. 
 
Last year the company embarked upon a very important and 
significant expansion of its facility in Saskatoon — a welcome 
expression, I might add, of confidence in the economy of 
Saskatchewan and the people of our province. 
 
Now these six gentlemen are here today to meet with the 
minister responsible for CIC, and the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation president, Mr. John Wright, and to meet with me 
tomorrow in Saskatoon in the morning to discuss further 
opportunities for our province — to building on our long and 
mutually profitable relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know I speak for all members when I say that we 
are honoured that our visitors share optimism about the future. 
We’re honoured that Hitachi, one of the world’s great industrial 
enterprises, is committed to working with us to enjoy the 
benefits of continued growth and prosperity here in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask each of these distinguished visitors 
to rise, and after they have completed standing, to remain 
standing, and then to accept the greetings of the House. They 
are, first of all, Mr. Haruo Urushidani, director and general 
manager of Hitachi engineering and product division in Japan 
— if you’d please stand — Mr. Hiroshi Yamaguchi, who is the 
president of Hitachi Canadian Industries in Saskatoon; Mr. 
Tetsuhiro Nozaki, who is the general manager of Hitachi plant 
engineering division in Japan; Mr. Masahide Tanigaki, who is 
the general manager of Hitachi international operating division 
in Japan; Mr. Kaz Shinyashiki, vice-president of Marubeni 
Canada Ltd. in Vancouver; and Mr. Tadashi Uehara, manager 
from Hitachi (Canadian) Ltd. in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me, all the members in welcoming our 
honoured guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
also introduce the guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
unfortunately, gentlemen, I didn’t receive notice of your names, 
but we do want to welcome you to Saskatchewan. 
 
I had the privilege last year of touring the Hitachi plant in 
Saskatoon, and I was impressed by the way it was operated. It 
was a well-run industry in Saskatchewan — something that we 
desperately need. And the employees and management of the 
company could only express their appreciation for how Hitachi 
had shown confidence in the province of Saskatchewan, and for 
the fact that they were able to participate in your company. 
 
For those of you who are visiting Saskatchewan, we welcome 
you to this province on behalf of the official opposition; and for 
those of who are in Saskatchewan, we thank you for your part 
. . . the part you are playing in the Saskatchewan economy, and 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

we wish you well here in Saskatchewan in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32  The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to provide a 
response to the 130th written question in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Question 130 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to provide the 
answer to question 131, in the spirit of openness and 
accountability and responsibility on the part of the government. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 131 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had an 
opportunity to look over some of the material that was 
presented regarding this particular Bill, and I have to make the 
following comments. I believe that there is a lot of 
housekeeping that should be done, Mr. Speaker, in this 
particular Bill, and I’m very pleased to see that we can move 
this ahead and try and get some of these housekeeping items 
looked after. 
 
There are some concerns though, Mr. Speaker, with this Bill. 
And they have been addressed before but I would like to try and 
highlight some of the concerns and maybe add one or two new 
concerns. 
 
One of the things that seems to bother me particularly comes 
from the fact that these amendments are coming at this 
particular time. As you know, the annual report from the 

Children’s Advocate has just been put forward and some of 
those items . . . some of the issues that were highlighted in that 
annual report are not very complimentary to this particular 
government. 
 
And we noticed too, in the same set of amendments, that the 
amendment regarding pay and salary has a major difference 
from what is currently in place. So that is a real concern. 
Because we believe that, as stated in the amendments, some of 
the Children’s Advocate as well as the Ombudsman role really 
deserves to be independent. And the independence of both of 
those positions I think are paramount. 
 
When I see though that the way that the salaries are set for both 
the Children’s Advocate and for the Ombudsman, that being 
determined by the Board of Internal Economy, that gives me 
certainly some concern. That is not independent as I would see 
it. 
 
The amount of salary that can be set then, if it goes to the Board 
of Internal Economy, is really determined by a committee of the 
legislature that has a disproportionate amount of representation 
on one side and not the other. 
 
(1430) 
 
Then that, Mr. Speaker, is not an independent review of the 
salary. And I hope that that isn’t meant to be reflective of the 
independence of the office as so indicated in these amendments. 
 
I have also noticed, Mr. Speaker, that when I reviewed the 
annual report of both the Children’s Advocate and of the recent 
annual report of the Ombudsman, several items came forward 
that I think is relevant in fact to this particular amendment. 
 
When I noticed the Ombudsman’s report, there was a lot of 
complaints that are taking place against the Crown corporations 
and the utilities. It seems odd that an Ombudsman would have 
to deal with people, citizens of this province that are frustrated 
in trying to make a settlement with their own Crown 
corporation. 
 
There should be normal ways and normal ways and normal 
recourses for trying to solve particular problems. The 
Ombudsman role apparently has become increasingly important 
in trying to solve these particular frustrations of our citizens. 
 
If this were a deregulated environment and the Crown 
corporations in fact were replaced with private utilities, there is 
a mechanism for solving these particular frustrations, and it 
wouldn’t have to be referred to the Ombudsman. But it almost 
appears that the Ombudsman is being overloaded with a lot of 
the problems that maybe shouldn’t be associated with an 
Ombudsman role. 
 
I noticed that the increase, for instance, in the Ombudsman’s 
role in terms of trying to solve complaints has risen almost 70 
per cent in the last couple of years. That is a huge increase and 
therefore puts an increasing amount of stress on the particular 
Ombudsman. And at the same time, other complaints against 
the . . . that are referred to the Ombudsman refer to Social 
Services, workmen’s compensation, and as I referred, to the 
Crown. 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

That extra workload I’m sure has to be compensated for by 
either making sure that the salary is independent rather than an 
internal review, internal . . . the Board of Internal Economy. 
Without proper compensation, I really think that the 
Ombudsman role is going to be diminished. Or, if the workload 
continues to be increased at the same rate, something is going to 
have to be done in terms of why these frustrations are being 
directed at the Ombudsman. 
 
And when I reviewed as well the Children’s Advocate role, I 
noticed in her annual report that calls coming in from frustrated 
people involved in the role of Children’s Advocate, 75 per cent 
of these calls have actually come from the parents and the 
children themselves — 40 per cent from the parents, 33 per cent 
from children. And 67 per cent, as I read the annual report, 67 
per cent of those came from Social Services. 
 
It would appear that the role of the Children’s Advocate is 
trying to pick up some of the . . . to try and solve some of the 
problems rather, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Social 
Services is not being able to address, and I think is certainly 
falling down on the job when that many people or that many 
complaints are addressed to the Children’s Advocate. 
 
When I looked at the role as well in the annual report, I noticed 
that the budget from 1997 to ‘99 has virtually doubled from 
$500,000 to $950,000. That’s a 55 per cent increase in two 
years. 
 
Now if that is representative of the kind of work that the 
Children’ Advocate has to handle, that in my view says a lot 
about the work that the Children’s Advocate must address. And 
as I mentioned, probably because some of the problems that 
should have been addressed by Social Services in particular 
have not been addressed. 
 
Another part of the amendments that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, 
look at the authority to suspend the Children’s Advocate or the 
suspend the Ombudsman while the legislature is not in session. 
There’s some wording change from disabled and so on to things 
like “incapacity to act, negligent of duty” and so on. 
 
If this is an independent position, as the amendments purport to 
try to put in place, I’m wondering what the conditions are. Are 
they objective or subjective when it comes to the suspension of 
authority of both either the Children’s Advocate or the 
Ombudsman? 
 
Another of the amendments include, Mr. Speaker, the ability 
now of either one of these agents to file separate annual report. I 
think that’s important and I would certainly support that. That 
shows the independence of these two bodies and I think the 
perception of these two entities is very important. 
 
There is another amendment that I wanted to highlight. I think 
that it has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Higgins: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, one of my best supporters sitting in your west 
gallery from the constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow. Not 
only in my political life, but throughout our married life, he has 
supported me in many endeavours that I have taken our family 
on. 
 
I would like the members of the House to welcome my husband 
Don to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of 
the amendments that I noticed in this particular Bill is allowing 
the Ombudsman to have, and the Children’s Advocate to have 
access to whatever information that they require in order to 
conduct the appropriate investigation. I think that’s a very 
important element if we’re going to depend upon both of these 
entities so heavily. Certainly we do not want to restrict their 
ability to have access to the information and also to conduct any 
appropriate investigation that they feel is essential in trying to 
bring these complaints to resolution. 
 
There’s another amendment that I’ve noticed, that there is a 
waive of the requirement to submit a written complaint. It 
would appear that even though the Ombudsman and the 
Children’s Advocate role is so busy, to allow for open access, I 
think, is commendable. I guess the caution I would have, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the open access without written complaint 
would certainly increase the workload of the Ombudsman or the 
Children’s Advocate. That would be a concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I wanted to also highlight one of the other 
amendments that I have a little bit of trouble with. There is a 
provision in these amendments to allow the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to suspend the Children’s Advocate or the 
Provincial Ombudsman when, as I mentioned early in the 
session, the Assembly is not in session. 
 
I would like to be able to feel comfortable that in determining 
who was going to be suspended and for what reasons, there was 
just cause. 
 
I don’t notice in the amendments anything to do with an appeal 
process. It would appear that at the discretion of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, a person could be suspended for any 
particular reason that that the Governor in Council would feel 
was appropriate at the time. I don’t think that that is an 
appropriate . . . that’s not an appropriate amendment, and I do 
believe an appeal needs to be put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several of these concerns that I have with 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

these particular amendments and I would prefer that we would 
have a little more time to be able to resolve some of the 
concerns that I have raised. And so at this time I would like to 
move debate on this particular . . . adjourn debate, excuse me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 26 — The 
Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this Bill at 
first blush appears to be fairly straightforward. It will allow for 
a document to be tabled through the Clerk of the legislature 
when the House is not in session in order for the document to 
made public. 
And we on this side of the House support that. 
 
Currently the preparation time is about 210 days. Over the next 
four years it apparently is going to be trimmed to about 120 
days, and we certainly support that. 
 
These amendments are fine except for the fact that the 
information that is provided in the documents is not necessarily 
adequate. And there’s some very, very good examples of that, 
Mr. Speaker, in the annual reports from CIC that you not 
always include the activities that the Crowns may be engaged 
in. 
 
And in recent years in this Assembly we’ve seen examples of 
that such as the Channel Lake fiasco. There wasn’t one word of 
mention of it in the annual reports, Mr. Speaker. And while the 
government is moving to provide better disclosure in terms of 
time, they certainly aren’t doing anything in terms of content. 
And I think that’s the concern that we would have with this 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that regardless of when the 
information’s tabled, if the information is incomplete, it still 
doesn’t provide any better picture to the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
A better commitment from this government would be to give 
full disclosure of the activities that they’re involved in. And the 
most recent one, of course, is this pipeline deal that the province 
is involved in through SaskEnergy. There is lots and lots of 
questions surrounding that pipeline and whether there was 
actually a need for the pipeline or not. And there’s a lot of 
skepticism on this side of the House whether there was a need 
for that pipeline. 
 
And all you have to do is look back, Mr. Speaker, at the 
Channel Lake debate. As I said, there was not a word of 
mention whatsoever in any documents that the government 
tabled, late as they were. The fact of the matter was in the 
concluding . . . at the conclusion of the whole Channel Lake 
fiasco, we found that an assistant to the Premier, a Brian Topp 
who has successfully, I understand, landed a job with another 
NDP administration somewhere else . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well he’ll be turning up sooner or later in some NDP outfit, 
I’m sure. 
 
Anyway the fact of the matter is, he was the one that wrote the 
report. And I remember the member from Regina South telling 
the reporters that at the end of the day, they had to support it or 
pull the pin out of here, I think was the . . . well I think I can 
recall exactly his words — it was either we live with the report 
or walk away. And I’m not quite sure what that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well perhaps the member would like to help us 
a little bit. What did you say then? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I remember exactly and we can get the 
quote. I’m sure that there are people in our office that will dig 
that up for us in the next few hours while I’m on my feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is that the NDP when it 
comes to tabling documents, when it comes to giving full 
disclosure, when it comes to providing information to the 
taxpayers of this province, have never, have never given full 
disclosure. 
 
(1445) 
 
And that’s why the people of this province are very skeptical 
about the way you people operate in government. That’s why 
they distrust you. That’s why they don’t agree with you. That’s 
why they’re moving away in droves from you. That’s why in 
the last election you lost member after member. That’s why in 
the last election you just about lost entirely. That’s why in the 
last election the Saskatchewan Party got more votes than you 
did totally. 
 
And that’s why in the next election, that’s why in the next 
election you’ll be sitting over on this House — at least a few of 
you will be, at least a few of you might if a few of you care to 
hang around or care if you . . . a few of you might be able to 
manage to retain your seats. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the last 
election, if we would have had a couple more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s the concern that 
the taxpayers of this province has. And regardless of when this 
government says that they are going to provide information, 
regardless of when they come forward with the annual reports, 
regardless of what their stated intentions are, they’ve never 
carried them out, Mr. Speaker. They’ve never provided 
disclosure. 
 
They’ve provided trumped up reports written by employees of 
their administration, written by people within the Premier’s 
Executive Council offices about very, very serious issues of 
misuse of taxpayers’ money. And we’ve seen this in numerous 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. And so this piece of legislation, while 
it has some stated good in it, it certainly falls well short of the 
mark in terms of what is necessary when it comes to disclosure. 
 
And I hear members on the opposite side of the House chirping 
from their seats. If you really were interested in disclosure — if 
you really were interested in disclosure you’d be bringing a Bill 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

forward providing information about all areas of taxpayer 
expenditures whether it’s the Crown corporations or whether 
it’s the line departments. When it comes to the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, you will know that there is very, 
very little information. 
 
The Provincial Auditor of this province even has difficulty 
getting information from this government, even though in all of 
their campaign literature over the years, the last number of 
elections they have talked about open and accountable. And the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton stands in the House day 
after day, proud as punch with a blank folder in his hand saying 
that he’s providing the full information about the latest question 
from the opposition. 
 
The fact of the matter is when we get the information there’s a 
half a dozen words of explanation about a question that requires 
considerable detail. And while they have all this stated intention 
of providing full documentation and all of that sort of thing, 
when we receive it there is absolutely nothing in it that provides 
us with any closer explanation of the questions that we’ve asked 
for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the difficulty that we have with the 
administration when it comes to the kind of information that 
they should be providing to the people of this Assembly, and 
more importantly, to the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers 
in this province. 
 
As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we are considering some 
amendments to this legislation to deal with those kinds of 
concerns because we feel that full disclosure is important. We 
feel that that’s what’s necessary. 
 
And while we are consulting with people across the province 
about The Tabling of Documents Act, we feel it important that 
we do our job in opposition and take some time to move 
through this Bill, to look at it and consider some options in 
terms of amendments to the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, we would move for 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order, order. Order. Before I call the first 
subvote, I’ll invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Seated beside me is the deputy minister of the department, Dan 
Perrins; and seated behind Mr. Perrins is Bonnie Durnford 
who’s the assistant deputy minister. Seated behind me is Bob 
Wihlidal who’s the executive director of financial management. 
 
And towards the rear of the Chamber are Phil Walsh, who’s the 
executive director of income support; Marilyn Hedlund, the 
associate executive director of income support; Richard Hazel, 

the executive director of family and youth; and Deborah Bryck, 
the director of child daycare. 
 
I think that’s it. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the minister 
and to his officials this afternoon as we discuss issues 
surrounding your department, Social Services, and how it deals 
with the people of Saskatchewan, and in particular provides 
services to families and mainly to children. And in many cases 
how your department deals with children and how it . . . 
 
In some ways while I think the term to use in talking to 
workers, they’re there to protect the lives and the well-being of 
children. Sometimes one has to question whether or not they’re 
really looking at protecting the lives of children or even 
thinking of the well-being of children. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think over the next period 
of time as we debate Social Services, we’ll be raising a number 
of concerns and issues that have been brought to our attention in 
that regard — issues, certainly not just brought to our attention 
by individuals, but most recently by the Child Advocate, Debra 
Parker-Loewen in her report titled, I believe it’s listen to the 
children . . . Children and Youth . . . Listen to Their Voices. 
 
Mr. Minister, certainly she raises a number of concerns which 
we want to get into and discuss with you and your department 
officials as to where the department is heading, what steps are 
being taken to address the concerns that have been raised. 
 
But as I indicated, Mr. Chair, there are certainly a number of 
issues, a number of concerns that always come to the forefront 
in regards to the Department of Social Services. 
 
And when one looks at the department and recognizes the 
number of individuals that received care that are on social 
services and then the different concerns, and certainly issues 
arising from individuals vary from one region of the province to 
the other, and I’m not exactly sure how your department deals 
with these. Is there just a straight standard policy and no 
flexibility? And I think those are the issues we need to look at, 
such as rental for housing. And that’s a question I think, Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to begin with fairly shortly. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to know exactly how 
many individuals are working in the department, how many 
workers. Can we have a list of who’s working and salary ranges 
from the department in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We’ll certainly undertake to 
provide the member with that information, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, we trust that in that 
information you’ll have covering not only your office but all the 
people in the department. We would like to have an idea. And I 
take from your response that that’s the information we’ll be 
receiving. 
 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

Mr. Minister, a concern that has really . . . come across my desk 
on a number of occasions over the past little while is in regards 
to rent for housing, and this is an issue I think I’d like to get 
some clarification on. And the concerns that are raised are 
coming from individuals who are just finding, especially in the 
larger urban centres, that the standard level of rent just falls 
short of what is actually available. 
 
And in one case in particular, just most recently, an individual 
had called me and basically they’re being told by their landlord 
that the rent . . . rental rate is going to be increasing. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Minister, however, what this individual is already finding, 
she’s already digging into her basic allocation, I believe, of 
about . . . I think it’s just over 200-and-some dollars a month to 
cover rent because she’s short by about 40 or $45. And that’s 
just one situation. And no doubt your department hears from 
many individuals. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to have an idea of where the department is 
going in order to address this concern and this issue so that the 
issues aren’t always falling on our shoulders as MLAs. Not that 
we’re not looking for work to do, but I think some of these 
circumstances that come to our desk are circumstances that 
possibly should . . . there should be a policy or a means of 
addressing it through the department so that steps are taken and 
there are means of addressing the different concerns and 
recognizing that different costs and different regions that people 
face in order to provide for themselves and their families. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is the policy right now in regards to rent 
and what is your department doing to address the issue that 
arises when people find themselves that a standard rental rate is 
falling . . . that they’re receiving is actually much lower than the 
quality of housing or the availability of rental services that are 
available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, I 
want to thank the member for the question and for his 
comments. With respect to shelter allowances, shelter 
allowances are based on generally the size of the family that is 
making application to us, and can be further refined based on 
where it is that person lives in Saskatchewan. 
 
That is to say there will be one scale for people who live in the 
large urban areas, another one for small towns, and then another 
maximum for those who live in rural areas. So it’s those two 
factors combined which will determine what specific shelter 
allowance provision will be made for someone who applies to 
us for social assistance. 
 
There are some other special requirements that can be taken into 
account. For example, if a person has a disability which limits 
the kind of housing that might be appropriate for them, we can 
also take things like that into account in establishing what the 
shelter allowance will be. I think the member is correct in 
saying that, as the person who contacted him has a concern 
about the availability of housing, and the cost of housing is also 
a concern to us especially in the larger cities and also in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 

And I guess we have basically two ways to address that. One of 
the ways would be to increase the maximum shelter allowances 
that we provide to individual clients. But in doing that we don’t 
necessarily have any guarantee that landlords might not increase 
the rents commensurately. And therefore it is a question as to 
what would be gained if we increased the shelter allowances. 
 
We’re taking the approach that what we need to do is to invest 
more in social housing to see what we can do to increase the 
availability of decent, safe, affordable housing for low-income 
people including those in receipt of social assistance in the 
areas of the province where there is the greatest need, which as 
I indicated is in our urban areas — or large urban areas — and 
in the North. 
 
And the member will know that although it’s not contained in 
my budget per se, there are budget provisions in Municipal 
Affairs to increase the amount of money that will be going into 
social housing. The details of how we’ll invest that have yet to 
be worked out. But we’ve taken the approach that rather than 
simply increasing shelter allowances and not having a guarantee 
after having done that as to whether or not our clients will be 
better off and low-income people will be better off, and we’re 
better off to look at trying to improve the housing availability 
for low-income people, including people on assistance in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that. And 
I’m not saying I don’t disagree with the fact that just by 
bumping and basically saying here’s what the shelter allowance 
is, here’s what the maximum would be available, may not 
indeed promote some of what you’ve been talking about, that 
but actually at the end of the day we still find ourselves not 
really meeting the goal of individuals. 
 
But what I’d like to know is, for the sake of people out there 
who are finding it difficult right now and finding that they 
actually have to dig into their food and clothing allowance in 
order to meet their rental requirements . . . One particular case I 
have, and of course the two larger centres are probably even 
more difficult, the one individual that called me just recently 
and was almost in tears — didn’t know where to turn — is 
facing a situation where she’s living in a neighbourhood that we 
know in the two larger urban centres, some neighbourhoods just 
aren’t all that conducive to raising a family. 
 
She’s got an eight-month-old child. She’d like to move from it, 
but there isn’t anything, in what she has been following, as far 
as finding even rent that’s close to what she’s already being 
underfunded for — shelter allowance — to move into an area 
that would be more appropriate to raise a family. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I would like to know is what is your 
department doing to address these types of concerns, and what 
do we as MLAs do? Who do we put these people in touch with 
to have their cases possibly reviewed so that they are indeed 
being, if I can use the expression, treated fairly? So they have 
housing, adequate housing, to meet their needs in 
neighbourhoods that are more conducive to a family, raising a 
family, without having to draw from their meagre living 
allowance to supplement or to pay that shelter allowance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I just want to say that 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

we do provide in Social Services an appeal mechanism that if a 
particular client feels that there are circumstances that have not 
been appropriately considered by my department, that there is 
an independent appeal mechanism that can, should, will review 
their circumstances to see whether or not they’re being treated 
appropriately by the department, including the question of their 
shelter. 
 
But again I have to go back to the fundamental question. Given 
that all of us — and I think the member recognizes this — must 
deal with limited resources, and if it’s a question of investing 
those limited resources, where should those limited resources be 
invested? Is it at this point in increasing shelter allowances 
generally? And would that improve the situation? Or are we 
better off to look at the supply of affordable, decent, safe 
housing? 
 
My sense is that we should be looking at the latter. And my 
department will be . . . or is sitting down with the Department 
of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing to deal with that 
specific question to see how we can increase the supply of 
decent housing for low-income people — not just those on 
social assistance, but other low-income people as well. And that 
is the direction that we are going. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that’s all fine and dandy 
if . . . to increase and to build appropriate housing in this . . . in 
areas that would be more conducive, especially for young 
families and development of young families — for instance, 
some of our downtown neighbourhoods where the livelihood of 
the neighbourhood isn’t exactly what a family or a young 
family would like to bring their children up in. 
 
But what you’re talking about, Mr. Minister, is not available 
today. What you’re talking about, the discussions between your 
department and Municipal Government, is something that 
you’re hoping to achieve in the future. And I don’t dismiss this 
as . . . dismiss that as a laudable goal. I think certainly that’s an 
area that you need to take a look at, and I commend you for 
looking at it. But what . . . it doesn’t address the immediate 
need. 
 
And you mentioned about an appeal mechanism. When a 
person has come to the point where they really don’t have all 
the basic skills to find employment outside of the home . . . And 
one of the situations that I ran into was . . . is an individual who 
did have work but due to medical problems was unable to 
continue working. And most people do not find that employers 
. . . there are enough employers around who are willing to hire 
someone for two or three hours a day if that’s about the limits 
they may face as a result of health problems. And also that 
amount of work may not work or be all that conducive in 
receiving support from Social Services as well. 
 
I’m aware of the fact that we’ve put in place, about three or four 
years ago now, a plan that is there to supplement. If a person 
can find employment, encouraging people to get employment 
and that’s . . . When I talk to individuals, I talk to them and ask 
them if it’s possible for them to find employment, if they’ve 
actually tried to find employment. And what I find, Mr. 
Minister, is that people come back to me and they say, you 
know yes, the job that I did find, I started working there, but 
actually I had less in my pocket. And I didn’t have as much to 

cover my needs as I was getting on assistance at the time. 
 
And so there’s two ways of looking at the circumstances. And a 
basic minimum wage doesn’t leave you with a lot even at 40 
hours a week if you have the opportunity to find full-time work. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what does a family or what does a single 
parent do today with an eight-month-old child in trying to find a 
better . . . not necessarily a better-quality home. I think they’re 
satisfied with the home, the building, the shelter that they live in 
right now. But by moving to another neighbourhood with a 
shelter that . . . or a house that would be somewhat similar, 
however, in an upscale neighbourhood it’s probably going to be 
a little more money. What does that person do? 
 
You mentioned about an appeal mechanism. Who do we put 
that person in touch with in regards to that appeal if that’s 
what’s necessary, if they just don’t seem to get anywhere with 
the department at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
appeal, I would encourage that person to contact his or her 
worker and to ask the worker as to how it is that she should go 
about appealing. And if she can’t get that information from her 
worker, I would certainly encourage her to call my office 
because we’d be more than pleased to provide that and to let the 
person know what rights they have of appeal. 
 
We take the appeal mechanism, if you like, seriously. We think 
that it’s necessary where you have a department, you try to 
provide assistance — and some of the decisions might be 
seemingly at times somewhat subjective — that there is an 
outside body that can independently assess whether or not the 
person who’s in receipt of assistance is being dealt with fairly 
and appropriately. And we take that seriously and want to do 
that. 
 
The member also raised the question of this particular case, or 
this, you know . . . and more than one. 
 
(1515) 
 
We have, as the member acknowledged, two years ago, in 1988, 
set in to place the building independence program, which is 
intended to provide real, substantial incentives for low-income 
working families. We’ve taken the approach that we need to 
encourage low-income families to work because even if a 
low-income parent is starting off at a minimum wage, it is 
through work that ultimately a person can gain experience, can 
gain or achieve better opportunities for better jobs down the 
line, as opposed to locking them into the welfare system. 
 
So what we’ve done in conjunction with the federal government 
is to provide all families, depending on their income, with a 
Child Benefit. There is a combined National Child Benefit and 
. . . or federal Child Benefit and a Saskatchewan Child Benefit 
which, depending on the circumstance of the family, might be 
up to $2,500 approximately per child. 
 
In addition to that under the building independence program, 
we put into place the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
program, which is not automatically calculated based on one’s 
income from the previous year, but is a program to which 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

people need to apply. And again, it’s intended to encourage 
people to work and recognize that if you work, that you may 
have additional costs that you might not have if you were just 
simply in receipt of assistance — costs such as transportation to 
get to work, clothing, and child care costs, which are very 
significant, and in the case you mentioned would be an 
important consideration. And I think in terms of that program 
that family might receive up to $2,000 per child, and again it 
depends on the circumstances and the kind of income that they 
derive. 
 
In addition thereto, we recognize that health costs for children 
are a major concern of low-income people. When families are 
in receipt of assistance, we provide coverage for additional 
health costs; whether it’s eyeglasses or prescription drugs or 
dental needs, we will provide coverage for that. But if a family 
in the past moved off assistance, then that coverage would stop. 
 
And so we’ve taken the position that we should continue to 
provide assistance to that family, at least for their children, so 
that if their children need eyeglasses or there’s surgery that’s 
. . . dental surgery that’s required or drug costs — if the child 
has asthma for example — that we will be there through that 
additional health coverage to allay any concerns they might 
have about those costs and in that way try to make sure that 
they don’t need to go back onto assistance simply to have those 
additional health costs dealt with. 
 
And we take the position that the person that you’re talking 
about and others in society need to be encouraged and provided 
generous incentives to work, because it’s through work that 
ultimately that they can find some hope of getting out of 
poverty. But to create a situation where you provide incentives 
to stay on assistance, on social assistance, that then too is a 
recipe for locking them into poverty. So the approach that 
we’ve taken is to provide incentives. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
certainly pleased to hear you speaking about the fact that there’s 
nothing wrong with people going out and finding actual gainful 
employment. You and I remember a day when the placements 
were different and I remember the opposition of the day 
certainly criticizing the former administration for even asking 
people or putting people to work, and criticized for those 
initiatives. 
 
And I can assure you that whether you will have agreed with 
some of the policies of that time, I know in circumstances 
talking to communities that implemented some of the programs, 
that actually a number of people who had been on assistance 
over a period of years . . . One community in particular over a 
period of years hired people on assistance and never did hire the 
same person back. And out of eight people that they had 
actually hired under that program, seven of them were full-time 
employees. 
 
There was only one individual who continued on social 
assistance and that individual moved to another community 
where the community wasn’t implementing the program of 
helping them trying to . . . by providing work and Social 
Services providing some supplements like you were talking of, 
so that they would see that their gainful employment is 
something that can be a benefit. 

And I firmly believe that, because I believe if a person feels . . . 
has a better feeling about themselves, a greater well-being 
knowing that they are contributing to themselves and to their 
family . . . And so I think that’s very important and I’m pleased 
to hear that your department is talking of and is continuing to 
move towards methods and ways of assisting people find 
gainful employment. 
 
Before we move from this though, Mr. Minister, I would like, I 
would like you to give me the basic cost of shelter allowance 
and utilities — that’ll vary from one area to the next — what 
the basic allowance is for family, what the additional allowance 
per child is. 
 
And I’d also like to know who the contact person or what the 
mechanism is for the appeal process in regards to disagreements 
regarding shelter or other costs that are received by Social 
Services recipients. Who do they contact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, first I just want to 
say to the member that, although it’s not my department, the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
continues to provide opportunities for social assistance 
recipients to gain a meaningful work experience, to help prepare 
them for full-time employment. They do this through work 
placement programs very significantly; I think there’s about 
1,600 clients or so that Post-Secondary assists throughout the 
province. 
 
There’s also a community works program where there’s almost 
a thousand people in Saskatchewan who gain work experience 
through job placements with community-based organizations. 
And there’s also a bridging program which places people with 
private employers, I believe, and also community-based 
employers to help them gain experience and to become job 
ready. So we continue to provide those kind of opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the social assistance rates, the rates . . . the 
standard allowance for one adult . . . one adult, one child, the 
basic allowance — food, clothing, personal, and household — 
is $230. The shelter allowance would be $385, the utilities 
would be actual, and in addition to that, there would $210 that a 
person would receive through the Child Benefit, combined 
federal and Saskatchewan Child Benefit. Plus there would be 
. . . if that person also had some employment, there would be 
further assistance that they could qualify for through the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. 
 
And if it would help the member, we can certainly send across a 
comprehensive list of all of the various rates, depending on the 
number of adults and children and the like, and provide that to 
him. 
 
In terms of the appeal process, we could also undertake to 
provide the member with a bit of a write-up on the appeal 
process and how that works and who it is that people should be 
appealing to. 
 
But our workers know and are expected that if clients raise 
concerns, that those clients should be told about the appeal 
process in their area — how they’re accessed at, how the 
process works, who also might be in a position to help that 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

person. Because we recognize that not all people in receipt of 
social assistance are in a position to advocate for themselves. 
Obviously not, because they contact your office and they 
contact my office because they don’t feel that they’re in a 
position to advocate for themselves. 
 
So depending on the centres, there are also people in the 
community that are in a position to assist that person through 
the appeal process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that 
response, and certainly I would appreciate a breakdown of how 
the appeal process works specifically, for my understanding. 
And I certainly will pass on to anyone who comes to my . . . 
brings it to my attention — if they’re running into problems that 
they should contact the worker certainly if they feel that they 
have . . . their worker hasn’t really been listening to the 
concerns raised — to contact my office again and we’ll 
certainly follow up on it. 
 
The one question I do have. You mentioned basic allowance of 
230 and then a child benefit of 210 per child. Is that per child 
over and above the 230? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It seems either I’m not 
getting all the facts or something’s missing here because some 
of the most recent ones . . . and I have two or three that some of 
your office staff are actually looking up on my behalf so I’m 
not going to comment on those until I get all the information 
and nor do I intend to bring individuals before us here. 
 
But just the numbers here, you’re giving me here, even if they 
do have to draw a bit from their basic allowance to cover rent, 
with the Child Benefit there should be a little more to work with 
than what I’ve been informed about. And I’ll do some, 
certainly, some follow-up as to what actually is being received 
by clients. Normally I do that anyway just to see exactly where 
people are at. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned as well the services provided by 
Post-Secondary Education, and just Post-Secondary doing a few 
things. I don’t know, and you can correct me if I’m wrong, but 
are they working in conjunction with your department to 
provide some real training opportunities for individuals to help 
them get off assistance? And I think maybe if you wouldn’t 
mind just expanding on it a bit. 
 
The reason I ask the question is because I’ve had in just the past 
few months, a few people have come to me who are on 
assistance and the issue that they raised . . . in one case an 
individual had taken a special care aide course and there 
weren’t any real jobs opening up so she was looking at moving 
on into accounting. There seemed to be more of an opening and 
I believe there was a firm that had some availability or was 
looking to add some staff people. 
 
(1530) 
 
The problem she had was that to go and take this extra 
additional training, she would have to move onto . . . she told 
me she would have to move off of social assistance onto a 

student loan, and again through the student loan provide for 
herself. 
 
But she wasn’t in . . . and I’m not exactly sure how that works. 
But it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that moving people right off 
of social assistance, or saying they’ve got to move into student 
loans, first of all, you’ve got to qualify for a student loan, and 
that’s a very difficult thing to do. 
 
And what’s your department doing to assist young people in 
that way, especially in light of the fact that we’ve got legislation 
before this Assembly; that is you’ve recognized that your 
department has a responsibility to individuals who especially 
have been under their care for a number of years and at the age 
of 18, prior to this legislation, would basically be cut off and 
they were on their own, and now you’re recognizing that you 
will offer them some assistance and support till they’re 21. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the question is: what is your department doing 
to actually help people gain the educational services that are 
needed, or assistance in order to give them some of those 
educational assets that will give them real . . . an opportunity for 
meaningful and gainful employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member has asked 
about . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: —Mr. Chair, the member from 
Moosomin has asked about educational support for people who 
receive assistance. 
 
We as a department again try to support specific clients with 
specific needs. If we think that there is an educational 
opportunity, a specific training program, depending on that 
client’s circumstances . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m going to invite 
all members that wish to participate in a sidebar conversation to 
please have the courtesy to do so outside of the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I 
indicated, we do try to . . . If there are clients that have specific 
educational needs, we try to work with them to see if we can 
assist them. In the main, we provide referrals to programs that 
are run by Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, for example, has 
a provincial training allowance, which is a flat-rated benefit but 
more generous than what we might provide for people on social 
assistance, as a means of supporting social assistance recipients 
and also Employment Insurance recipients in Saskatchewan to 
gain basic education upgrading. But I’m not really in a position 
to deal with the details of the programs that Post-Secondary 
Education provides because I’m not responsible for that 
department, although we do work closely with them to see if 
they do have space available for clients from my department 
and to see what can be done to help people upgrade their 
education and their employment skills so that they are in a 
position to . . . be in a better position to get jobs in our labour 
market. 
 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

So that’s one way of saying that I’d certainly encourage the 
member and other members to ask my colleague, the minister 
responsible for Post-Secondary Education, about the specific 
training opportunities that his department provides not only for 
social assistance recipients but also for Employment Insurance 
recipients, and I think he’d be pleased to answer that. I know 
that if I try to answer for him, he’s sitting next to me, he’ll 
probably kick me in the shins or something like that and say 
that’s my business. 
 
But suffice to say, I think there are probably about 4,000 people 
in Saskatchewan who either are in receipt of social assistance 
now and we provide them with specific help for upgrading their 
skills; or some of those are in receipt of a provincial training 
allowance and therefore not in receipt of social assistance but 
are upgrading their education and their skills under the umbrella 
of Post-Secondary Education. 
 
But suffice to say that, like the member, we agree that the more 
that we can do to help unemployed people to upgrade their 
education and their skills and to put them in a position to 
compete for jobs in the job market, the better off we are. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, maybe 
what we should do is ask the member, the minister responsible 
for Post-Secondary Education, to get into the debate as well. It 
seems to me there is an overlap, and it might be more 
convenient even, say, down the road when we get to 
Post-Secondary Education if we could have a bit of a dialogue 
with the two ministers available so we get a better 
understanding. That might be a way of addressing it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, a couple of my colleagues would like . . . 
have a couple of areas that they’d like to address this afternoon 
while we have a chance. So I’m just going to wrap this up by 
saying this right now in regards to this particular issue, I take it 
that your department and the workers available throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan should be able to really assist 
individuals on social assistance to find the proper channels that 
are needed to. If you will pursue further education or pursue 
some job opportunities through the co-operative programs that 
are there with social . . . with Post-Secondary Education. 
 
And from what you just said I’m going to just say . . . or take it 
that being that whenever someone comes to me I’m going to 
invite them to go back to their worker. And if indeed we’re 
finding roadblocks or the worker isn’t that familiar . . . I’m 
trusting the workers are familiar enough with the programming 
to at least assist people through. It seems to me when the 
individuals have come to me they’ve been gone to their worker, 
they asked for and the worker refers them to somebody else and 
they just seem to be getting, if you will, the paper shuffle, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So we will see whether or not what you have just been sharing 
with us this afternoon is actually working and if people . . . if 
we can refer them to the worker, and the worker is doing what 
you’re telling us this afternoon they should be doing, then we 
should be able to assist people in finding that — whether it’s 
some further education or gainful job employment — that 
opportunity to move totally off assistance. 
 
At this time I’m going to defer to some of my colleagues. 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I just . . . on the 
member’s last point, yes. But again, as I indicated we try to 
assess individual client’s needs and their circumstances and as 
to whether or not our support would be appropriate. 
 
I think the member can recognize that if a 19-year-old person 
showed up at Social Services office and said that, look I don’t 
live with my family; I’m on my own; I have no income. What 
I’d really like to do is to go through university to become a 
lawyer. Will you pay for that? Well there’s obvious limits to the 
kind of assistance that we would be providing. 
 
But suffice to say our workers are in a position to refer our 
clients to Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training to see what assistance they can provide for people in 
certain circumstances. And there are also in addition to that, 
depending again on a client’s circumstances, we may as a 
department also be in a position to assist that person. 
 
And as I’ve indicated, I think that there are at this point about 
4,000 people in Saskatchewan that are receiving some form of 
assistance either through Post-Secondary Education and were 
previously social assistance recipients, or are currently social 
assistance recipients. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, I very much appreciate that. 
Mr. Minister, I would like to discuss a couple of partnership 
agreements — one more of a local nature and certainly one of a 
more provincial nature. 
 
But I would like to start with an initiative in the Hudson Bay 
area that you may very well be aware of. It was an initiative of 
the Hudson Bay School Division, the Porcupine opportunities 
program, community living division of Social Services, and the 
community of Hudson Bay itself, to design and develop a 
program for people with disabilities that would provide 
transition out of the school system into both a vocational 
program and some pre-employment type of programs. 
 
Originally the understanding was that this program could be 
funded as early as January 1 of this year. I understand that most 
of the work that needed to be done in order to put it in place 
was done. And I would like to know if there is any provision in 
this budget to support that program, and to what degree it will 
be supported? 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The answer is yes, Mr. Chair, 
although we’re not aware what the specific amount is at this 
point. But yes, there is money in the budget. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. And 
when will that be made available? I understand that the 
community and the various organizations involved are feeling a 
certain degree of frustration at this point in that they haven’t 
been made aware of when it will be made available, how much 
will be made available, and what the conditions of it being 
made available will be. Perhaps if you could respond. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, our 
funds are there. They’re there to support . . . 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

The Chair: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, our funds are there. 
They’re available now to support the program. My 
understanding is that we’re just trying to sort out with some of 
the other partners that you mentioned to ensure that their funds 
are also there, and that the necessary understandings are there to 
support the program. 
 
(1545) 
 
And we do support the program, want to provide the money, but 
there’s some wrinkles that still have to be ironed out with the 
other parties to make sure their funds are there. But our money 
is ready to go. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
expect that those are operational dollars that you’re referring to. 
And do you know if any capital monies will be made available? 
There will be some capital requirements in order to get this 
program off the ground, and are any capital monies of any kind 
going to be made available to facilitate that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as I understand it, our 
funds are targeted primarily to provide operational support for 
this venture. That there is a local service club that is intending 
to raise funds for renovations to a facility to accommodate the 
program. 
 
If there should prove to be some problem in terms of raising the 
funds locally, we’d certainly be prepared to give some 
consideration to additional assistance as may be required. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to move on to a broader and larger partnership arrangement 
now, and that would be the partnership arrangement between 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living, and the 
community living division of Social Services partnership. 
 
Over the years this partnership I think has worked very, very 
well. There has been some concern on the part of two partners 
though, SARC and SACL (Saskatchewan Association of 
Community Living), that in terms of moving forward with any 
of the decisions that are being made jointly, on occasion the 
cost of that falls back to them. 
 
And while community living division of Social Services has on 
occasion provided some assistance to the broader-based 
provincial partnership, I think that they have felt on occasion, as 
I indicated, that the larger responsibility has fallen back to them 
in order to move some of these solutions that they’re providing 
for a lot of the issues across the province. 
 
And I’m wondering, in this budget, will there be any support for 
the SACL, SARC, and CLD (community living division) 
partnership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that 
although the government has provided additional support for 
community . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Although the government is 
providing an additional 2 per cent in support for 
community-based organizations to assist them in salary needs 
of their employees, and I believe a further 1 per cent for general 
operating increases . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Does the member for Kindersley wish to 
make a statement from his feet respecting the ruling of the 
Chair? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Point of order, Mr. Chair. As you know, and as 
many members of this House will know, the minister 
responsible for Social Services used to heckle continually from 
his seat. And it comes with a great deal of concern to members 
on this side of the House when he stands and then sits down and 
requires absolute . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. The Chair . . . Order. Order. I thank the 
member for Kindersley for stating what . . . Order. I thank the 
hon. member for Kindersley for stating what he believed is a 
point of order. I simply respond by saying that the Chair neither 
asks for nor particularly is desirous of any help from members. 
 
I’m going to simply report to you that the minister has not 
asked for silence. In fact, the minister has been encouraging the 
Chair to allow the heckling to continue. 
 
However, however, having . . . Order. When a member asks a 
question, I think that member has a right to hear the answer. 
And likewise, the minister has a right to hear the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Now where 
were we? 
 
We have provided a 2 per cent increase to CBOs, 
community-based organizations, to a system with wage needs 
of their employees; a further 1 per cent to a system with other 
inflationary pressures that they might have. 
 
Having said that, there are no additional administrative funds 
proposed to be provided to either the Saskatchewan Association 
of Community Living or the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres as such. 
 
Having said that, we are in discussions with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres or SARC, to inquire 
about their possibility of administering an initiative that is 
contained in this year’s budget, I believe a sum of 
approximately $300,000 to promote the transition of persons 
with disabilities from a sheltered workshop or rehabilitation 
centres into supported employment in the job market in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’re . . . although there’s no additional great administrative 
support in addition to the 1 per cent, we are in discussions with 
them about some additional program dollars so that they might 
be able to administer that initiative for us. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, is it 
not correct that that additional $300,000 comes from the old 
VRDP (vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons program) 
funding and is not in fact part of this budget; through EAPD 
(employability assistance for people with disabilities) or 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

through any initiatives, that this is part of what was left once the 
old VRDP program was terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, 
the $300,000 is new funding specifically targeted to assist 
persons with disabilities to make the transition. 
 
In addition to that, the member will note that under 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, there’s a further 
$1 million budgeted for employment assistance for persons with 
disabilities, which I understand also represents an increase over 
the old VRDP program. 
 
The member also raises a question again where there’s a bit of 
an overlap with Post-Secondary Education. And perhaps the 
member from Moosomin had a good idea that perhaps both 
departments should be here some days so that where there are 
those areas of overlap, that we can get into a more fruitful 
discussion of those issues. And I appreciate that suggestion. 
 
But, in short, the $300,000 that is targeted to assist persons with 
disabilities to make that transition is new funding and it’s new 
funding that I personally am very excited about. 
 
I think that there’s a growing recognition, as the member will 
know, in our society that we need to do more than simply 
provide opportunities for persons with disabilities to work in 
cloisters or sheltered workshops or rehabilitation centres, but to 
the extent that we can, to support them to gain . . . to achieve 
real jobs in the real economy so that they too have a sense of 
doing some real things in their life the same as everyone else. 
 
So I’m personally very supportive of this initiative. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — So I understand it then, Mr. Minister, that 
the money would be new to your department, but probably 
would be the residual funding from VRDP brought over from 
Post-Secondary Education. Is that correct? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well again, Mr. Chair, the funding 
in our department is new. And I’m . . . we’re guessing 
somewhat again because it’s a different department, but it’s our 
understanding that the funds that are allocated for EAPD are 
also new funds. So if you like, there’s additional funds of $1.3 
million in our budget to support persons with disabilities to 
enter the mainstream of the job market in Saskatchewan. 
 
But having said that, we will undertake to check with 
Post-Secondary Education that the statements that we’re in a 
sense making on their behalf are in fact correct. And we’ll 
certainly get the member the, to . . . make sure that the member 
has the accurate information. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a question 
in terms of the administration of the 300,000: will that be 
administered solely by SARC or will that be administered 
through the SARC-SACL-CLD partnership, the province-wide 
partnership of those three provincial organizations? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the $300,000 is . . . our 
discussions with SARC are such that we anticipate that SARC 

will administer the funds. 
 
They will have an advisory board that will include for sure the 
Saskatchewan Association of Community Living. They will 
obtain proposals from the various SARC members and SACL 
branches about how people in various parts of Saskatchewan 
might be able to increase the opportunities in communities for 
persons with disabilities, and therefore increase the uptake of 
funds that are there under employment assistance for persons 
with disabilities. That’s how we propose to expend the 
$300,000. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just 
one more question, and then I have a number of colleagues who 
would like to join in the questioning in and on the estimates. 
 
But just very quickly, I think that there has been a tremendous 
amount of success in this province in creating employment for 
citizens with disabilities, both through the membership of 
SARC and through organizations such as SARCAN. One of the 
major impediments, however, over the years has been the lack 
of resources to be able to go out and talk to the business 
community, to talk to the general public about the benefits of 
employing people with disabilities. 
 
And my concern is, is there any funding available in this budget 
to be able to do that? Where individual community-based 
organizations, some of the provincial associations that are 
involved, can go and speak with business about the merits of 
employing people with disabilities? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
the $300,000 is intended to. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister, I believe it was the 
last time we had estimates, we spoke a little bit about the 
situation with regard to child care provisions. And I wonder if 
we could just continue quickly that discussion. 
 
There is a situation in my constituency in Kindersley that . . . I 
don’t want to bring the child care provider’s name into it. I may 
provide it to you after our discussion here. But there was some 
concern about the problems associated with the current 
legislation and the number of children that you can have within 
a private home care or private child care facility. I believe it’s 
eight that you can currently have. 
 
And you probably . . . I’m sure you are aware, and your 
officials are aware, of the difficulty that that presents in some 
cases. In this particular case, Mr. Minister, this lady is 
providing child care to a number of people in Kindersley. The 
difficulty that she is faced with is that many of her clients, many 
of the parents of children, are part-time employees of various 
businesses in Kindersley and area. And as a result of being 
part-time employees, they’re called to work on relatively short 
notice and require immediate child care services if they’re 
going to enter work that day . . . go into the workforce that day. 
 
And so, as a result of that, what happens is at times she is faced 
with a situation where many of her clients come to her asking 
for child care for their families, for their children. And, Mr. 
Minister, it obviously presents some challenges for her because 
she finds herself in a situation where she may have eight people 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

turn up on a regular basis, and then three or four — as a result 
of part-time employment — call and ask if they can bring their 
children over for . . . to deal for child care. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if there is any latitude in the 
legislation, or if we can somehow or another deal with this type 
of situation, to address it. And as I said, I’d be prepared to share 
with you the lady’s name after our discussion here. I spoke with 
her this morning and she was wondering . . . we had talked 
about it earlier if we could follow up a little bit on this, Mr. 
Minister, to try and resolve this situation. She’s not in any way, 
shape, or form trying to circumvent the legislation, but she’s not 
always in a position to be able to turn down people when they 
show up at the door wanting child care services. 
 
So perhaps you would care to comment at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there are . . . or Mr. 
Chair, there are legislative amendments to The Child Care Act 
before the Assembly at this point which propose to deal exactly 
with the question that the member has raised. 
 
The member is right that a family child care provider is limited 
to providing care for no more than eight children at any one 
time. And for that matter, whether they’re licensed or 
unlicensed, we take the position that there should not be more 
than eight children. As the member can appreciate, at a very 
busy time of day, how could a child care provider in the case of 
say, a fire emergency, be able to evacuate a great number of 
children. 
 
So, like the fire commissioners, we would have some very 
grave concerns from a safety point of view, and have concerns I 
think importantly from the point of view of the quality of child 
care that might be provided if the numbers get too large. I mean 
what kind of child care could be provided if a person had a huge 
number of children in a home and no help to do that. 
 
So, in short we put amendments before the Legislative 
Assembly to expand the type of child care that can be provided. 
That if that child care provider can get another person to assist 
them, then they can care for up to 12 children in their home. 
And that’s the amendments that we’re making. 
 
So in that particular case if a person normally has say seven or 
eight children but there are a number of families who need 
placement in that home, if she has another child care provider 
that she can also bring into the home at that point and it meets 
local municipal bylaws, then yes, she would be assisted to do 
that. And I might say that I’m also prepared, pursuant to 
minister’s orders before the legislation is enacted, to provide 
that person with that ability to do that now. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move we report progress. 
 
(1615) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the hon. 
minister to introduce her officials. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
On my left here is the acting deputy minister, Larry Spannier. 
Next to Larry is Debbie Wilkie, director of marketing and 
corporate affairs. Behind Larry Spannier is Rob Greenwood, 
assistant deputy minister of policy division; next to him is 
Donna Johnson, executive director of corporate management. 
Then we have Lynn Oliver, who’s the chief information officer, 
information technology; and Bryon Burnett, who’s the assistant 
deputy of operations. 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials that are here today. I would like to 
just direct a couple of general questions to you, Madam 
Minister, if I could and then we’ll get into maybe some more 
detailed questions in a few minutes. 
 
One of the important things that I feel about economic 
development is make sure that everybody is on the same 
wavelength as what your objectives are. Do you have, or could 
you relate to us, the overall vision statement that you have or 
the published mission statement that you have for your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I would be pleased 
to read that to the member opposite: 
 

To grow and diversify the Saskatchewan economy by 
building on our existing strengths. 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you, 
Madam Minister. One of the most striking things that I’ve 
noticed about the Estimates, Madam Minister, is some of the 
things in the summary page of the expenditures. I’d like to just 
touch one or two of them. 
 
The first one that I have noticed is the policy. I notice an 
increase over 1998-9, again in 1999-2000, and the estimated for 
2001 is something like a 32 per cent increase in the policy 
section. Can you explain why that increase is necessary and . . . 
is there an increase in staff for instance? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chair, what the increase is for is 
the research and the consultation for the economic development 
strategy that’s coming. 
 
But I would like to say a word about the role of the Department 
of Economic Development in the government, because I think 
it’s often not well understood. And I think often groups who 
talk about, well you don’t need a Department of Economic 
Development, don’t understand what the main role is within 
government. 
 
If you look at the two major economic development projects 
that this province has landed in the last 12 months — the 
Synchrotron project and the forestry initiative — the initiative 
for both of those projects came from this department. A large 
part of the initiative is putting together the pieces to make the 
Synchrotron a reality. That is, ensuring that we had what we 
required on our part in terms of the research capacity, the 
training, but also that we had the contacts with other 
jurisdictions — that the federal government was onside, that the 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

CFI (Canadian Foundation for Innovation) was onside — the 
Government of Ontario has put $10 million into this project — 
that the Government of Ontario was onside. And so a large part 
of their job is to work within government and with other 
jurisdictions to land these sorts of projects. 
 
And I want to just say to the members opposite: if you didn’t 
have these folks, you wouldn’t have the Synchrotron project. It 
is that simple. And I say that to people when I’m in Saskatoon. I 
say people who come from that bent . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Beg your pardon, sir? I didn’t hear what the member said. 
 
But I do think . . . when I talk to people in Saskatoon about the 
Synchrotron and I say, you know, we played a major role in 
landing this project, I don’t think there’s anybody involved . . . 
Ralph Goodale himself wouldn’t deny that fact. Would this 
project be here if these folks weren’t here? And the answer is 
simply, no, it wouldn’t because it took years and years of work 
to put that together. 
 
I’d like to take a moment to also talk about the forestry strategy 
which again means 10,000 new jobs in three years — more jobs 
if you look beyond the three-year time frame — more than half 
a billion dollars of private sector investment. What that required 
was a couple of things: Working with the Department of 
Environment to ensure that we had the right balance between 
protecting the environment but also fully utilizing the wood 
supply to bring the companies here; and then contacting the 
companies to ensure that we had competitive bids for the 
different projects. 
 
So when you talk about research and development increasing, 
in fact the number of bodies hasn’t increased dramatically, but 
the role played by this department in government is absolutely 
key to ensuring that those sorts of projects land on this 
province. 
 
And I can guarantee to the members opposite — neither the 
Synchrotron nor the forestry initiative would be here if these 
folks weren’t here. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair, and thank you, Madam Minister. 
I have some questions about the statement that you were just 
referring to. 
 
I really believe that when you referred to partnership, I think 
that’s an important part of economic development. In my view, 
economic development is probably the one key feature that all 
departments of the government need to be focusing on. Without 
economic development . . . it’s really the essence of what the 
whole government should be focusing on besides some of the 
social things. 
 
Now that partnership is very important. Did you, in your 
discussions with the . . . for Synchrotron or for the northern 
initiatives, who was involved in the what you call the 
partnerships? Was private industry involved? Was Education 
involved? Was research . . . How broad a range was the 
partnership? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think one of the things, Madam 
Chair, there that we’re most proud of is the level of partnership 
involved in the Synchrotron project. It involved the Canada 

Foundation for Innovation, the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Government of Canada, the University of Saskatchewan, the 
city of Saskatoon, the University of Alberta, and the University 
of Western Ontario, the National Research Council, SaskPower. 
 
And I add to this list, because this list is a couple of weeks old, 
the Government of Ontario now. And there will be other 
governments coming on as partners in this project. 
 
So absolutely, and the . . . I think what the point I want to make 
is you don’t get those partnerships by picking up the phone to 
Al Palladini, the Minister of Economic Development in 
Ontario, and saying Al, how about 10 million bucks? Could we 
have it? And I’m sorry I don’t have time to visit you, but please 
send it in the mail. 
 
You develop those partnerships by these folks going down to 
Ontario, talking about the project, talking about the benefits of 
the Synchrotron to Ontario companies, and saying over a period 
of time, here’s our case and here’s why we expect you to invest 
in it, and why ultimately the Government of Ontario did invest 
in that project. 
 
Going back to forestry. Absolutely, we work across government 
with the Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training, with the Department of Highways. But again the role 
of these people is to co-ordinate that all so that when you go to 
an investor who says, well okay, maybe I would be interested in 
investing in forestry in the province of Saskatchewan, you can 
say, okay, fine, here we have the Department of Finance. We’ve 
got the best tax regime for your company. You’re going to pay 
the lowest taxes of any jurisdiction in Canada, right here in this 
province. The least expensive place in which to do business. 
 
We’re going to say, because we have worked with 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, we’re going to 
have a skilled, trained workforce ready to go. And we are going 
to work with the Department of Highways to ensure that the 
other road infrastructures are there. 
 
So that’s exactly what happens. You work in partnership within 
your own government and in partnership with other 
governments across Canada to get them onside for your 
projects. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Chairperson, I noticed . . . And this 
is from an annual report, it’s somewhat dated now, it’s 1998-99. 
There’s a section on . . . cabinet committee on economic 
development, and it was renamed at that time. It was renamed 
the cabinet committee on economic — oh, sorry, on the 
economy. 
 
Is that committee still in operation now? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Madam Chair, yes, it is. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — What are some of the activities that you use 
the cabinet committee for? Or is it a departmental decision 
whenever you’re trying to focus in on a particular Economic 
Development activity? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Madam Chair, that’s actually a very 
good question. The role of the cabinet committee on the 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

economy is to do exactly the coordination that I’m talking 
about. 
 
So that, for example, the forestry initiative would have gone 
through the cabinet committee on the economy over a period of 
several months; so that you knew that the training component 
was in place, the highways component was in place. We’re now 
working on the secondary processing components — the 
agro-forestry component. 
 
And that’s where the policy decision is made. Here is what this 
government is going to do in this particular sector and all of the 
departments have to appear and have their part of the package 
in place. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam 
Minister, I want to maybe move ahead a little bit to get your 
view on some of the things that Economic Development uses or 
maybe should be using in terms of making it friendlier for 
investment, friendlier for economic development. I’m thinking 
in terms of the use of tax credits. 
 
Now I know that you use tax credits in certain industries. Can 
you tell me how successful those are, particularly in the film 
industry, and what is achieved and what is the objective? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Madam Chair, to the member 
opposite. Tax credits are an important part of what we use to 
attract companies to Saskatchewan. That is, we’ll take a 
particular sector — and we have targeted the number of them 
— manufacturing and processing. We need this province to do 
more manufacturing and processing of our products rather than 
shipping them out raw. 
 
So one of the things we do is we change the tax regime to 
ensure that we have the lowest taxes of any jurisdiction with 
which we compete in manufacturing and processing, which we 
do; or livestock facilities would be another example. 
 
So we use tax credits to ensure that in the areas that we have 
targeted for growth, we have the lowest possible taxes of any 
possible competitors. You mentioned the film tax credit. That’s 
an excellent example. The film tax credit has led to tremendous 
growth in the film sector. But what we also do is we monitor 
the results. 
 
So if we bring in manufacturing and processing tax credits, 
what we look for is an increase in activity in terms of the value 
of the production and jobs to ensure that you actually are 
realizing the jobs that were promised by the companies, and in 
every case so far, these tax credits have worked. 
 
In this last budget we went for a major income tax cut because 
the business community told us of all of the tax measures that 
you could put in place to grow this province, a dramatic 
four-year plan to cut income taxes would be the most important. 
And so that was the growth tax cut in this budget, was the 
income tax cut. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, if it has worked well with 
the film industry and some of the other ones that you’ve 
referred to, would you give consideration to expanding that to 
virtually all of the economic activity and industry that are trying 

to create economic activity in the province? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think the position that you 
have to begin with is you’ve only got a limited amount of 
money available. This province still has a huge debt as you 
know. So you have to look at a sector and say okay, fine, for 
every dollar of tax cuts here, how many jobs do we get. And 
that’s the analysis that occurs. 
 
The tax cuts that occurred in manufacturing and processing 
were not expensive tax cuts, but they did have the effect of 
making us the lowest cost jurisdiction in terms of taxes. And 
they did lead to economic activity. 
 
So they have to build a business case to us. They have to say 
. . . that sector has to say okay, if this tax cut occurs, then this is 
the economic activity that will result. And it’s a very proven 
way of growing the economy. The provincial action committee 
in the economy in its report a couple of years ago said this is the 
tax approach that has worked and has been successful in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Chair, I was happy to hear you say 
that, Madam Minister, because I too believe that making tax 
concessions or considerations are the correct way to try and 
attract success in terms of business and commercial and 
economic investment. That’s why I was asking earlier if you 
would consider expanding the tax credit to other industries and 
if your staff has had a chance to do some economic modelling 
as to what the results would be from those kind of expansions. 
Because again, I think that’s quite important to be able to try 
and attract those kinds of industries to Saskatchewan. Without 
those kinds of incentives, we’re not going to attract the 
businesses. In fact, it almost seems like we’re chasing them 
away. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Madam Chair, first of all, it’s the 
Department of Finance that does the analysis because they, of 
course, are responsible for the tax regime in the province. And 
so they do the analysis sector by sector. 
 
But I would disagree with the member. I don’t think . . . If you 
look at the record of the companies that have moved to this 
province recently, the tax regime is only a part of the answer. In 
fact, there are companies that have moved here recently — and 
I’ll give you some examples — who have said the tax regime 
wasn’t the issue at all for them. 
 
The Alberta Garment Manufacturing moved from Alberta into 
Saskatchewan. The reason they moved — and they stated it 
publicly — was because we had the best training for the 
workers. And of all the problems that this province and other 
provinces are going to face in the future, labour shortages are 
going to be our biggest problem that we’re all going to face. 
 
So just as important as the tax regime is going to be the 
education and the training that you have for your people. And 
companies like the Alberta Garment Manufacturing have said 
they moved to this province not because of tax regime, although 
they didn’t have any particular problems with the tax regime, 
but because of the training module. 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

So I think if I have a disagreement with the members opposite, 
it’s this belief that taxes alone do it. It doesn’t. If you don’t . . . 
We wouldn’t have had the Synchrotron, we wouldn’t have had 
forestry if it depended only on our tax regime. It depends on the 
whole range of tools, and in some cases training is going to be a 
lot more important than taxes. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Chair, Madam Minister, I can 
appreciate that there is more than one element in order to 
develop this. And I think you’re correct in your suggestion that 
training and education is a vital part of this. The concern I have 
is that even though that’s a part of our economic development 
plan and a key part of it, the training that we’re giving our 
students and our young people and the education is a very 
expensive part to our economy. But in fact a large majority of 
our young people are in fact leaving because of the tax regime 
or lack of opportunities. 
 
How best to address that concern, because as you know our 
population has not increased a great deal when we look at the 
population of Canada generally which is at least doubled if not 
more. Other provinces around us have increased by percentages. 
Saskatchewan has not increased its population very 
significantly in the last 40 or so years. 
 
The fact is that all of our families are experiencing our young 
people leaving and going outside the province. How do you 
square the training and education aspect, and try to keep them 
here in this province with your economic development vision? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think, Madam Chair, the first thing 
I would do is disagree with your basic premise, which is the 
young people are leaving. They’re not. 
 
If you look at Saskatchewan in the last Statistics Canada survey 
released, we’re net intakers of post-secondary education 
graduates. That is more people with post-secondary education 
come to this province than leave. We’re actually net gainers. 
 
And if you look at some of the numbers, well over 90 per cent 
of the people who graduate — from whether it’s SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
universities — stay in this province. And for the ones who 
leave, we actually get more coming from other provinces. 
 
So in terms of the educated, skilled people that we need for our 
future — the young people — we’re keeping them here. We’re 
keeping them in greater numbers than we ever have, with the 
possible exception of the 1970s, in this province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Chair. Madam Minister, that sounds 
very good and very encouraging but I haven’t been able to see 
any of those results from my constituency or from talking to 
people. I have relatives that are leaving right after graduation. I 
know that people in my constituency are needing trained people 
and they’re not available. They’re just not available in our 
province. 
 
So I guess I really wonder where you’re getting the statistics 
from about a net increase of our young people. The Governor 
General just made a comment here in this legislature in the last 
few days, commenting on the fact that young people that she 
talked to were making a point that they were going to 

regrettably have to leave this province. 
 
Can you give me a little more comfort as to where these 
statistics are coming from? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Sure, they’re coming from Statistics 
Canada. And they’re not secret statistics; they’re widely 
reported. 
 
The Governor General was talking about a specific 
phenomenon — people leaving farms because they had no 
choices. No doubt about it. That’s happening. 
 
But if you come to the member for Regina South’s 
constituency, you come to my constituency in Saskatoon . . . I 
have children that age — late teens, early 20’s — and I ask their 
friends constantly: what are your plans? They’re staying here. 
They’re staying in this province. 
 
I would challenge the member opposite to go to Innovation 
Place and look at the age of the workforce there in some of our 
high-tech, highly trained sectors of the economy — about 10 
years younger than the rest of the province. So there’s no doubt 
about it — there has been a shift of population from rural areas 
into urban. 
 
And as Minister of Economic Development, I’ll tell you one of 
the problems in doing economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan are the number of jurisdictions you have to deal 
with. When you have to . . . A project in Humboldt required 30 
different RMs (rural municipality) to get together to make the 
decision. Well that makes it more difficult. 
 
In Saskatoon and Regina, there’s one government that they deal 
with. So it’s a lot easier for them to come there. 
 
But there is certainly an imbalance. Rural areas have been 
experiencing depopulation. The latest labour force says 
statistics showed that. They also showed that there is major 
growth in Regina, Saskatoon, and in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that shift is 
very severe in fact from rural to urban, and certainly it’s well 
noticed. 
 
I had a question that would relate to that. And if you’d just give 
me a minute, I’ll try and find what I’m referring to. I’m 
referring to the business and community economic development 
aspect. And I’m looking at the sub-programs for regional 
economic development authorities and organizations. 
 
It would appear to me that the REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) that I’m looking at have had a reduction 
in the amount of funding going to them from —1998-99 — 
from almost 6,000 . . . 6 million down to 3,200,000 in the 
estimated ’99 and 2000. And estimated in 2001, it’s now only 
2.8 million. 
 
Is there a reason why there’s such a decrease in the amount of 
funding for REDAs when in fact you’re trying to develop the 
economy in rural Saskatchewan? And I guess peripherally 
trying to do that by amalgamating rural municipalities that I 
don’t believe have anything to do with economic development 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

in terms of size. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There’s been a reduction of 750,000 
in REDA funding which I’ll explain in a minute. 
 
But I want to take you up on the second point. One of the big 
problems, if you want somebody to move into a jurisdiction, is 
you have to have a common set of regulations across the piece. 
 
And if you talk to . . . you talk to our REDAs. You go to some 
of the successful REDAs — look at the Humboldt REDA. 
They’ll tell you that one of the first things they have to do is 
take a whole series of RM regulations which are at odds with 
each other, and to put them into harmony in order for a 
company to come in. 
 
And I have horror stories like this about what companies have 
to face if they’re trying to move into a jurisdiction. A plant on 
one side, on one side of a road in one RM, and the road being 
controlled by the RM on the other side of the road. So it 
becomes very difficult for those companies. 
 
So one of the easy things for them to do is to go to Regina or 
Saskatoon because they deal with one government. They say 
okay, fine, here’s one government, one set of regulations. So it 
is a major problem in those communities. And I can tell you 
project after project . . . they’re shaking their head but it is true. 
It is absolutely true. 
 
And I think that the problem is in parts of the province like 
Humboldt where you have a very good REDA that does that 
function, it takes the RM regulations . . . they say let’s get them 
all harmonized, let’s put them into one regime so it’s common 
across the piece. That part of the province grows like this. 
 
Other parts of the province where there is no REDA in place 
that’s effective because they haven’t chosen — REDAs are 
local organizations — then there’s no capacity to do that. We 
don’t have the capacity as a government to go in and say you 
need a set of common regulations. And so you go through those 
obstacles. 
 
Now, as far as the reduction in funding, there was a REDA 
enhancement fund which was in place to help the REDAs get 
better established, to allow them to build basic infrastructure, 
computerize, get on the Internet if they so chose, to do training. 
And that’s been reduced because we feel that we’ve done what 
we needed to do to get the infrastructure in place. And quite 
frankly, the new proposals for projects weren’t good enough for 
me to say to keep the extra money there. 
 
So that money will be redirected into one-stop shopping for 
economic development in communities across the province. So 
that we actually try to work with the federal agencies and do 
what’s been done in Swift Current and other parts of the 
province — have one centre where you can come for economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
guess I have some concern then with the REDA budget. When 
you were mentioning a moment ago that an expanded base of 
municipal realignment is a requirement in terms of economic 
development, what effect then will it have on these REDAs? 

Are you going to amalgamate several REDAs into one? Or 
what would be the strategy or the plan there? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well we believe that there’s an 
optimal size for a REDA. That it shouldn’t . . . There are some 
REDAs that do need to amalgamate with other REDAs. They’re 
too small to be effective, so we will be encouraging them to do 
that. 
 
And so there’s a problem at the bottom with some of them 
being too small. But you’ve got to be careful because the ones 
in the North, which are called CREDOs (community regional 
economic development organization), cannot be too large 
because of the geographic area. 
 
The reality of the REDA is the REDA allows parts of the 
province to do economic development on a regional basis, and 
in a sense overcomes the problem if they’re successful in 
having all these different RMs with all the different regulations. 
But as Minister of Economic Development, I simply got to tell 
you — and the member would know that because he’s been in 
economic development — it isn’t a selling point when you go to 
companies outside the province and you say: please come to our 
province, we only have about a thousand governments here. 
Business is . . . Their hands go up. They say, you’ve got what? 
So it is not a selling point. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. When you said that we’ve decided that the REDAs 
would be more effective if they were in more of an 
amalgamation, was that a ministerial “we” or was that a 
department “we” or was that a cabinet committee on economic 
development “we”? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the REDA’s themselves 
would say that there’s an optimal size that they would like to 
achieve. 
 
And so we have the member from whatever that is — 
Kelvington-Wadena — making comments. In her area, they’re 
voluntarily amalgamating, they’re growing. They’re actually 
becoming larger through choice because they realize that they 
have to be of a certain size to be effective. 
 
And so we’re encouraging them to do that. Because when 
they’re competing really for opportunities with Saskatoon and 
Regina — where the size of that REDA and population would 
be well over 200,000 people in that area — in order to 
effectively make a case to a company, which is what they want 
to do, to come and locate in their area, they have to be of a 
certain size. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you. I’d like to, if I can, in a 
few minutes I might come back to REDA because there is some 
other things that I think we should explore. 
 
But I would like to move ahead into the business investment 
program that is listed on page 35 of the Estimates, and in 
particular the $10 million figure that is there in innovation and 
science fund. 
 



May 4, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

Now I know that you’ve put out press releases about this fund. 
But I’d like in your words, Madam Minister, what the objective 
is of this fund and what do you expect to accomplish from this? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, it’s a very . . . it’s an extremely 
important fund. 
 
I was in Ottawa last week at a ministers’ meeting. We had an 
excellent presentation on e-commerce R&D (research and 
development). And the vast majority of the new jobs that are 
going to be created are going to require some measure of 
research and development, knowledge-based economy — 
absolutely key to the future. And provinces that have a good 
knowledge infrastructure are going to succeed and those that 
don’t are going to fall behind. They’re going to be left in the 
dust. 
 
This fund is very specific and targeted. The federal government, 
in its last two budgets, announced major research and 
development funds which we generally support. There’s some 
. . . some of the criteria with some of their funds we have 
problems with, but generally we support them. 
 
They would be the Canada Foundation for Innovation, which 
has funded various projects in the province, the biggest one 
being the Synchrotron; would be the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research, which will be funding health research in the 
province; and the other is the Chairs program which will be 
providing funding for universities. But based on the number of 
research grants that these universities get, all of those funds 
require matching contributions from the province . . . from 
provinces to be successful. 
 
So what this fund will do is it’ll provide matching funds for the 
federal grant. Essentially what we do to our researchers, we say 
we’ll back every one of you in the competitions but only the 
ones that win, that succeed, will get funding. And we tried that 
with the Canada Foundation for Innovation and it worked 
exceptionally well. 
 
Because, as I say, provinces that are going to create jobs and 
opportunities for those kids of the future have to be in a major 
way involved in research and development as we are in 
biotechnology, in Synchrotron, and there’s a whole list of areas 
where we are right at the top in terms of the list across Canada. 
 
You say, where do you go for agriculture biotechnology? 
There’s no question, they say Saskatchewan. 
 
Where do you go for research into other aspects of agriculture? 
No doubt, they say Saskatchewan. 
 
Synchrotron — which will be probably the most important 
single project that this province has received in the last 25 years 
— will mean Saskatchewan will be on the map. So that’s what 
the fund will do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
personally support the objective of the research and the things 
that are happening, for instance at the University of 
Saskatchewan in particular, but also developing here as well. 
 
For the amounts of money that we’re putting into here — it’s 

very significant amounts of money — what do you or your 
department have in terms of assessment of the projects? Or do 
you have targets and programs that need to be achieved by 
certain standards? How do you assess the usefulness of these 
research grants because they are very considerable? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I know it sounds like a lot of money 
to you — $10 million. Ontario and Alberta have put half a 
billion dollars into these funds . . . if you . . . with the 
significance of this to their future. Now these are federally . . . 
peer-reviewed by the federal government, exactly the same as 
the Synchrotron. 
 
Before the Synchrotron was even considered for Saskatchewan, 
there was, what I call, peer review. That is scientists from 
across Canada, the National Science and Engineering Research 
Council, took all of the proposals and assessed them against 
each other. And then the Synchrotron . . . Saskatchewan won 
that competition over University of Western Ontario in that 
case, and then we went after the funding. 
 
So they’re peer-reviewed under the auspices of the major 
research council. The government does not get involved 
because it’s the scientists who have to tell you which is the best 
project here that’s actually going to be successful. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I wasn’t referring 
to awarding of the research money even though it’s $10 million, 
and you might not think that’s a lot of money. Where I come 
from it’s a lot of money. And to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
that is a very significant amount of money considering the 
number of taxpayers that we have is not exactly expanding at 
the rate of other provinces. 
 
But what my question was, Madam Minister, was once you 
have awarded the . . . the contract has been awarded and your 
research money has been allocated, what does your department 
do in order to make sure that the research is progressing 
according to the objectives and plans that were first outlined in 
the awarding of this contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — They’re like any other contract the 
government would enter into. There are timelines, deliverables, 
results, and they’re monitored, very carefully monitored, in 
conjunction with the federal government. We actually work in 
partnership with the federal government on these because we 
don’t see any reason to duplicate the bureaucracy of it. 
 
So we work in partnership with them. If you’ve got a research 
grant — I mean I’ve had them; I know how they work — you 
have a contract. By this time you have to deliver this, by this 
time you have to deliver that. At the end you have to have the 
book or the project completed. And the funding is all 
conditional on meeting whatever the timelines are and the 
deliverables. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I want to 
get into the area of co-operative development, also on page 35, 
if I could. Can you outline what the objectives are of this 
particular vote? And what the role of your department is in 
trying to achieve those objectives? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, from our point of view the 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2000 

co-op sector is a major engine of economic growth in the 
province of Saskatchewan but it’s not like the business sector. 
The parameters under which it operates are quite different. 
 
So this group here works with the co-op sector if legislation is 
brought forward. A couple of years ago the Minister of Justice 
revised The Credit Union Act, 1985 to make it more possible 
for credit unions in the province to grow. It would come 
through the co-op secretariat. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, in the last budget — not you, but 
the real Minister of Agriculture — announced a new initiative 
in new generation co-ops. The work would have been done 
through the co-op’s policy secretariat. 
 
Any work in co-ops across government is done by the 
department involved, that is Justice and Agriculture, but under 
the policy coordination of the co-op’s directorate. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Does that directorate put a 
greater amount of emphasis on developing that part of the 
economy as opposed to attracting private sector to this 
economy? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It definitely does because if you 
look at rural Saskatchewan, and you go into some of those 
communities, small communities, what are the last things to 
leave? It’s usually the credit union and the co-op store. So 
they’re absolutely key to particularly the rural parts of the 
province. 
 
If you go to Saskatoon, you’ll see Safeway, Superstore, OK 
Economy — I’ve got a list. You go into many rural 
communities, what you’ll see is the co-op in one way or 
another, whether it’s the grocery store or the gas station, and the 
credit union. So they’re absolutely key and we do whatever we 
can to promote the health and the expansion of the co-op sector. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, it almost 
seems like you’re predicting the continued migration of rural 
into urban again. I guess my concern there is why is this 
happening in Saskatchewan, and it’s not happening in Manitoba 
or it’s not happening in Alberta? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I’m not sure what the member’s 
question is . . . Not at all. In fact one of the changes we made in 
the last two years is we put more of our Economic Development 
staff out into rural communities, into the regions out there. 
Because the problem in the past is, if you went into an office 
outside of Saskatoon or Regina and you said I’d like to start a 
business, you might be able to get a bit of advice, but it’d be 
hard. If you said I want to start a co-op, they wouldn’t know 
what to do — they’d tell you to go to Regina. 
 
Now the . . . we have regional staff across the province. So if 
you go in and you’d say, I’d like to start a business, they can 
help you. But if you say I might be interested in starting a co-op 
because maybe a new gen co-op is the best answer to my 
problem, they can give you the help and the advice they need. 
 
So in fact what we have done is we have moved people from 
Regina out into the regions in the last couple of years. 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


