





























































Hansard: June 28, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2243 
 June 28, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I hereby inform the Assembly 
that pursuant to an Act of this Legislative Assembly respecting 
a by-election in the constituency of Wood River, which was 
assented to on June 27, 2000, Mr. Delwood (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
is authorized to take his seat as member for the constituency of 
Wood River. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present 
to you Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert, member of the constituency for 
Wood River who has taken the oath, and he has signed the roll 
and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Huyghebaert, I welcome you to this 
Assembly and I hope that your service here will be to your 
honour and that of your constituents. Welcome to the 
Assembly. 
 
Let the hon. member for Wood River take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition concerning the effects of tobacco on 
the health of young people, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass legislation to protect 
children from tobacco use. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition has been signed by the good people of Cabri, 
Pennant, Lancer, and other communities in that area. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition with approximately 1,000 names on them from a 
group more commonly known as the victims of no fault. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to repeal the provision of the personal 
injury benefits contained in the automobile insurance Act 
and to adopt a return to an add-on insurance system which 
will provide benefits on a no-fault basis to all victims 
without taking the innocent victim’s right to seek 
compensation from a person responsible for the accident, 
but with the appropriate modifications to reduce overall 
injury costs. 
 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, these come from people from all over 
the province — 1,000 names of approximately 3,000 that have 
been handed in. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens of this province who 
would like to see improved cellular telephone coverage in their 
area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Prud’homme, as well as Middle Lake, and 
Warman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here today calling for a total smoking ban in all public places. 
The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition has been signed by people from my hometown of 
Prince Albert as well as Shellbrook, La Ronge, and more from 
Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents 
concerned about municipal amalgamation. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the dozens of signatures on these petitions come 
from two communities, the community of Buchanan within my 
constituency and Lipton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do also have some 
petitions to present in support of a total ban of smoking in all 
public places. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to nursing home fee increases. And the petition states 
that residents of nursing homes are there out of necessity. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from my riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar, primarily from the community of Kyle, as 
well as Lacadena and Beechy. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to read today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Young. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed mainly 
by people from Regina, and it’s a petition asking that smoking 
be banned in public places. 
 
And I hereby submit the petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens opposed to 
nursing home fee increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Weyburn and Bromhead. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to construct a tower for cellular telephone service. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 

 
And it is signed by citizens of Lake Alma, Balgonie, Beaubier, 

and Gladmar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today to present on behalf of concerned citizens to do with the 
forced amalgamation of municipalities in the province. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with the forced amalgamation 
on municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds — actually thousands — of 
signatures here from all over Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin reconstruction of Highway 
47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction No. 1 
Highway. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the people of Stoughton, Glenavon, 
Corning, Kennedy, Windthorst, Wawota, Wolseley, Grenfell, 
Estevan, Mr. Speaker, Kipling. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of citizens of the province on the following matters: 
 

The reduction of fuel taxes; 
 
Provision of reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, 
Bruno, Vonda, Cudworth and Lake Alma; 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals and the 
Cupar Health Centre remain open; 
 
To ban smoking in public places and workplaces; 
 
To restore the Paddockwood access road; 
 
To rescind increases in nursing home fees; 
 
To begin reconstruction of Highway No. 47; and 
 
To oppose the reversion of Saskatchewan highways back 
to gravel. 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Interim Report of the Special Committee to Prevent the 

Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Prebble, Co-Chair of the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 
Through the Sex Trade, presents its interim report which is 
hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to rise as Co-Chair to the Special 
Committee of the legislature to Prevent the Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade, and I wish to make some 
remarks in support of this report that is being tabled this 
afternoon in conjunction with my colleague, the other Co-Chair 
of the committee and the hon. member for Humboldt. 
 
The first thing I should say, Mr. Speaker, is that the interim 
report is the cumulative property and work of seven members of 
the Legislative Assembly and the staff that worked and 
co-operated with them. 
 
I would like to mention who those members are. I, the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone, and the hon. member for Humboldt 
are your Co-Chairs. Other very able members of the committee 
are: the member for Kelvington-Wadena, the member for 
Regina Northeast, the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, the 
member for Moosomin, and the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these members have worked very diligently 
in preparing the report that is being tabled this afternoon. And 
it’s an interim report, Mr. Speaker. Our final report will be 
prepared and delivered we hope later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on two of the important principles 
that are guiding the work of your committee. One is that the 
involvement of children in the sex trade constitutes child abuse. 
We reject the use of the term child prostitution to describe what 
is happening to our children because this term fails to convey 
the fact that the child is the victim. 
 
Second, our goal is to eliminate the involvement of children in 
the sex trade in this province. The committee promotes zero 
tolerance towards johns and pimps who perpetrate abuse, and 
towards others who contribute to the sexual exploitation of 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to stress that we should not underestimate 
the large number of children who are being tragically affected. 
My colleague, the member for Humboldt, will elaborate more 
on the details of this. But we are facing the reality now of over 
500 children being abused by johns and pimps on the streets of 
our urban communities in any one year. 
 
This is despite the efforts of many wonderful people working in 
paid and voluntary positions in our community, doing the best 
they can to assist these children. It’s also despite the efforts of 
our government with respect to financial resources to these 
community groups and also recent changes to The Child and 
Family Services Act which strengthened the legislation and 
toughened the penalties for people who are caught abusing 

children. 
 
The majority of children suffering abuse are First Nations and 
Metis children, usually from very low-income families. In 
contrast, the vast majority of perpetrators are white males who 
have a good deal more financial resources. 
 
The consequences for these children, Mr. Speaker, are 
horrendous. Sexual abuse leaves deep wounds that take many 
years to heal. Sometimes they never heal. Children suffer 
regular violence from johns. They catch sexually transmitted 
diseases. The very core of their being is often damaged. This is 
abuse of the worst kind, Mr. Speaker. Members of our 
committee are firm in their view that this assault on our children 
must stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our committee began our consultations with 
presentations from resource officials from the departments of 
Social Services, Justice, and Health, who provided us with 
essential background knowledge on the programs and resources 
currently available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Following this, the committee held a video conference with 
officials from the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta, to 
examine both provinces’ unique legislation. 
 
In total we heard from 35 witnesses during this first phase of 
the hearings in Saskatoon and Regina. The witnesses came from 
a variety of backgrounds and interest groups, including 
Aboriginal government organizations, outreach programs, 
community-based organizations, municipal and police service 
officials, individual citizens, and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee has identified six main themes 
brought to our attention by witnesses which are outlined in the 
interim report. These areas of concern will in turn form the 
context of provincial hearings in the fall. The six areas are: (1) 
legislative approaches; (2) deterring offenders; (3) outreach and 
safe refuge; (4) long-term healing; (5) prevention; and (6) 
education and awareness. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch briefly on four of these 
areas. First let me say a word about legislative approaches. 
Your committee has examined two pieces of legislation in 
depth: Alberta’s Protection of Children Involved in Prostitution 
Act and special amendments to Manitoba’s Highway Traffic 
Act. Your Co-Chair, the hon. member for Humboldt, will speak 
to the Alberta legislation in some detail. 
 
Let me just say by way of very brief introduction, that Alberta’s 
law provides for the involuntary apprehension of children for a 
period of up to 72 hours, and provides funding for workers who 
offer follow-up support to children who’ve been removed from 
the street. 
 
The Manitoba legislation was introduced in 1999. It is aimed 
directly at deterring johns and provides for the seizure and 
impounding of vehicles used by those charged with an offence 
related to prostitution. In Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, vehicles 
remain impounded if the johns in question were seeking sexual 
contact with a child under the age of 18. For men who sought 
sexual contact with adult women on the street in Manitoba, 
vehicles can be returned but only if men pay a $400 fine and 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

attend a john school. 
 
In our final report, Mr. Speaker, your committee will make 
recommendations on whether these legislative provisions, in 
whole or in part, should be adopted in Saskatchewan. 
 
Second, I wish to say a word about the importance of deterring 
johns. Your committee has heard a consistent message from all 
presenters that we need tougher penalties aimed at offenders 
who abuse children on the street. 
 
There was also a desire by many presenters to see changes to 
the law that would make it easier for police to investigate the 
activities of suspected johns. For example, the Regina Police 
Service recommended that the Saskatchewan government lobby 
the federal Minister of Justice to change the section of the 
Criminal Code dealing with offences related to prostitution, so 
that such offences are classified as a hybrid offence rather than 
as a summary offence. This would allow offenders to be 
fingerprinted and photographed and make it easier to track the 
movement of johns from one city to another. 
 
There’s also a good deal of interest, Mr. Speaker, in looking at 
how we could change provincial statutes to make it easier for 
the police to fully conduct an investigation against the 
suspected john. 
 
Deterring johns is crucial to helping our children, Mr. Speaker. 
We can help one group of children get off the street and out of 
the sex trade, but a whole new group of children will soon fall 
victim to abuse unless we stop the pimps and the hundreds of 
male perpetrators in our province who are actively engaged in 
seeking sex with children on the streets of our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those making submissions to our hearings 
emphasize the importance of outreach services and safe house 
programming as important ways to help children increase safety 
and ultimately exit the street. The member for Humboldt will 
address these issues in more detail in her remarks. Let me just 
say that in our final report, Mr. Speaker, your committee will 
recommend what actions might be taken to increase safety to 
children and advance the supports available to help children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many children who have been pulled into the sex 
trade face serious drug and alcohol addictions and major 
self-esteem issues. Every child who has suffered sexual abuse 
faces a long healing journey. Our committee received many 
suggestions for improved services that would help these 
children heal. Your committee Co-Chair, the member for 
Humboldt, will also speak to these proposals in her remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, your committee 
has begun to examine two other areas where we believe 
progress can be made to reduce the number of children at risk 
on our streets. One is in the area of prevention. 
 
Our committee heard on numerous occasions that Saskatchewan 
should invest in preventing the root causes of child sexual abuse 
on the streets, namely poverty, family violence, racism, and 
family dysfunction. 
 
With respect to domestic violence, your committee received a 
briefing from the Manitoba government on their Baby First 

program which screens all children who are born in Manitoba at 
the time of birth, identifies families at risk of abusing or 
neglecting their children, and provides those families with 
active support, including a home care visitor who works with 
them over the next two to three years. 
 
Manitoba officials advise that for every dollar invested today in 
preventive programming, $7 in future cost savings could be 
achieved. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, your committee is considering the 
contribution that increased public awareness and education can 
have in reducing the problem. Public awareness is critical to 
changing attitudes that exist towards the behaviour of johns and 
the involvement of children. 
 
In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is critical that we change 
the current culture which exhibits some tolerance for men 
engaged in picking up children on the streets for sexual 
purposes. This is a totally unacceptable practice, Mr. Speaker, 
and that message needs to be sent clearly by everyone in our 
society. 
 
Secondly, we need to rethink the use of the term child 
prostitute, which is an inappropriate term to use, Mr. Speaker, 
because it implies willing participation on the part of the child. 
No child chooses to be on the street, Mr. Speaker. Children are 
drawn into the sex trade and often remain there under threat of 
violence, under very severe pressure from a family member, or 
under enormous financial pressure, or as a result of a drug and 
alcohol addiction. 
 
Community awareness is key to changing attitudes around these 
issues, Mr. Speaker. Some important public education 
endeavours have already been undertaken in Saskatchewan, 
including a provincial poster campaign, educational pamphlets, 
and a sign campaign by community groups in the stroll areas of 
Saskatoon. Your committee will examine what additional steps 
might be taken to advance public awareness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the other members of the 
committee for their very hard work on this issue to date. I want 
to express my appreciation to the hon. member for Humboldt 
for the dedication to this issue she is demonstrating as we work 
together in co-chairing this process. 
 
I want to express my appreciation to every one who presented 
in the first phase of the hearings. And I want to express my 
sincere appreciation to all the staff that supported your 
committee in this process. 
 
I believe the interim report provides a useful framework on 
which we can build. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Humboldt: 
 

That the interim report of the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade be now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to the comments from my 
colleague, the hon. member from Saskatoon Greystone, in 
reference to the special committee that was established to 
prevent the sexual exploitation and abuse of children on our 
streets, I would like to make further acknowledgements. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the several staff members we had 
assigned to the committee: the Clerk of the committee; our 
technical advisor, Randy Pritchard; the Hansard and broadcast 
staff who accompanied the committee during our hearings; the 
staff of the Office of the Clerk who assisted in the arrangement 
of the public meetings; the Hansard staff who helped with 
editing the report. 
 
And I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to thank and commend my 
Co-Chair, the hon. member from Saskatoon Greystone, once 
again for his co-operation, his acknowledgement of the 
seriousness of this issue, and his great desire and intent to 
address this issue in a very successful manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would especially like to acknowledge another 
group of people that are very, very important when addressing 
this issue, and who have very courageously come forward with 
their testimony to the committee. These are the many youth and 
survivors of the street who presented to the committee. 
 
Their emotional testimony was very, very colourful. It was very 
painful for them, and it was incredibly courageous of them to 
come forward. And I want you to know that your contributions 
will be valued greatly during the committee’s deliberations. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of all committee members, I wish to thank 
them again for their insight and courage in sharing their 
heart-wrenching stories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their testimony re-emphasized the need, the great 
need for this committee, because their words put a human face 
on the lives of children who are abused through sexual 
exploitation. Because of this, the committee is better able to 
understand the weight of our responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would just like to quote from 
the report some of the comments that the youth who presented 
to our committee gave us in regards to their experience. 
 
And this is from one youth who presented to the committee in 
March, and she said: 
 

The first time I started working on the streets I was nine. 
Why did I do it? (Why did I do it?) To support myself. I 
had no one to depend on. I was somebody . . . I was an 
adult trapped in a nine-year-old’s body. I had no respect 
for myself (and) I had no respect for anybody. 

 
And a further quote, Mr. Speaker, from another youth. And this 
quote is in part, but it should give to the Assembly an indication 
of the kind of horrific circumstances that some of our children 
are in. 
 

The stuff that went on in the house was unreal. You can’t 

even call it abuse; it’s called torture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mandate of this committee is 
all-encompassing. We will be addressing all aspects of the 
problem of the sexual abuse of our children on the streets. But 
most importantly we will be looking at solutions. In looking at 
those solutions, we have up till this point had some very, very 
wonderful presentations made by many people to our 
committee. 
 
One of the very valued contributions came from the police in 
our various cities and in the police from other cities that really 
do show how us how tragic this situation is. I want to read 
another quote from Constable Sheree Gay from Regina Police 
Services and she says: 
 

We see a 12-year-old girl on the corner of the street . . . 
She is waving at cars . . . and from our experience we 
know that she is out there selling herself . . . 
 
A car will pick her up . . . 
 
So we will stop that vehicle . . . 
 
. . . when I pull that vehicle over and I approach the driver 
and I ask him for his driver’s licence and his registration 
and he complies, and I see no signs of impairment, and I 
ask him who the young girl is, and he tells me that it’s 
none of your business, basically as a police officer I have 
no grounds to arbitrarily detain him any longer. 
 
If he tells me that that is his niece, (he doesn’t tell me why) 
. . . doesn’t tell me why she was on the corner or refuses to 
answer those questions for me, I have no alternative but to 
let him proceed. Because as the law states at this particular 
time, I don’t have enough reasonable grounds to believe, 
based on the fact that that child was standing on the corner, 
that that crime is going to be committed — as the law 
stands now. So I can’t explain to you how heart-wrenching 
it is for me as a police officer to let that john drive away. 

 
Another quote that I think is very valuable, Mr. Speaker, is a 
quote from retired staff sergeant Ross MacInnes, Calgary Police 
Services, who previously did work in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And Mr. MacInnes tries to give us an 
understanding of what kind of horrific acts are taking place 
against our children in this province and every province. And 
Mr. MacInnes says: 
 

She had been locked in a walk-in freezer in the back of a 
(Calgary) pizza shop. She had been on her back for 16 
straight hours. She had sex with 42 men . . . this is not 
intended to shock you, ladies and gentlemen, this is 
intended to inform you of what is going on in this city and 
in Saskatoon and in every major city in Canada. This is our 
town after dark. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the interim report makes reference to the 
estimated numbers of children who are being sexually abused 
and exploited through the sex trade in both Saskatoon and 
Regina. These numbers are very, very high. 
 
I want to just tell the Assembly today that I’ve done a little 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

calculating, and when you calculate that 300 children in 
Saskatoon are being abused on our streets — out of a 
population of 200,000 — that translates into one in every 666 
residents is a child that is being sexually abused on the streets. 
 
But what the committee finds equally disturbing is the fact that 
this evidence tells us there is a significantly much larger 
number of offenders also seeking the sexual services of these 
children, therefore substantiating just how important the work 
of your committee is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent of this interim report is to define the 
scope of the problem and to share legislative issues discussed to 
date. It is also the committee’s hope to promote awareness of 
the issue and begin to examine ideas put forward as prospective 
solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee is not making any 
recommendations at this time in this report. We expect to hold 
further hearings this fall to allow more community groups, 
individuals, and youth to voice their concerns, their suggestions, 
and their recommendations. 
 
And as the member from Saskatoon Greystone has mentioned, 
the final report, including recommendations, will follow our 
next phase of hearings and be presented during the next sitting 
of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel it’s important to elaborate a little bit on 
some of the findings that we have had in respect to legislative 
approaches put forward. And I particularly would like to 
elaborate a little bit on Alberta’s approach with their Protection 
of Children Involved in Prostitution Act. 
 
The legislation brought forward in Alberta was intended to 
emphasize that children are victims of sexual abuse. They are 
not criminals, they are victims, and they need to be protected. 
 
PCHIP (Protection of Children Involved in Prostitution Act), 
which is the acronym for the Act, allows for the involuntary 
apprehension and 72-hour assessment of children. The 72 hours 
that has been designated is meant to deal with immediate needs 
of that child, and it is not meant to take into consideration the 
further long-term healing of the child. It is meant to place the 
child in a safe place, out of the reach of johns and those who 
might harm them, while assessment is taking place. 
 
PCHIP — as I mentioned — the legislation is to keep children 
safe from johns, from pimps, from drugs, from violence, and 
from death. 
 
Early intervention has been tagged as very key, and there have 
been considerably less new children on the streets in Alberta 
since this legislation has been brought in. There have been no 
prostitution-related charges laid against children and youth 
since the implementation of that Act. And the police are finding 
that there are no more inconsistencies within the police 
enforcement in Alberta. 
 
This legislation has been valuable in that it has been a catalyst 
for fostering new partnerships focusing on the needs of 
children, while ensuring at the same time effective and efficient 
coordination between existing agencies. 

This legislation has been a powerful tool for raising awareness, 
and it has identified and helped greatly children who could not 
make the choice to leave the street. 
 
In Saskatchewan, many of the presenters that came to our 
committee had some reservations regarding the Bill. Outreach 
workers in Saskatchewan have expressed concerns that 
involuntary seizure of children on the streets may damage their 
trust relationship with the children. They expressed concerns 
that the legislation may push the problem underground. 
 
And they expressed their concern that 72 hours of 
apprehension, time in a safe house, does not necessarily 
translate into the child stepping off the street, as evidenced in 
many multiple apprehensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to go on and speak a little bit 
about other aspects that were brought to our attention that we 
want to deal with. The member from Saskatoon Greystone has 
spoken quite at length on deterring offenders, and it’s important 
to notice that both Manitoba and Alberta’s legislation have a 
component in it to deterring offenders. 
 
But I’d like to go to the long-term healing. Several witnesses 
that came to our committee emphasized that Saskatchewan 
lacks an appropriate long-term addiction treatment centre for 
children and youth. This is seen as absolutely necessary because 
drug addiction and alcohol addiction and all kinds of drug 
addiction are often part of the problem. 
 
Most presenters that came to our committee felt a need for a 
holistic long-term treatment centre for children, youth, and their 
families. There was strong emphasis from presenters that this 
client group needs more programs that are culturally sensitive 
with a traditional Aboriginal approach. Many youth witnesses 
and a former street person informed the committee that there is 
a lack of services also for older women who wish to or already 
have exited the street. It was expressed that training 
opportunities or opportunities to return to school, as well as 
increased employment opportunities for youth to earn more 
money, was very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was some successful programs that were 
presented to the member for Saskatoon Greystone and myself 
when we attended the Edmonton conference. And one of them 
that is especially notable is the prostitution recovery centre. The 
prostitution recovery centre which is located in Minnesota is a 
residential facility that incorporates chemical dependency 
treatment, sexual trauma mental health care, and independent 
living training and preparation all under one roof. 
 
So the centre also promotes stability for exploited women and 
children, and there are volunteer mentors that are there working 
with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to just touch a little bit on intervention 
outreach and safe refuge. We are fortunate in Saskatchewan to 
have a safe house in Saskatoon. Although the safe house is 
voluntary, it is serving a great purpose in establishing 
relationships with children on the streets because it’s been noted 
that it’s very important to establish trusting relationships in 
order to help kids off the street. The safe house and their staff 
are to be commended on providing children at risk with a safe 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

refuge from the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the presenters felt that foster care . . . the 
foster care system was not an adequate resource for these 
children. They felt this could change if more Aboriginal homes 
were recruited as foster caregivers. Their message was that 
these children would be less likely to run from a foster home 
. . . or from a home they felt comfortable in. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to . . . I am pleased to 
second the motion put forward from the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone, and I leave this Assembly with these 
words. 
 
And we look forward to reporting next session our final report 
on the sexual exploitation and abuse of children. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a second 
motion related to the committee report, by leave of the 
Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that the special committee . . . I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Humboldt: 
 

That the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade be 
authorized, during any period of adjournment of the first 
session of the twenty-fourth legislature, to make a report 
on its inquiries by filing the same with the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly; 
 
And that the report shall be distributed in accordance with 
The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce some 
very important people from Wood River — my campaign 
manager, Mr. Bud Romansky and his friend, Sylvia Dixon; my 
sister, Dulone Jepson; my brother and his wife, Dean 
Huyghebaert and his wife Jackie. 
 
And I’d also like to say — I’m not allowed to use my own 
name in the House — but the pronunciation of my last name is 
the same as my brother’s, and that is Huyghebaert. My niece, 
Deanna Huyghebaert, and her friend, Frank Gelinas. And last 
but not least, my wife Phyllis. Would you please join me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great deal of pleasure today that I ask the Assembly to join me 
in welcoming a large number of guests that are here today. And 
because there are so many and I would risk offending by not 
mentioning them all, I will mention Barb Byers, the president of 
the Federation of Labour, and the affiliated and non-affiliated 
union members, workers, members of the public interested in 
the proceedings today, as well as my constituents that are in the 
gallery — and they know who they are. 
 
And also former member, Bob Lyons, now with the 
international labourers union, and Bob we’ll see if it’s still as 
much fun as it used to be. 
 
But I ask you to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to join 
the Minister of Labour in welcoming the working men and 
women of Saskatchewan here today to join in and watch the 
proceedings in the legislature today. So please join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of visitors who are here today to 
witness the formal tabling of the special committee report in the 
Assembly, and both myself and the hon. member for Humboldt 
have the pleasure of making some of those introductions. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, Sandi 
LeBoeuf, who is with the Saskatoon Tribal Council, and who is 
Chair of the working group to stop the sexual exploitation of 
children which is a working group of Saskatoon Communities 
for Children. It’s very nice to have you here, Sandi. 
 
Also present is Jacqui Barclay, who is also associated with 
Communities for Children and is a street outreach worker with 
Saskatoon District Health in Saskatoon. And I might add that 
we’re very fortunate to have in the gallery our technical adviser 
for the committee, Mr. Randy Pritchard. 
 
There are also some youth who are friends of mine who I will 
let the hon. member for Humboldt formally introduce but I want 
to welcome you. 
 
And I also want to say a special welcome to my former 
seatmate, Bob Lyons, who is in the gallery this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So please join me in welcoming all these special guests to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, two 
very, very special women who have been very courageous in 
their life and have survived the streets and are now, Mr. 
Speaker, showing great leadership in their endeavour to 
certainly support and enhance the lives of women throughout 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have with us Maggie Beacon, street survivor 
and new leader, as well as Sarah Ninnie, a street survivor from 
Saskatoon. And I’d ask the Assembly to give them a warm 
round of welcome and appreciation for the work that they’re 
doing in making our society a more happy place to live. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to rise today to introduce to you and through you to 
members and my colleagues in the Assembly, two very 
important women in my life seated in the gallery here on the 
main floor, Mr. Speaker — my mother, Sheila, and my 
grandmother, Gladys Campbell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and fellow members of the Assembly this is my 
grandmother’s 90th birthday today. It’s a great day in our 
family. 
 
She was, Mr. Speaker, born in Hillsboro, North Dakota, 90 
years ago today. At a young age she moved with her family to 
the Pangman area and her father died when she was 
young-aged. Her mother remarried, and she grew up in the 
Amulet area for many of you who may know; and I think the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy representative knows where Amulet is, 
near Ogema. 
 
But anyway, it’s just my distinct pleasure to have my 
grandmother here and I’d like all of you to join with me in 
welcoming her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, two 
friends and former colleagues sitting in your west gallery. 
Darren Piper and Glen Stewart have been long-time associates 
and good friends, and they are business agents for the United 
Food & Commercial Workers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, two special guests in the west gallery — Mr. Terry 
Drabuke from CanGro, he’s the merchandising manager; as 
well, his friend and our friend from Costa Rica, Carlos 
Gutiérrez. 
 
About 18 months ago I was able to participate in an educational 
co-operative tour of Costa Rica with Mr. Drabuke, studying 
co-operatives and the benefits of working people and providing 
jobs. And Carlos is now touring Western Canada investigating 
exciting business opportunities to provide jobs to people in 
Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic. 
 
So if all members would please . . . We’ll be speaking with the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley who’s also the 
member for Terry Drabuke. So would all members please 

welcome the guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
introduce to you in the west gallery, Mr. John Melenchuk. Mr. 
Melenchuk is accompanied this afternoon by his mother, and 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All of us in 
this Legislative Assembly have staff who support us and have 
to work hard to make us look good. I probably have a staff that 
have to work particularly hard. 
 
But I would like to . . . I’d like to ask members to join me in 
welcoming two of my staff here today in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker — Corelie Bernat and Anne Marie Heffernan who have 
joined the Assembly today. They watch us every day on the 
legislative channel but this is the first time I think they’ve 
actually been in the Assembly to watch us. 
 
So please join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Thank You’s Extended 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to request leave to 
give an extended member’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
thank all hon. members for allowing me some extra time for my 
statement today as this is the first opportunity I’ve had to speak 
in the legislature as the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Wood River. 
 
It’s been a long time in coming, Mr. Speaker. I think all are 
familiar with the circumstances that surrounded the Wood River 
constituency going right back to the general election, a situation 
that led eventually to Monday’s by-election. 
 
I have a lot of people to thank for getting me here today. I wish 
to thank all of my supporters in the Wood River constituency 
who have worked so tirelessly, virtually since last August when 
the Premier called the general election. Without the support of 
my local team it would have been virtually impossible to cover 
the entire constituency during the short writ period. 
 
I also want to thank my new colleagues, the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, for the moral support they lent me 
through the election campaign, and more importantly for the 
many hours of time that they spent door knocking and talking to 
concerned voters in the Wood River constituency. All of the 
MLAs here share in this victory with me. 
 
I also want to thank all members of this legislature who were so 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

kind to pass a special Bill — and I kind of liked it being called 
the Yogi Bill last evening — to allow me to take my seat before 
the end of this session. 
 
The people of Wood River have been without effective 
representation basically since last fall and they deserve to have 
an MLA to speak for them in this Assembly. On behalf of the 
people of Wood River, I thank all members for allowing that to 
happen more quickly than it might have happened otherwise. 
 
And I want to thank my family for sticking with me, now 
through three campaigns in the Wood River constituency. 
Politics, along with my other activities, have kept me away 
from home much of the time and I want to thank them for their 
patience and understanding. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the 
contribution of the NDP-Liberal (New Democratic 
Party-Liberal) government in my victory. If it were not for the 
policies put forward by the government, policies such as forced 
amalgamation, abandonment of highways, closure of health 
care facilities, I’m sure my victory in Wood River would not 
have been so large this time around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly look forward to representing the people of 
Wood River beginning today. Highways, health care, taxes, 
jobs — these are all major concerns in my constituency as they 
are around the province. And I look forward to working with 
my colleagues to raise these issues with the government and to 
put forward positive Saskatchewan Party alternatives to the 
NDP-Liberal game plan that many people simply do not agree 
with. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Joni Mitchell Art Exhibit 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was so 
mesmerized by your call that I was a little late on getting up to 
my feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, there is a famous novel 
whose title everyone knows and often quotes: You Can’t Go 
Home Again. Well the only problem is that the title is wrong. 
As a case in point this Friday night, this week, at the Mendel 
Art Gallery in my hometown, Ms. Joni Mitchell is coming 
home. 
 
Joni Mitchell, of course, the Saskatchewan songwriter and 
composer of some of the most haunting and lyrical music of the 
last four decades. As Maclean’s magazine says, she is, quote: 
“one of the most influential and celebrated songwriters of her 
generation” — a world class performer. 
 
But Joni Mitchell is also a visual artist of no small talent and 
beginning Friday, the Mendel will be exhibiting 81 of her 
paintings, sketches, and montages. The exhibit is called 
“Voices”, an apt description considering the variety of styles 
she has shown through the years in both her music and her 
visual art. 
 
One characteristic of the exhibit, as we are told, is the strong 
artistic and personal attachment that Joni has to the Canadian 

Prairies. This is revealed in several strong landscapes. Those of 
us who know and love the Prairies aren’t surprised by this 
because while she lives partly in Los Angeles, she still is a 
prairie, Saskatchewan girl. 
 
Which is where I began and close, Mr. Speaker — Joni Mitchell 
is coming home, in person and in spirit. I welcome her, I know 
all members welcome her, and I urge all of us to travel to 
Saskatoon to view the exhibit by one of Saskatchewan’s 
favourite and most talented daughters. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eastend Hang-Gliding Competition 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to inform you, and through you the members of this House that 
the community of Eastend is going to be hosting the 2000 
Canadian hang-gliding championships this coming month, July 
1 to 8. 
 
Now this is the second time in four years that Eastend has 
hosted this competition. The Eastend area has some of the best 
thermal updrafts in the country, which have accounted for 
personal records being achieved for time aloft and distance 
travelled, according to pilots who attended the 1996 event. 
 
The organizing committee is expecting some 40 pilots to 
compete from the four western provinces, as well as the 
northern United States. They will fly five flights in a 154 mile 
radius with landing zones in places as far as Leader to the north 
and the community of Chaplin to the east. 
 
The Eastend championship, as far as I know, is the only 
competition that has been held in a non-mountainous terrain. 
 
The organizing committee has invited those of this Assembly 
who are not faint of heart to experience the exhilaration that this 
sport has to offer by booking a flight. 
 
I’ll be taking your orders today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Watrous Businesses 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to have 
some more good news coming out of rural Saskatchewan, this 
time courtesy of a rural newspaper, The Watrous Manitou. 
 
The title of the June 5, 2000 article is titled, and I quote: “Local 
business initiatives speak of optimism in the rural economy.” It 
goes on to say: 
 

If recent activities in various sectors of the local business 
community bear any weight, it could be said that rural 
Saskatchewan is on a roll and exhibiting all the signs of 
people who are optimistic about the future of their 
community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t sound like the doom and gloom the 
opposition has been spreading around. 
 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

The article goes on to describe the success of four businesses in 
the Watrous area. The birth of Klisowski’s Hyperbaric chamber 
and Murray’s bath house bring two new exciting businesses into 
the area, while the rebirth of Watrous Home Building Supplies 
and the Pepper Tree Restaurant have expanded due to customer 
demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things are beginning to look brighter in rural 
Saskatchewan. This government is committed to growing the 
economy so all residents of Saskatchewan, rural and urban, will 
share in the benefit. 
 
I congratulate these four businesses in Watrous and their 
entrepreneurial spirit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of Mennonite Heritage Village 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On last 
Sunday I had the great privilege of attending the grand opening 
of the Mennonite Heritage Village site in Swift Current. I’d like 
to take this opportunity to congratulate the many volunteers 
who had the vision and determination to see this project through 
from a dream 10 years ago to a lasting monument of the 
Mennonite tradition of Swift Current and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend the site to my colleagues and the 
people of the province. It includes an original period furnished 
Mennonite farm home, an original barn that is attached to the 
home in the Mennonite tradition by a breezeway, a summer 
kitchen and a windmill and many other wonderful artifacts. 
 
This site is a lasting memorial to the great people whose work 
ethic, faith, and compassion for their fellowman helped carve a 
way of life out of the prairie dust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m intensely proud of my own Mennonite 
heritage, and while I wish I was more fluent with the language, 
I’m going to make an attempt this afternoon, with apologies in 
advance to the folks back home and the member for Rosthern 
and the member for Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Launch 2000 — CTV Regina 
 
Mr. Harper: — More good news for Saskatchewan and Regina. 
On Tuesday, June the 27, I had the opportunity to represent the 
Government of Saskatchewan at the Launch 2000 sponsored by 
CTV’s (Canadian Television Network Limited) Regina. Launch 
2000 is a sneak preview of CTV’s fall program lineup. 
 
This lineup consists of many of the favourite programs such as 
ER, Third Watch and Law & Order, while adding in new 
programs such as The Fugitive, Sopranos, and many recently 
re-released movies. 
 
A special congratulations to CTV Regina for leading all CTV 

stations in sales in Canada last year. CTV Regina had the 
highest percentage of sales over budget and is number one in 
business development, reflecting the strong Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Congratulations to Mr. Dennis Dunlop, general manager, Mr. 
Wade Moffatt, retail sales manager, and Mr. Geoff Bradley, 
creative services and operations director of CTV Regina — and 
on a very successful year. And we look forward to another 
exciting program lineup this fall. 
 
Congratulations CTV Regina on a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Concerns in Wood River Constituency 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
to rise in the legislature today as the MLA for the constituency 
of Wood River. 
 
And after virtually a year-long campaign, I really don’t want to 
waste any time. I intend to do what I said I would set out to do. 
 
Mr. Premier, no matter where I travel in the riding, the 
sentiment is the same. The NDP government has neglected us 
for too long, and we’re not going to take it any more. Our 
provincial highways are in treacherous condition. We’re forced 
to drive hundreds of miles to the nearest hospital. Our towns 
and villages are dying and the lack of economic development 
means our young people must head to the cities or out of the 
province for work. 
 
Mr. Premier, the message is clear. The people of Wood River 
want your immediate attention to these issues. Will you stop 
ignoring the serious issues facing the people of this riding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I again want to welcome 
the hon. member to the Chamber. 
 
In answer to his question, it is the government’s policy to try to 
balance economic, social, and other programs in the best 
interests of both rural and urban Saskatchewan. But more 
specifically, I think the best answer to his question comes from 
today’s StarPhoenix editorial on the by-election in Wood River 
which in part says the following, quote: 
 

It’s one thing for Saskatchewan residents both urban and 
rural to demand that the province increase spending on 
highways, improve health care delivery and fork over 
money to interest groups ranging from farmers to 
impoverished kids to teachers, all the while coming up 
with tax cuts to put Saskatchewan on par with Alberta. It’s 
another for the government to deliver on all these 
competing demands without adding to the debt. 

 
And here’s the last quote: 
 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

Whichever political party promises to deliver it all is 
playing voters for patsies. Any voter who believes that 
turfing out the current government will, overnight, get all 
(the) highways . . . paved, rural hospitals reopened . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I can see why I got such a 
plurality in the election when we get answers like that — which 
we have been receiving for some time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, the issue front and centre 
during the campaign was highways. In fact once again, today, 
the good people of Climax are out on Highway 18 patching 
holes. 
 
They’ve given up on receiving any help or seeing any proactive, 
positive action from this government, so they’ve taken the 
situation into their own hands like their neighbours in Val 
Marie did. 
 
The fact of the matter is the amount of money from the 
Highways budget for administration has increased, and the 
money actually going to building and maintaining our 
provincial highways has decreased significantly. The people of 
Wood River know this and they will not be fooled by empty 
words and promises. They want action. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Premier, when are you going to live 
up to your responsibility and give our highways the attention 
they desire and require? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat what the 
Minister of Highways has been saying — that $250 million a 
year over the next 10 years in Highways — this government has 
made a commitment to highways. 
 
But I also want to conclude by this quotation from The 
StarPhoenix editorial today. Quote: 
 

Whichever political party promises to deliver it all is 
playing voters for patsies. Any voter who believes that 
turfing out the current government will, overnight, get all 
(the) highways magically paved, rural hospitals reopened 
and waiting lists zapped, farm supports ratcheted up, and 
taxes slashed is practising a form of self-delusion not seen 
since the heady days of Grant Devine. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing, over on that side, the heady days of 
Grant Devine. They were turfed out in the 1980s. 
 
I congratulate you on your win. You will never make it to the 
treasury benches because of that attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like to just welcome 
again our very welcome and special guests and friends to the 
Assembly here today while I’m on my feet, but also to remind 
the hon. guests that the practice of the Assembly, the traditions, 
are to not allow people in the gallery to participate in debates or 
become involved in debates on the floor of this Hon. Assembly. 
So I would ask kindly for your co-operation. 
 

Liberal Election Commitments 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is now 
clear that the Liberal leader is going to completely ignore the 
results of the Wood River by-election. Yesterday, one day after 
the coalition government was soundly trounced at the polls, he 
stood in this House and he pledged his undying love for the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess that would make some sense if the NDP 
were implementing some of the Liberal platform. But that’s not 
happening either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has compiled a handy 
little checklist of 35 specific promises that the Liberal leader 
made in the last election and I sent that list to the leader. I asked 
him to check off the ones that he’s actually accomplished. As 
far as we can see, he’s zero for 35. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you point to one item that the Liberal 
platform has been implemented in your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the Leader of 
the Opposition is as deluded as the other members opposite. 
When we formed this coalition government, we talked about 
our plan, we talked about how we would balance the agenda of 
the New Democrats and of the Liberals in putting forward a 
plan for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, when we put 
forward our plan in our Throne Speech and our budget, we 
talked about major tax reductions. Starting July 1 — some of 
the biggest tax reductions that this province has ever seen with a 
completely new tax plan beginning January 1, 2001. 
 
We’ve just announced a health care review where we will be 
looking for efficiencies, where we’ll be looking for 
accountability, based on the five principles of the Canada 
Health Act. 
 
And when he asks me what this coalition government has 
achieved, I can point to many things in education, and health 
care, in taxation. But when we ask the members opposite what 
they have achieved from their platform — nothing, not one 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well since the 
minister doesn’t want to mark his own paper, we’ll mark it for 
him. 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Let’s start with health care. The Liberal leader promised to 
scrap all health district boards — wrong. To create 10 to 12 
regional hospitals — wrong. Provide renal dialysis and a full 
range of diagnostic services in each hospital — wrong. 
Purchase four — count them four — mobile MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) machines — wrong. Create 300 new 
nursing positions — wrong. Create 132 new diagnostic 
treatment and occupational physical therapy positions — 
wrong. Keep all rural and urban hospital beds open — wrong. 
And, relieve waiting lists — wrong. 
 
I hope you did better on your medical exams than you did on 
this one. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the coalition is working so well, why hasn’t the 
government implemented any of the Liberal health promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when we 
just announced the health care review and we talked about the 
three phases of the health care review would provide with 
interim strategies this fall, and a final report next spring, that 
will tie into an implementation cycle that will fall into the 
budget cycle as well as the legislative cycle of this government. 
 
So, when he talks about what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask all hon. 
members to allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So when the member opposite asks 
what has been achieved within the nine months of this 
government in terms of the approach in health care, the 
approach in taxation, the fiscal responsibility that has been 
displayed, it is a marked contrast to the members opposite who 
promised zero in health care, who promised frozen money for 
education, who talked about their entire platform — major 20 
per cent tax cuts and a little bit for highways and forget 
everything else — and they called that a balanced approach. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, they are not balanced. They are extremely 
imbalanced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe health 
care isn’t the doctor’s best subject. Let’s try highways. 
 
The Liberal leader promised to spend every penny of gas tax on 
highways, streets, and roads. They promised to spend $277.5 
million on highways, $55 million on new rural and urban streets 
and roads fund, $37 million on twinning the Trans-Canada and 
Yellowhead highways; and create 1,500 new seasonal highway 
construction jobs, create 100 new full-time and 500 new 
seasonal road construction jobs for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the coalition is working so well why hasn’t the 
NDP adopted any, any of your highway policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the 
Highways budget this year — 250 million — is the highest 
expenditure of any provincial government in the history of this 

province. 
 
And when we talk about the per cent currently of net revenue 
from gas tax, it’s 87 per cent. And of course I’d like to see that 
move up to 100 per cent at some point in time. 
 
But I remember just recently the member from Cypress Hills 
said, that during the Devine years, 199 million was spent per 
year. But what he failed to say is that they borrowed 30 to 40 
per cent of that money and we’re still paying for it. 
 
The fact of the matter is our Highways budget is budgeted for, it 
is balanced, and it is fixing the highways and roads in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s go . . . a 
few more Liberal promises. Cut $4.7 million from the Premier’s 
office. Cut $7 million from advertising. Cut $9.6 million from 
government travel. Save 6.2 million by getting rid of SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation). I remember it — 
scrap no-fault insurance. 
 
And here’s a good one, considering the shape of the Liberal 
Party — eliminate the 6 per cent sales tax on funerals. Wrong 
again, Mr. Speaker. He can’t point to one single Liberal policy 
that this government has implemented. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the Premier even let you sit at the cabinet 
table, or do they have a little card table off in the corner for you 
and the member from North Battleford. Why aren’t your 
policies being implemented by this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we talk 
about the achievements of this coalition government, and there 
are many. 
 
And when we talk about our Throne Speech, we talk about our 
budget, it is now a matter of public record. In fact we are voting 
the estimates off for our budget right now. 
 
And what that budget provides for is a major tax cut starting 
July 1. All people of Saskatchewan will see more money in 
their pockets starting this July. January 1, 2001, the biggest tax 
cut in the history of this province. So all Saskatchewan 
residents, all Saskatchewan citizens will benefit from that tax 
cut. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, there is more money for 
health care. When he talks about the mobile CT (computerized 
tomography) scanner that was recently announced for Moose 
Jaw and Swift Current, a positive — a positive. 
 
And what we’ve said now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to 
education, is an increase of $28.5 million. 
 
So we have a balanced approach, Mr. Speaker, and our 
approach is to provide more for health care, for education, for 
highways, and still put more money into the pockets of the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, yesterday I asked 
you whether you had been advised of any financial irregularities 
at the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford. I asked you 
whether the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority had 
ever conducted a review of the Gold Eagle Casino lease 
agreement between SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) and 212317 Saskatchewan Ltd. 
 
Here is the verbatim answer from yesterday in question period. 
You said, quote, “Mr. Speaker, the answer would be no.” 
 
Madam Minister, The Leader-Post is reporting today that the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority conducted an audit 
of the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford in 1998. The 
interim result of the audit contains clear evidence of financial 
irregularities related to millions of dollars at the Gold Eagle 
Casino. 
 
Madam Minister, how is it possible that you had no knowledge 
of a 1998 audit into SIGA’s gaming operations by your own 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I begin by 
congratulating the member opposite for the giant leap forward 
he’s taken in his seat in the Assembly. 
 
I would also say that, Mr. Speaker, I know yesterday now that 
the member opposite . . . my officials have informed me that he 
was speaking from a first audit conducted by the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. This document was a 
preliminary internal working report prepared by SLGA’s 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) internal auditor 
in June, 1998. It identified very preliminary issues that required 
further analysis. 
 
After considerable work done by the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, their findings were incorporated into a 
management letter sent to SIGA in June of 1999. Mr. Speaker, 
this management letter identifies issues that SIGA was 
responsible to resolve. SIGA acknowledged their responsibility 
and demonstrated that the progress had been made on some of 
these . . . 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Another question for the Gaming 
minister. Madam Minister, according to the audit conducted by 
your own department, SIGA overspent its 1998 budget by more 
than $8 million. 
 
Your own government agency’s investigation uncovered 
evidence that the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford 
overspent its promotions budget by more than a million dollars 
in the same year. The government investigation concluded that 
the Gold Eagle Casino spent $300,000 more than it needed on 
lease space and that the inflated lease payment was made to a 
numbered company controlled by some of the same people who 
managed the casino operations. 

Madam Minister, there are serious problems and yet it appears 
that either you were completely unaware of them or you were 
aware of serious financial problems uncovered by your own 
audit but decided to stay quiet about it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question. He’s been quite lengthy in his 
preamble. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Which is it, Madam Minister — NDP 
government incompetence or NDP government cover up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned, considerable work was done on that audit before a 
management letter was prepared with the final findings, and 
that was presented to SIGA in June of 1999. The audits 
conducted by SLGA are reviewed by the Provincial Auditor 
during his annual audit of SLGA. 
 
In noting concerns in his spring 1999 report, the Provincial 
Auditor included some of the items noted in the management 
letter to SIGA. But he also stated, Mr. Speaker, in his spring 
report: 
 

The operation of commercial casinos in Saskatchewan is 
relatively new. Accordingly, the Authority faces a 
challenge in designing systems and practices to regulate 
and monitor SIGA’s casinos. We think the Authority has 
addressed this challenge well. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government could 
have taken a great leap forward by coming clean on this two 
years ago. My next question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. It 
is now clear that the NDP government was aware of the serious 
financial irregularities two years ago and they chose to cover it 
up. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Maybe it’s because the NDP was 
getting some of this gambling money. 
 
Mr. Premier, the investigation into the operation of the Gold 
Eagle Casino by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority found evidence that money is being funnelled from 
the gambling operations to the NDP. Mr. Premier, how much 
casino gambling money has been funnelled to the NDP? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, preliminary internal 
audits, the first audits done, management letters sent to SIGA 
who’s demonstrating they’re working and progress has been 
made. They indicated further work needed to be done. Audits 
conducted by the SLGA are also looked at at the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
He mentioned some of the items of concern in the report in 
1999. Members opposite did not question that at that time. And 
that report also stated the auditor felt that there are many 
challenges in this area. We do not deny that, Mr. Speaker. But 
the authority was moving to resolve some of those issues, put 
systems in place, and the authority was trying to address those 
matters, and we’re doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the items in the Provincial Auditor’s 
report in June 1999 remain unresolved. No one’s questioning 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

that. They were brought to my attention further in a letter to me 
in June. We’re now conducting an independent audit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, according to your own government’s 
audit, and I quote: 
 

. . . it should also be noted that there are sponsorship for 
political party functions such as NDP golf tournaments and 
the Premier’s dinner. 
 

The auditor clearly identified this as an issue and you chose to 
cover it up. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you think it’s appropriate for casino gambling 
money which is earmarked for the social and economic 
development of First Nations people to be funnelled to the 
NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, overspending, if it were 
an offence, according to the auditor, these members opposite 
with their $1.8 billion over budget to date in their spending 
initiatives should be cited, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the political 
grandstanding happening here does not do justice to these 
issues. Many of the details that are outlined in those reports are 
now going to be examined in an independent audit done 
independent of government. 
 
I would ask the members opposite to let that audit process 
unfold. I’m not going to speculate on whether those items will 
be cited or others. This information confirms that we’re doing 
the right thing. An independent audit team, having full 
information, looking at the full details, they will do so 
independent of government and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, we have been 
informed that SIGA gambling revenue been used to purchase 
thousands of dollars worth of prizes for your NDP golf 
tournament in 1998 and 1999. Can you confirm this, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I think this does confirm 
that we’re doing the right thing. Mr. Speaker, there are many 
details they have from a very preliminary working paper, one 
snapshot in time. Many other people have mentioned they have 
concerns — they have concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We have concerns. That’s why we’re conducting a detailed 
review, an audit process in underway. I’m not going to discuss 
the details of that audit or the status of that audit right now. I 
don’t want to interfere with the audit team’s work and neither 
should the member opposite. I’m not going to speculate on the 
results of that work and neither should the member opposite. 
When the detailed review by independent auditors, who are 
independent of government, have their work completed, they 
will make those findings public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, you should have done the right thing two years ago 
when the auditor first raised these concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question for the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
you are the Premier who brought casino gambling to 
Saskatchewan. You are also the Leader of the NDP. Is it 
appropriate for the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan to 
receive gambling money from those very same casinos? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, when they talk about 
doing our work and doing it well, SLGA prepared information 
in a management letter to SIGA. SIGA has some responsibility 
to act upon those. They were making progress in some areas. 
Many areas we still identified that were unresolved and needed 
the work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the operation of casinos 
in Saskatchewan, the Provincial Auditor does say we face many 
challenges, Mr. Speaker. We have to design systems, look at 
regulation and monitoring practices and put those all into place, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says and I state, he thinks 
the authority has addressed these challenges well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’re facing these new challenges and 
we’re doing it well. We’re asking for an independent audit that 
will look at all of the information including what the member 
opposite drags in here for political gain. He will . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m please to provide the . . . 
table a response to questions no. 206, and by leave of the 
Assembly, also to provide the answers to questions no. 207, 
208, 209 and 210. Questions answered this season, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Those answers are tabled. 
 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, a good friend of mine, Virgil 
Cairns, seated in our gallery. He’s my constituency association 
president, and as many of you know these are very valuable 
people we have. And, Virgil, it’s my pleasure to welcome you 
here today on behalf of my members. 
 
With Virgil are two of his friends and two of my friends — 
Vikas Khaladkar and Bob Todd — from the carpenters union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the Hon. Minister of Labour to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today with me 
is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of Labour; John Boyd, 
director of policy and planning; Jan Whitridge, manager of 
legal analysis, policy and planning; and Doug Forseth, senior 
labour relations officer with the labour relations and mediation 
division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome 
the minister and officials to the Chamber today. As I did 
yesterday, I’d like to take this opportunity again to speak out 
against Bill 59. And as I said, my colleagues have spoken 
against this Bill a number of times in the past, but I’d also like 
to continue to inform the general public of the consequences of 
this Bill, and again, correct many of the misrepresentations and 
false statements made by the minister concerning this Bill. 
 
And once again we will outline the real reasons why the 
government is introducing this Bill in such a rush. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to start out by referring to a letter sent to 
the Saskatchewan Alliance For Economic Growth by the 
Minister of Labour. And it goes into the regular explanations of 
what her view of this legislation is and I’d just like to quote 
some of it. It goes on to say that: 
 

I believe that it is important to note that on the outset these 
amendments will not affect the majority of Saskatchewan’s 
construction companies, but only those companies that 
have been double-breasted and, as a result, operating as 
both union and non-union at the same time. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The amendments are intended to level the playing field for 
both union and non-union construction companies by 
prohibiting double-breasting. 

 
But at the end of the day, Mr. Chairman, that this statement is 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Why is the Minister of 
Health on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, a point of order. I believe I 
heard the member referred . . . makes reference to the Minister 
of Labour making false statements. I believe that is 
unparliamentary language and I’d ask the member to withdraw 
the insinuation that the Minister of Labour has made false 
statements. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I thank the Hon. Minister of Health for 
raising the point of order. Regrettably I did not hear that part of 
the conversation and so I direct this to the hon. member for 
Redberry Lake. If in fact you did say that the Minister of 
Labour had misled or issued a false statement, that is 
unparliamentary, and I would provide an opportunity to 
withdraw it. 
 
But I’m quick to point out, I did not hear it and I’m in the hands 
of the hon. member for Redberry Lake on this matter today. 
And of course I would be checking Hansard when it’s available 
tomorrow. 
 
But if the hon. member for Redberry Lake did in fact say that, I 
would ask that you withdraw it. If not, then you have the floor. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I would like you to check Hansard. 
I’m not aware if I said it or not. 
 
But my point was, Mr. Chair, that many of the statements the 
minister’s making about this Bill, many people in the 
construction industry and in the general public basically don’t 
agree with. And that was the point I was trying to make. And 
throughout today’s proceeding we’d like to clear up many of 
these statements and make the record straight about what really 
the intent of this Bill is. 
 
I’d like to go on to quote from this letter to the Saskatchewan 
Alliance for Economic Growth. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction with legislation 
permitting double-breasting and prohibiting this practice 
will put our province’s construction companies on the 
same footing as those in other provinces. 

 
And it goes on and on. 
 
I’d just like to point out that these statements unfortunately 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

don’t hold water. In other provinces not every construction 
company which operates in the same sector of an industry is 
found to be a double breasted company, as there are many 
differences based upon the scope and the extent of the second 
operation. 
 
And also traditional industrial work in Saskatchewan has been 
done by unionized workers in the commercial and industrial 
work by non-unionized companies. So I’d just like to point that 
out. 
 
The letter also goes on from the minister, stating that, “This Bill 
is not forcing unionization.” Well I don’t know what else you 
could say about this Bill but that it is forcing unionization. 
 
Yes, the minister hides behind her statement that the company 
is being unionized, not the worker. Well that’s fine and dandy, 
but at the end of the day the worker has to pay . . . the union 
dues are deducted from the worker’s cheque and at that point 
the worker isn’t entitled to participate in union business, but 
they still have their dues deducted. 
 
And as we know in the construction industry, Mr. Chairman, 
there are times throughout the winter months especially that the 
construction workers are laid off, and when they are rehired 
they will be forced to join a union. So again I’d just like to point 
out that discrepancy. 
 
The other ones that go on in the letter is concerning on the 
subject of subcontracting: 
 

. . . this legislation does not require Saskatchewan 
contractors to hire unionized subcontractors. 
 

Well, Mr. Chairman, technically in the Bill maybe not, but we 
all know that through provincial agreements they will have to 
be unionized. They will have to deal . . . subcontractors will 
have to be unionized. And so that effect will spread out through 
the economy, and the so-called mom and pop operations will 
have to be unionized in order to participate in these contracts. 
 
Also another item that’s of very great concern is considering 
our First Nations. And it goes on to say, it does not contain any 
provisions that would affect Aboriginal hiring or other 
provisions containing either collective agreements or project 
agreements. But of course if there’s any Aboriginal companies 
that are deemed to be spinoff companies, they’ll be 
automatically unionized. So that comment does not hold any 
weight as well. 
 
It also goes on to talk about the construction labour relations 
association, and we know that if this Bill passes, the 
construction companies will be forced into having that 
association as their representative, at the minister’s discretion, 
by the way. 
 
I’d like to at this point read into the Hansard a letter that I have. 
It’s from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce dated June 
27. And it’s to the Minister of Labour, and it’s concerning 
amendments to The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Act, 1992. And the letter . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Why is the Associate Minister of 

Health on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d to introduce a 
colleague of mine, a special guest in the gallery, in the east 
gallery — Rosalee Longmoore who’s the president of SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and other SUN members with 
her. If Rosalee could stand? 
 
And I’d like to welcome her to the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Athabasca on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to also introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To you and 
through you and to the rest of the members of the Assembly, I 
want to introduce a very special guest in the gallery opposite. 
The guy’s name is Allard Merasty . He’s from Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
and he’s brought a bunch of young kids here today to do some 
lobbying and some meeting with some ministers. 
 
And I think it’s very, very important that we recognize some of 
the unheralded heroes from our northern communities, and 
Allard’s a fine example. And certainly as a role model I look to 
other people as some of them people that I want to be like when 
I grow up, in many senses, and Allard is certainly my role 
model. He works very hard. He has a number of boys he takes 
care of and works with the young people. He’s also an excellent 
athlete. 
 
So I want all the members of the Assembly to welcome Allard, 
to thank him for bringing the young people down all the way 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Municipal Affairs on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — For leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, to the member opposite. I 
notice sitting in the gallery is someone by the name of Suzanne 
Stewart. She’s hiding behind the clock which is an unusual 
thing for Suzanne to be doing, is to be hiding behind anything, 
because she’s been quite a strong advocate for our nurses in the 
province and certainly from the part of the province that I come 
from, and a very diligent worker in the health care profession. 
 
And I really appreciate the opportunity to see you again, and for 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

you to be here to witness the proceedings of the House. And 
have a great summer. 
 
I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming Suzanne to the 
House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to continue by 
reading this letter into the record. It says: 
 

Dear Minister Crofford: 
 
We are in receipt of your June 9 correspondence 
responding to our May 10, 2000 letter wherein we set forth 
some of the serious concerns we have regarding the 
proposed amendments to the CILRA. We were extremely 
disappointed with your response as the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce and its members continue to have 
significant concerns with the proposed legislation and the 
long-range implications it will have. 
 
In your June 9 correspondence you state that the legislation 
is intended to create a level playing field for the 
construction industry, thus allowing for greater fairness 
and competitiveness and suggest that this legislation is on 
the same footing with other provinces. This is not accurate. 
In other provinces not every construction company which 
operates in the same sector of an industry is found to be a 
double-breasted company as there are differences based 
upon the scope and extent of a second operation. In 
essence, there is and will be a significant problem with the 
expansive definition of “sector” in Saskatchewan. This 
definition will cover industrial, commercial, and 
institutional jobs in Saskatchewan. Traditionally, industrial 
work in Saskatchewan has been done by unionized workers 
and the commercial institutional work by non-unionized 
workers. For example, work at a mine site, which is 
industrial in nature, should not be in the same category as 
building a school or commercial building. In other 
provinces, the two operations in this example would not be 
regarded as being the same sector because they are not 
competing as they are doing different work, and therefore 
there would be an automatic certification. 
 
Your correspondence also states that the amendments will 
put union and non-union firms on a level playing field 
within our province. Unfortunately, you have ignored the 
competition from outside of Saskatchewan. The legislation 
will force general contractors who bid industrial work on a 
unionized basis to become unionized for the commercial 
and institutional jobs. This will make them uncompetitive 
for commercial or institutional work and will result in 
out-of-province businesses bidding for and receiving work 
that would otherwise have been performed by 

Saskatchewan companies using Saskatchewan employees. 
Not only will Saskatchewan construction businesses lose in 
the scenario, but your government will no longer receive 
the revenues as a result of these contracts. Many of the 
employees that will come in will be out of province 
residents and will file their tax returns in other 
jurisdictions, and will pay provincial tax to other 
provinces. 
 
Your comment that eliminating double-breasting will not 
prevent firms from hiring non-union subcontractors is 
misleading. As you are very much aware, collective 
agreements typically have clauses that restrict the ability of 
the unionized contractors to contract work to a non-union 
contractor. As a result, unions will effectively be able to 
prevent the general contractors from using non-unionized 
workers for their commercial and institutional work. This 
is the goal that has been stated publicly by the unions in 
their media reports and literature that has been distributed 
in your legislation promotes this goal.  
 
In numerous interviews and in the House you have stated 
that the amendment Act will not affect in any way joint 
ventures with Aboriginals. We would suggest that this is 
not accurate. If a First Nations business is found to be a 
unionized spinoff, the CILRA (Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Act) makes that business subject to 
provincial collective bargaining agreements negotiated 
through the CLR (Construction Labour Relations 
Organization). In such instances there is an obligation to 
hire unionized people. How will those provisions coincide 
with another initiative brought in by your government to 
provide equity employment opportunities for Aboriginals? 
To the extent that Aboriginals are not unionized, they will 
lose their opportunities to work and thus the employment 
equity opportunities that should exist will be eroded. 
 

(1515) 
 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce believes quite 
strongly that this legislation will result in a significant 
erosion of our construction company base and with the 
skilled workers. The legislation that you are introducing 
will directly result in fewer workers and ultimately less 
income tax for the province. The proposed legislation is 
short-sighted, politically motivated, and not in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan residents. We strongly urge you 
to reconsider your position, and to the extent that the 
legislation passes, that you delay proclamation until you 
have had a further opportunity to seek input from all 
parties and make a rational decision based on the growing 
economy. 
 
The Provincial Chamber recently introduced Action 
Saskatchewan which talked of creating an environment 
that would be stable and would promote business 
development. This legislation is extremely regressive and 
Saskatchewan business and new businesses looking to 
come into this province will not know what is coming next 
and will not have the assurance that there will be steady 
and constant laws that will govern their operation. We have 
been doing our utmost to champion the province and 
suggest to people that this is a good place to carry on 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

business. But it becomes very difficult to do so when the 
government refuses to listen to the reasonable requests of 
business and brings in regressive legislation. 
 
Sincerely, T.G. Davis, President 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce  

 
And I’d like to table this letter, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the Minister of Health on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Earlier I raised a point of order that the member did indicate 
that the Minister of Labour made . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I already told the . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve got a new point of order. 
 
The Chair: — You have a new point of order? I didn’t 
understand that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I have a new point of order. I did 
review Hansard from June 27, 2000, page 2218. And in the 
member from Biggar’s remarks, he did say this: 
 

It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to stand in this House today and continue to speak out 
against this Bill, as many of my colleagues in the 
Saskatchewan Party have done for a number of weeks — 
not only to speak out against Bill 59, but continue to 
inform the public of the two consequences of the Bill and 
correct the many misrepresentations and false statements 
made by the Minister of Labour and outline the real 
reasons the NDP is so desperate to pass Bill 59. 

 
I would argue, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. Chair, that this is 
unparliamentary language, and I would ask you for your ruling. 
 
The Chair: — To the point of order? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I withdraw those remarks and I apologize. And 
if I said it again today, I also withdraw and apologize. Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the hon. member for Redberry Lake for 
dealing with this point of order immediately and effectively. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
just basically ask the Minister of Labour, how can you dismiss 
this letter out of hand and should you not take their concerns 
into stride and hold this Bill until the construction industry 
people have had a better look at the whole situation and discuss 
it with your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to just 
start out by maybe clarifying a little bit for the member what 
my role is as Minister of Labour because there seems to be a 
little bit of confusion. He understands his role to be to speak for 
the chamber of commerce, but I want to lay out what I think my 
role is. 
 

And I think the best way I can do that, because it’s expressed so 
well, is laying out some of the preamble to the Canadian Labour 
Code. It says: 
 

Whereas there is a long tradition in Canada of labour 
legislation and policy designed for the promotion of the 
common well-being through the encouragement of free 
collective bargaining and the constructive settlement of 
disputes. And whereas Canadian workers, trade unions, 
and employers recognize and support freedom of 
association and free collective bargaining as the basis of 
effective industrial relations for the determination of good 
working conditions and sound labour management 
relations. 

 
And I would add as well, Mr. Chair: 
 

Whereas the Government of Canada has ratified 
convention no. 87 of the International Labour 
Organization, concerning freedom of association and 
protection of the right to organize. 

 
That’s very important, Mr. Chair, because I’m going to come 
back to that, protection of the right to organize. 
 

And has assumed international reporting responsibilities in 
this regard. 

 
And I’ll just add and certainly hope that our House would adopt 
a similar stance: 
 

The Parliament of Canada desires to continue and extend 
its support to labour and management in their co-operative 
efforts to develop good relations and constructive 
collective bargaining practices, and deems the 
development of good industrial relations to be in the best 
interests of Canada and ensuring a just share of the fruits of 
progress for all. 

 
And so it’s my job, Mr. Chair, to try to create that environment 
that can give effect to Canada being a signatory to international 
labour agreements — certainly the kind of provisions that we’re 
trying to include in things like NAFTA (North American Free 
Trade Agreement), the labour side agreements. 
 
Now I’ll move from there to the member’s specific questions. I 
was hoping for a little more of a dialogue, but seeing as you 
gave me the whole load, I guess I’m going to have to give you 
the whole load back here. 
 
The one thing I guess that I’ll start out by saying is this question 
of whether this exists in other jurisdictions. There is nowhere in 
which this Bill differs in essence across Canada. And the 
essence of that Bill is no double-breasting, you can’t be union 
and non-union at the same time. People have a democratic right 
to choose to be union or non-union, and unionized employers at 
the bargaining table with unionized employees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 
 
The Chair: — What is the member’s point of order? 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people in 
the galleries are not allowed to participate . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The member raises a point of order 
before the Chair had an opportunity to deal with the issue. 
 
I thank the hon. member for raising the point of order, and 
simply wish to remind our guests in the galleries that we do, all 
members, sincerely welcome you here, but ask that you respect 
the institution and not participate in the debate through applause 
or action. 
 
Why is the member of Health on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the Acting House Leader, I want to 
respond to the point of order and would . . . 
 
I have a new point of order. 
 
The Chair: — A new point of order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask you to rule, Mr. Chair, on 
whether it is appropriate for members on the floor of the 
legislature to draw members in the gallery into the debate on the 
floor. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the hon. Acting House Leader for asking 
the Chair for a ruling on the appropriateness of members 
drawing gallery guests into debate. Order, order. And certainly 
on that point of order, it is well taken. It is inappropriate for any 
member to draw in our guests into debate, and I thank the hon. 
member for raising the point of order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. These are 
exciting times in the legislature, and I have to say that I want 
the member to understand that I take all of his questions very 
seriously because I do see it as my responsibility to be fair in 
these matters. 
 
Now you talked about forced unionization, and I want to ask the 
member a question, Mr. Chair. If he signed a contract, and if the 
person that he signed a contract with then created another 
company to avoid being responsible for that contract, would he 
consider that to be appropriate? 
 
And that’s what we’re talking about here. We’re talking about 
companies that were certified, duly certified under the regular 
labour relations process, who then chose to create spinoff 
companies in order to avoid their legal obligations under the 
appropriate labour relations system that we had here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t think you would want someone you had signed a 
contract with to do that, and neither did the workers who were 
certified under those unions like it when the person that they 
signed that contract with did that. And I think if you think about 
this, you’ll be able to understand that very well. 
 
Now the other thing is you asked about subcontractors being 
obliged to follow this. Well the fact of the matter is I found the 
member’s question very strange because you talked about even 
though the legislation doesn’t do it, that other agreements do. 
Well the fact of the matter is those other agreements are 

collectively bargained. And if you’re suggesting that I should 
write legislation in such a way that I’m predetermining what 
will be collectively bargained, I would say to the member that 
that would be inappropriate. 
 
And so I just say to you that I think the problem you’re 
referring to is one for the parties to settle at the bargaining table, 
and it’s not really appropriate in the discussion of the Bill. 
 
The next thing I’ll talk about is the member quoting from the 
chamber of commerce. Now it’s perfectly legitimate to quote 
from whoever you want. 
 
But I guess there’s one thing I want be clear about. I know the 
member thinks I was motivated by relationships with people in 
the union movement to put this forward. But when you 
understand the basic principles of the right to unionize and the 
right to be able to effect that right, the fact of the matter is we 
had a very big flaw in the legislation that had be corrected. And 
it wasn’t a matter of any direct lobbying on behalf of this group 
of people that cause me to do this. 
 
It was the result of two things. Several years of meetings and 
consultations on this subject, and people were surprised that this 
happened but I’m going to read a quote from Mr. Bob Mitchell 
that took place quite early in this process, where basically he 
said that if the industry was not able to come to agreement on 
this, then he would have to make the decision for them. And I 
think that statement was made in 1998. It says here: 
 

Mitchell hadn’t set a deadline for an agreement, but he 
won’t let the talks go on indefinitely. 

 
“I’ve made it perfectly clear that if they can’t resolve this 
issues themselves, then I’ll resolve it for them. And I don’t 
want to do that because nobody would be happy with that 
solution.” 

 
Well, Mr. Member, and, Mr. Chair, the reason we’re here today 
is the intransigence of some of the parties in compromising on 
this issue. And I’ll just quote again from 1996, December: 
 

The Saskatchewan Construction Association walked away 
from mediation talks with Kelleher on November 20 
saying that double-breasting didn’t need to be explored 
because it had already been dealt with. 

 
And it’s this lack of spirit of compromise that is the reason that 
we’re in this House today, having to have made a decision on a 
process that went on for four years with no resolution and very 
little compromise on behalf of the parties that you purport to 
represent here today in this discussion. 
 
The other quote I’d like to give you when you speculate on the 
propriety of these kind of changes, this is from a Board of 
Conciliation report in 1985, and I’ll just read a quote here: 
 

The concept of unrestricted spinoff companies is in our 
view fundamentally at odds with the principles of trade 
unionism as enunciated in our Trade Union Act. To allow a 
continuation of double-breasting in the industry as 
presently exists seriously jeopardizes the continued 
existence of the unionized construction industry. 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

The solution to the spinoff company is instead the 
establishment of collective bargaining framework which 
will ensure that agreements are competitive in the real 
world and readily reflect the reality of market conditions. 
 

Now just to help the member understand who believes these 
things, I’m going to read the names of the members of the board 
of conciliation that signed this statement: Richard Hornung, 
Q.C., Nick Sherstobitoff, Q.C., and Larry Seiferling, Q.C. 
 
Now as well the member speaks to the level playing field. And I 
know that’s there’s people who think I don’t understand this, 
but I totally understand this. What happened under the Bill as it 
existed prior to the changes we’re talking about today, is if you 
were a unionized contractor who didn’t spin off, or if you were 
a unionized contractor that came into being after the provisions 
of the Bill in ’92, then you would be able to spin off but the 
other people wouldn’t. So you would have an unfair 
competitive advantage in terms of those other people. 
 
(1530) 
 
And the people who are now complaining about fairness were 
quite happy to have that unfairness exist as long as it wasn’t 
them who were suffering. And now that that situation may exist 
for them, if they prove to be certified, they’re now worried 
about the unfairness. It would have been nice if they had 
worried about the unfairness when it was being applied to other 
parties of their sector instead of the narrow self-interest that 
we’ve seen in this discussion. 
 
The other comment I guess I would make was I had what I 
considered a rather elevated discussion with the head of one of 
the major companies in Saskatchewan who’s concerned about 
this Bill, from his office in Alberta. And I very much 
appreciated my discussion with that gentleman because he was 
very honest and forthcoming. 
 
He said, look, our company is unionized in other parts of 
Canada. It is unionized in BC (British Columbia). It is 
unionized in Ontario. And one of the things . . . and he says, we 
don’t mind that. That’s okay for us to be a unionized company. 
He said one of the things that makes it work for us is because 
the governments in some areas have union tendering policies. 
 
And so now we may see, when all these changes come through, 
that we will have the same group of employers coming back to 
us asking to reinstate the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) because then it will be fair. 
 
And I’m trying to explain to you that I totally understand these 
arguments. And there may be real competitive issues, but you 
know where you resolve those? In my view you resolve them at 
the bargaining table. And that is the appropriate place for those 
discussions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now the member talks about the 
tradition in Saskatchewan of doing union work in the industrial 
area and non-union in the commercial. Well, I just have to say 
that you have us confused with Alberta, because that has never 
been a tradition in Saskatchewan. We’ve always had a small 

sector. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that again those kind of matters can 
be dealt with at the bargaining table and have been in some 
instances. And I would suggest that rather than continuing to 
support the notion of unfair labour relations, it would be much 
more helpful to talk about what could be done to get parties 
around the table and actually get realistic about dealing with 
some of this stuff. 
 
On the issue of out-of-province workers coming into the 
province and taking jobs away, there was more out-of-province 
workers in this province when Devine first brought in his Bill 
than there’s ever been in the history of the province. And 
everybody who works in that industry knows that. 
 
And I’m sorry that maybe that you don’t know some of this 
history so that you might be a little more sensitive to all the 
unionized workers who lost their homes, lost their possessions, 
became unemployed as a result of Grant Devine’s Bill. 
 
But the fact of the matter, there’s a lot of bitter feelings out 
there, and I reiterate this is about fair . . . this is about fair law. 
It’s not about law that serves somebody’s self-interest. Because 
the very companies who are worried about fairness today didn’t 
worry about it when it applied to the other partners in the sector. 
 
And the other one you talk about — income tax, less income 
tax. I don’t know how closely you’ve looked at the job profiles 
in Saskatchewan, the tax tables. But unless you’re 
independently wealthy, in this province if you can afford to pay 
taxes you’re likely a unionized worker, and the only reason you 
can afford to pay taxes is because you are. 
 
I’m not saying that there’s nobody else that makes money. But 
the fact of the matter is is that many of the good-paying jobs are 
in the unionized sector, and those are the taxpayers. So I think 
you shouldn’t play too fast and loose with the term taxpayer. 
 
Now on the other point of Aboriginal, it’s nice after our party’s 
been involved in working on these kind of issues for 25 years in 
our government that you finally discovered that Aboriginal 
people live in Saskatchewan and you’re concerned about it. But 
the fact of the matter is there are no Aboriginal clauses 
imbedded in legislation anywhere in Canada. 
 
But what we have done in Saskatchewan and certainly did a lot 
of, starting with the Blakeney government and subsequent to 
that, was we imbedded initiatives for Aboriginal employment 
and business development in provincial contracting, tendering, 
and lease agreements. 
 
Many of the northern leases contain clauses that require the 
inclusion of Aboriginal people in those developments, I’m sure 
clauses that many of the people you’re talking about fought 
their inception. 
 
Under the internal trade agreement . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . yes, we have people here who know this history. And, Mr. 
Chair, under the internal trade agreement the exemptions on the 
competition clauses for regional and other matters of 
development, there are advantages for employers who partner 
with Aboriginal construction companies. There’s no question 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

about that. 
 
The origin of this particular exemption is in section 15 of the 
Canadian Constitution. Now I will mention that the building 
trades council has been working with the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) to promote hiring and training of 
young Aboriginal workers. And I think they have an action plan 
on the go at the very moment to have the 15 affiliated unions 
hire and indenture young Aboriginal people. 
 
Certainly in projects that go on in reserves there’s quite often 
affirmative clauses that unions are involved in working with. 
And as well in the Contact Lake Gold Mine project, or in 
northern construction, many of the construction unions are 
involved in this. 
 
So I believe that both non-union and union employers should be 
concerned about Aboriginal hiring, Mr. Speaker. But the fact of 
whether you’re union or non-union does not prevent you from 
caring about, agreeing to, or negotiating these kind of 
provisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The minister referred to 
a document. I would ask her to table that document please. And 
also in 1992 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You were reading 
from a document I understand; I would like you to table it. 
Table them all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . After that — you 
were reading from a document. 
 
You made reference to unrestricted double breasting. Well I 
believe in 1992, Madam Minister, there was a change in laws 
that prohibited any more double breasting. And you made 
reference to the right to organize. 
 
Well it’s interesting you used the right to organize. Right now 
with this law the workers of this province don’t have any rights. 
They will be forced into a union. And if not forced into the 
union, they are forced to pay union dues. And once they’re laid 
off, they will be forced to join a union or else they’ll have to go 
elsewhere for work. 
 
Also other things that you mentioned. You talk about other 
provinces, other jurisdictions. Well in Alberta the industrial 
sector is unionized and the commercial sector is not. And the 
Labour Relations Board has restrictions on whether they can 
investigate whether they’re of a common employer. So they can 
be owned by the same people, but still one be unionized and 
one not. I would think that’s a spinoff company that exists. 
 
And also the whole reason why this Bill’s been brought 
forward. You talk about instability, tension, no one negotiating. 
What was the problems? There were no problems. It was only 
in the . . . the only problems were in the mind of the 
government. 
 
You talk about the unfairness of things. Well nobody was 
complaining. The business was . . . industry was working very 
well. They hadn’t had a strike in over 18 years. So I’m not sure 
what the minister is really talking about there. 
 
And you go on to talk about out-of-province companies coming 

in to work during the Devine years. Well, Madam Minister, 
what do you think is going to happen now? I mean if you force 
companies into unionized contracts, the regulations and the 
rules that these companies have to abide by are going to 
increase their costs. 
 
So when they bid on a contract in the province, a 
non-unionized, out-of-province company can come in and take 
that job. That means less jobs for Saskatchewan people. And 
not only less jobs but we lose some of our tax base because the 
profits will go out of the province. Out-of-provinces companies 
will pay their taxes in other provinces. 
 
And as far as the Aboriginal workers are concerned, it’s just 
interesting to see the Aboriginal people are making a step 
forward, creating their own jobs, creating businesses, and going 
forward. You’re going to force unionization down their throat 
as well. 
 
And I just have a scenario which we’ve touched on before, but 
basically it goes like this. A worker who works for a new 
unionized construction firm will have to pay dues deducted 
from their wages, even if they do not belong to the union. If that 
worker were laid off, which is common in the construction 
industry because of the seasonal nature of the work in 
Saskatchewan, that worker upon rehiring will be forced to join a 
union. 
 
But an open-shop company from Alberta who does not have the 
extra costs of doing business, they will likely outbid the 
Saskatchewan unionized company. That same construction 
company worker could hire out with this out-of-province, 
open-shop construction firm, the Alberta firm, and then this 
out-of-province firm would take its profits home and pay its 
taxes in another province, let’s say Alberta. 
 
The Saskatchewan worker also has the option of moving to 
Alberta and working in Saskatchewan with this open-shop 
company. And if he moves to Alberta, he pays his taxes at a 
reduced rate to the Alberta government. 
 
So I just see this whole Bill as a lose-lose-lose situation for the 
whole province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, just for the record, could you tell us, tell 
the House how this Saskatchewan Bill will benefit the people of 
this province, considering the potential of lost jobs, lost tax 
base? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 
happy to do that. 
 
What I’d like to start with is, a lot of this seems to be premised 
on the fact that in order to be competitive you have to be 
non-union so you can pay less so that you can compete and . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I would say to the members 
opposite, if they truly believe that people will get paid more, 
then they would not likely unionize, and they would not likely 
have a concern. And certainly if non-unionized employers were 
to be unionized, they certainly would not be prevented from 
paying their workers those high wages that they’re currently 
paying them. 
 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

But what I want to talk about right now is something that’s 
called the Merit Contractors Association. Now Merit 
contractors — I think they’re part of this alliance that you are 
referring to — the Merit contractors’ on-line newsletter that’s 
entitled Open Mind . . . three years ago, the Construction 
Industry Institute initiated a research project on how to attract 
and maintain a skilled construction workforce. 
 
And they came up with all types of reasons as to why the 
industry can’t attract and retain qualified workers. And I’ll just 
read these out. This is what the craft workers say that work in 
the Merit companies. 
 
There was 1,200 craft workers employed by 21 construction 
workers . . . companies interviewed. The first one was: 
 

Poor pay and benefits. Craftworkers want wages and benefits 
that are competitive both in the construction industry and in 
other industries in which they find employment. 
 

The second one is: 
 

Non-permanent employment. Young people don’t want to 
work in an industry that has a reputation of laying off 
people on project completion. If permanent employment is 
available in another industry, construction workers can’t be 
blamed for leaving. 
 

The third one is: 
 

Poor job safety. All the contractors said they’d put safety 
as number one, but the craftworkers still say there’s a lot of 
places where safety is not given enough attention. 
 

Number four is: 
 

Poor treatment by supervisors. When The Business 
Roundtable did a study a number of years ago, it found that 
the number one reason workers quit was because of poor 
treatment from their supervisors. Ongoing supervisory 
training and human relations is a must for every 
construction company. The composition of the workforce 
is changing today, so it is even more critical to train 
supervisors on a continuous basis. 
 

And the last reason the workers gave in the Merit shops was: 
 

Poor working conditions. Craftworkers need to be provided 
an environment in which working conditions are conducive 
to supporting a high level of productivity. This (means) 
having clean Port-a-johns, and smoking and break areas. 

 
So I only read that into the record so that the member can 
understand that members of the industry understand these to be 
problems. These are not problems that have been invented by 
this government or invented by somebody else. The very people 
that signed the letter you’re talking about have done a study 
which has told them they’ve got troubles in their own roost. 
And I just bring that to your attention. 
 
The next thing I want to come back to, I mentioned I would 
come back to the Canada Labour Code’s description of the right 
to unionize, which is considered to be a democratic right both 

by the international labour organizations which is made up of 
members from around the world of all stripes of government. 
It’s a basic fundamental democratic right. 
 
Now you say people are forced to join a union. Today in this 
province if you’re a health care worker and if you go to work 
for a health care facility that has a union, you join that union . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you’re forced to join the union; 
well okay, well you’re out of the closet then. It’s good to know 
that that’s your view of the thing. 
 
I don’t think I need to say any more about that, Mr. Chair. We 
obviously have a basic difference of opinion on what these 
rights mean and how they’re maintained. 
 
The other comment I would make is in Alberta they do legislate 
their sectors. Now if the industry in this province hadn’t spent 
17 years fighting being fair, then we might have got on with 
those discussions you’re talking about. And I’m certainly 
prepared to sit down with all members in the industry following 
the passage of this Bill to talk about how to deal with those very 
practical problems. 
 
But I believe that those problems will be solved. As I 
mentioned, the president of one of the companies that you’re 
talking about agreed with me when I had a private conversation 
with him. He agreed with me. Because his company is 
unionized and he knows that the solution to his problem isn’t 
just de-unionization. He knows he has to sit down with the 
workers and work these things out. 
 
And I considered him a sophisticated president of a 
sophisticated organization. And I think if him and I can 
understand each other, then you and I should be able to 
understand each other. 
 
The other comment I would make . . . you talk about increased 
costs. I guess I would need the member to explain to me, if the 
costs are not wages, what are the increased costs that he’s 
talking about? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d also like to quote from the Merit 
contractors survey. It reads: 
 

In construction, a 1993 Merit Contractors Association 
survey revealed that 89 per cent of respondents surveyed 
thought that their work was satisfying, that they felt a sense 
of accomplishment from the work they performed. Over 81 
per cent said they would recommend working for that 
particular company to their friends. And a similar 
percentage disagreed with the notion that they’d be better 
off in a unionized environment. 
 

Madam Minister, can you tell us how many people are 
employed in Saskatchewan directly by the construction 
industry? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, the labour force survey 
indicates that there’s 23,500 workers in this sector in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to ask the minister how many of these 
companies were grandfathered in 1992 and how many workers 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

do they employ currently in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, we don’t know that. And 
continued requests of these organizations like the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association to tell us these numbers have not been 
forthcoming, so we just don’t know. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, could 
you give us a guess or an estimate, these changes to the Act, 
will they cause the numbers to go up or down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess the best thing I can do for 
the member there is to quote The Leader-Post . . . let’s see, 
what’s the date here — Monday, June 12, 2000, “Sask. job 
market sizzling hot.” 

 
‘We’ve got jobs all over the place,’ said Doug Elliot, 
publisher of Sask Trends Monitor. 
 
“They are . . . full-time jobs and a lot are for youth — it’s 
more good news.” 
 
. . . Saskatchewan (is) still far below the national 
unemployment rate. 
 
Most of the 14,600 increase in jobs came in full-time work 
. . . 18,600 higher than May of 1999. Part-time 
employment dropped by 4,000. 
 
There simply won’t be anyone to fill the jobs . . . 
 
“I don’t think we have enough people . . .” 

 
And so basically I would say if you’re concerned about people 
having work, it’s my impression that there is enough work to go 
around, and increasingly, as capital budgets increase, there will 
be even more work to go around. And I think everyone, instead 
of applying themselves to fighting over labour Bills, should 
apply themselves to how to deal with the real issues in growing 
our economy. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, what 
are the rules regarding out-of-province construction companies 
doing work in Saskatchewan and will they be affected by this 
Bill, or are only Saskatchewan companies affected? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would think that the member opposite 
should be painfully aware of things like NAFTA and the 
Internal Trade Agreement. And the fact of the matter is, is all 
projects over a certain size have to be tendered. It’s part of the 
opening up of markets across Canada and in North America. 
And so certainly those are tendered. 
 
But I did specify that under ITA there are exemptions for 
matters of regional development or Aboriginal development. So 
there are circumstances in which preference can be made if a 
case can be made for those things in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly, having high expectations within your tendering 
agreements makes it less profitable for companies to parachute 
in from outside. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wasn’t referring 
to NAFTA or any of those. I’m referring to this Bill. This is 

what we’re discussing. What effect is this Bill going to have on 
out-of-province companies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thought I was fairly clear in that 
answer. All tendering is governed by the ITA (Internal Trade 
Agreement) rules, or exemptions from, and any company inside 
or outside Saskatchewan would be subject to those rules. Laws 
don’t exist in isolation. And there is nothing in this Bill that 
would either hinder or help that process. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Speaker, I guess it comes to the point, 
would you have an estimate about how many out-of-province 
companies, which would be free from provisions of a union, 
bureaucracy, red tape, and so forth, are likely to take jobs in 
Saskatchewan? And take them out from under provincially 
owned firms who will have to pay the higher costs brought on 
by the union red tape? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, I would be way happier if 
the member said to me, let’s get together and bring all these 
players in the industry together, look at these bogeyman, see 
how real they are, and see what solutions we can reach together 
for the common benefit of our Saskatchewan companies and 
our Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Because I don’t think this scaremongering, speculating on 
things that might happen and could happen is really a very 
useful exercise. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. Madam 
Minister, and to your officials, I would just like to also ask a 
few questions on this Bill. I had the chance to speak to it in 
second reading debates and I have talked to a number of people 
in the industry and people in my home constituency about their 
views on this particular piece of legislation. And so it is with 
that input in mind that I would like to enter the discussion and 
the questioning here in Committee of the Whole. 
 
And in doing that, I’d like to maybe set the context for my 
remarks, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chairman of Committees, 
by referring directly to some . . . just a couple of the examples 
of the input that the MLAs were receiving and that I received as 
well. And if I can, I’d like to quote a little bit from these 
missives that I have. One’s an e-mail and one’s a written letter, 
both from people who are employees in the industry. And some 
have . . . with some very, very good questions that I think the 
minister has tried to address and the member for Redberry Lake 
has done a good job of asking, but one that will set the preface 
for my questions. 
 
This one particular e-mail begins: 
 

With regards to the enforcement of certification to open 
shop contractors. 
 
(He says) I am an open shop employee. 
 
I do not wish to be a union member. 

 
And I would gather from that statement neither does he wish to 
pay union dues or have his employer automatically deduct 
union dues. 
 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

If the workplace and open shops are to be non union it is 
their right to do so. 
 
Are you sure that you’ve received all the info about the 
open shop contractors: 
 
(He asks the legislators of this province, and he lists some 
examples.) (Are the) wages better? (Is the) training better? 
(Is the) work fairness better? (Are the) benefits better? 
(What about) apprenticeship (is that) better? (What about) 
RRSP (plans is that) better? 
 

In his view, and I think we should respect it — he is an 
employee in the industry — his view is that open shop 
contractors are the leaders in all areas. He says: 
 

No political party has asked me or my co-workers if we 
want to be certified. 
 
(He says that’s) our choice. 
 
Before you try and pass laws or bills be sure you and your 
co-workers are educated from both sides, with open ears. 
 
The changes you are trying to run through the house will 
open the door for open shop Out of Province Contractors. 
 

That’s his view, and I’m still quoting from the e-mail, Mr. 
Chairman of Committees. 
 

Open shop contractors will march in and overcome our 
economy, as bad as it is. 
 
Finally (he says) ask yourself honestly, do you feel that you 
are benefiting the worker or are you telling them they have 
no choice . . . 
 

And he has signed that as you can with e-mail messages. 
 
We have another from a journeyman electrician here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And no doubt you’ve maybe seen a 
copy of this letter, Madam Minister — your officials have. But 
again I’d like to read it into the record, Mr. Chairman, if I can. 
 

I am writing to express my disgust and frustration 
regarding the NDP government and their undemocratic 
plans to impose unionization of the construction industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I do not deny there is a place for unions and that history 
shows the work that they have done for labourers over the 
years. However living in a “free country” . . . 
 

And unfortunately he puts quotation marks around free country 
— perhaps he felt that he had to given the nature of this 
legislation. But he says: 
 

However living in a “free country” it has always been my 
right to choose. If it was my wish to belong to a union, I 
would vote for certification not be ordered to do so by a 
“democratic government”? 
 

And if I may interrupt the quotation momentarily, Mr. 

Chairman, I think that’s entirely the point. Some of the points 
have been raised by the member in committee and others in 
their speech during second reading debates. The point is that 
these companies are free to certify now — that right exists now, 
today, in the province of Saskatchewan, before this Bill is given 
Royal Assent. 
 
And if they have that right to do so now, why does the 
government feel it’s incumbent upon them to impose 
certification — basically to force unionization? Because that’s 
what this Bill is all about. 
 
If the Labour minister . . . Back to the quotation from the letter, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 

If the Labour minister (the) Hon. Joanne Crawford, and the 
Labour Relations Board impose their plans many of my 
other rights could be taken away or lost. I will be forced to 
join a union, pay union dues and my seniority could be in 
jeopardy. In addition I’ll lose my right to manage my own 
pension funds and some of my RRSP’s. 
 
To make matters worse the government’s plan will allow 
unfair advantages to out of province contractors. This plan 
takes money out of my paycheck and could in effect take 
my job away. 

 
He asks these questions: 
 

What are the freedoms that my family came to Canada for? 
 
Where is the loyalty to our people by our government? 
 

And finally: 
 

Where will they stop if we don’t stand up and stop them 
today? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Minister, in several of your remarks in 
addressing some of those questions put forward to you today, 
and during some of the speeches during second reading, we’ve 
often pointed out that there is currently no labour instability in 
this industry. Have there been lockouts? Have there been 
strikes? Have there been an inordinate number of unfair labour 
practice grievances launched? 
 
The answer to those questions is no. And the CLR 
(Construction Labour Relations Organization), the construction 
labour relations association will now be the organization that 
negotiates on behalf of everyone — although they get no choice 
in that by the way. 
 
And, Madam Minister, as a bit of an aside, I think you’ll 
understand when you’ve stood in your place and said that every 
other province has the same thing, there’s nothing in this piece 
of legislation that doesn’t exist anywhere else, I think you 
perhaps would want to expand on your remarks here today and 
we’ll give you the chance to do that. Because on this one issue 
of the right of employers to choose the organization that 
bargains for them, in so many other provinces in the Dominion 
those employers are given that right. And you’re going to take 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

that right away from them, take that right away from them and 
arbitrarily assign them an association over which they have no 
influence and no choice. 
 
How is that democracy? How is that democracy, Madam 
Minister, and Mr. Chairman? I don’t understand that. 
Employers under this regime, this government, will not have the 
right to choose who will do the bargaining for them. No wonder 
they’re upset, Madam Minister. No wonder their employees are 
upset and they’re sending e-mails and letters to the legislators 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the CLR, who is this anointed body, in their commentary 
dated June, 2000, Mr. Chairman, says: 
 

From CLR’s perspective, the legislative changes could be 
quite disruptive to the stability enjoyed by our industry 
over the past several years. 

 
That’s the group, they represent the employers for whom I 
guess you’ve said you’re doing this, you’re taking this action 
for these people, for the CLR. I think that’s worth reading 
again, Mr. Chairman: 
 

From CLR’s perspective, the legislative changes could be 
quite disruptive to the stability enjoyed by our industry 
over the past several years. 

 
Madam Minister, you’ve said countless times in this Assembly 
and outside that you’ve had hundreds or over a hundred or a 
hundred meetings in terms of consulting on this particular piece 
of legislation. I am sure — I know for a fact — that you met 
with CLR on much more than one occasion. In fact, I wonder 
how many of the hundred that constitute a meeting of the 
government and CLR. 
 
Did CLR tell you what they’ve said in their June 2000 
commentary? Did they say that this could lead to instability in 
labour relations in the construction industry, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So many good questions, Mr. Speaker, 
so little time. 
 
I want to start out, I want to start out by saying the member 
opposite isn’t the only person who gets letters. And I could get 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. Now I 
asked for members’ co-operation. The questions have been 
certainly audible and I ask for the respect for the answers to be 
audible as well. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t received 
any letters from workers opposed . . . I’ve got a very few letters 
at the very beginning and I’ve received stacks of letters recently 
from workers who support the choice to be in a union. 
 
And I would also say that I’ve also received letters from 
contractors who work co-operatively with their union, are very 
glad to see that there will be a level playing field now, and that 
spinoffs can’t underbid. 

And I’ve also quoted previously from the Board of 
Conciliation, which I did send over to the members opposite, in 
which Larry Seiferling, Nick Sherstobitoff, and Richard 
Hornung — all Q.C.s (Queen’s Counsel) — said that this was a 
necessary change in order to effect the right to make that choice 
of unionization and also to get rid of double breasting that 
jeopardized the existence of the unionized construction 
industry. 
 
Now if people are to have the right to unionize, we’ve got three 
lawyers here who have agreed that this is a pretty fundamental 
provision to that right. 
 
And I speak again to the Canada Labour Code that says that in 
industrial relations in Canadian society it’s considered to be a 
fundamental right. And in order for a fundamental right to have 
meaning, Mr. Chair, it’s got to be able to be effected. 
 
So just as he has some letters from people who oppose the fact 
that if they join a unionized workplace that they may have to 
become unionized, there’s also people who would like to know 
that their employer’s unionized so they have the choice of 
becoming unionized if they wish to. So I guess that’s just 
something where you have your own opinion. 
 
But there’s also a body of law that regulates industrial relations 
in Canada and in every province. And I will emphasize to the 
member opposite that the Labour Relations Board doesn’t 
impose anything. They are like a quasi-judicial body that 
adjudicates law — 50 per cent employers, 50 per cent employee 
representatives — and they come to their best adjudication on 
the laws that exist. 
 
So I would think that it would be unfair to characterize them as 
imposing anything. 
 
Now as far as the CLR goes, partly because of the instability 
that existed prior in the construction industry to Mr. Devine’s 
actions, and then subsequently in the intervening years, there 
was felt to be a need for a central body that did bargaining for 
that industry. 
 
And the employers when they were . . . had concerns about the 
CLR wasn’t about the fact of the CLR, what their concern was 
about was the right to be represented in the CLR. 
 
And so the change we’ve made in this legislation, Mr. Chair, is 
that any unionized employer can now be a member of that body 
and has a right to be represented in the bargaining. So I think 
that that should satisfy the concern that employers have. 
 
And as to the quote from the CLR, Mr. Matthews having been a 
player in this for a long time understands the tensions, and I 
think what his belief is, is because of the letters that we’ve seen 
from the alliance and what not, that he believes that people 
intend to keep the tension going and intend to keep disrupting 
things. So I think he’s just reflecting his understanding of 
what’s been going on for a long time. 
 
But I do want to be very specific because the members continue 
to insist that there were no consultations. Well that just isn’t 
accurate. 
 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

This is the number of meetings by organization. There was 50 
meetings with business organizations, 12 with labour, and 18 
with others. The organizations that were represented were CLR, 
SCA (Saskatchewan Construction Association), SCLRC, the 
chamber of commerce, the CFIB (Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business). And when these parties were asked if 
we could share the individual names of people who 
participated, they said no. 
 
And under freedom of information, if a third party is requested 
to declare information that was confidentially given by them, 
we can’t reveal it unless they give their permission, Mr. Chair. 
So I would have liked to have been able to actually list all of the 
people. 
 
But four years of consultations took place. I read the quote from 
Mr. Mitchell that gave two years’ warning that really we needed 
to see some progress and compromise, and unfortunately that 
compromise wasn’t there. 
 
But at the end of the day . . . I will also, just in the interests of 
letting you know how the consultations went, this is from June 
6 of ’98 where Manley McLaughlin, the executive director of 
the Saskatchewan Construction Association, described 
negotiations as delicate but said a June resolution is possible. 
McLaughlin said the first draft of an MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) has been released by organizations representing 
union and non-union companies. 
 
Now unfortunately, the hope that was existing at that time, Mr. 
Chair, that this MOU would continue and that compromise 
would happen, people would understand that all parts of that 
industry have slightly different needs, and they need to work 
together. That was our hope, Mr. Chair. But it didn’t happen. 
But certainly the discussions went on for a very long time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman of Committees, and, Madam 
Minister, thank you. 
 
I don’t think my point was that you haven’t had consultations. 
The question was are you listening? Did you listen when you 
consulted with all of the groups you mentioned? 
 
Because you mentioned a number of business groups who now 
appear on the letterhead of the Saskatchewan Alliance for 
Economic Growth. And they’re not much interested in Bill 59 
— I can tell you that. I don’t think I have to; I think you know 
that. 
 
I also quoted the CLR. I’m sure you consulted with them, you 
know, quite a few of the 100 times. They point to instability 
that’s going to come to the industry. 
 
So I’m not questioning the fact that you had a lot of meetings, 
Minister. I’m not questioning that the officials did, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m not questioning that other members of your 
caucus may have had a lot of meetings. But my question is the 
same question that we asked on this side of the House on so 
many issues: are you listening? When you asked people for 
their input, did you listen? Because I don’t think you listened, I 
don’t think you listened. 
 
This list would lead us to believe that you didn’t listen. The 

group that you seem to be appeasing doesn’t think much good is 
going to come of this in terms of labour peace in the industry. 
And so that’s the question we had. 
 
Madam Minister, the other thing that you said initially when the 
member for Redberry Lakes was questioning you about this Bill 
as it was introduced into the legislature was that, well, it’s 
pretty much the same as there is in every province; there’s 
nothing different here. 
 
Madam Minister, I think you want to stand up today — I hope 
you’ll stand up today — and admit that that is not entirely the 
case. And in fact the rules of this place prevent me from using 
any stronger language. Frankly, I’d like to. 
 
We have a list of the jurisdictional comparisons in terms of this 
area from right across the country. And let’s just deal with the 
issue of the designated or the accredited employer organization 
— that’s what we’re talking about right now — and find out 
what the rest of the country is doing relative to what your Bill 
would do here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ll start with Alberta. Employers have freedom to choose 
employer organizations which must have support of the 
majority of employers in the trade division. 
 
How about in Manitoba? How about Manitoba? Is Manitoba 
okay? I wonder for the member for Saskatoon Meewasin will 
try that. There is no associated business legislation, section 
59(1), Labour Relations Act. 
 
What about Ontario? Employers have the right to choose 
accredited employers associations, employers have the right to 
choose accredited employers associations that have the support 
of the majority of employers in the provincial unit. That’s 
section 136(2)(a) Labour Relations Act in that province. 
 
What about New Brunswick? Accredited employers 
organizations must be chosen and supported by the majority of 
affected employers, section 46. Also in New Brunswick in 
section 49, accredited employers organizations can be 
decertified by a majority of the employers. 
 
Employers in this province don’t have that option here. They 
won’t when this Bill receives Royal Assent. You’re going to 
yank that away from them. Just as you won’t give workers the 
right to a secret ballot, you won’t give employers the right to 
choose who bargains on behalf of them. 
 
What about Nova Scotia? Accredited employer organizations 
must be chosen and supported by a majority of the employers in 
a geographic area and sector, section 97(3). Accreditation may 
be revoked by a majority of employers, section 101. 
 
What about Prince Edward Island? Accreditation may be 
revoked by the majority of employers, section 59; and 
accredited employer organizations must be chosen and 
supported by the majority of employers in a geographic area 
and sector, section 55. 
 
And Newfoundland, accredited employer organizations must be 
chosen and supported by a majority of the employers in a 
geographic area and sector. Accreditation may be revoked by a 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

majority of employers. 
 
How is that the same as what you’re going to give this 
province? What you’re going to force on the province? There 
are so many other differences on this list that deal with matters 
other than the accredited associations that will bargain on behalf 
of the employers. 
 
But, Madam Minister, that’s when I believe your government 
started to stumble out of the blocks with this Bill, when your 
first line of attack on it bore little resemblance to the truth. 
Because the truth is this Bill is completely different and far 
more draconian than any other piece of legislation, with the 
possible exception of British Columbia where the popularity of 
the NDP there is rivalling the NDP here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so, Madam Minister, and, Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like you to comment on that. I’d like to give you the chance to 
stand up and tell us that this is not the same as what every other 
province in Canada is doing. This is markedly different than 
what any other province, save British Columbia, is doing in the 
country. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what we’re 
seeing here is a reflection of the larger debate the members 
opposite wish to have. If it was just this Bill that they were 
raising concerns about, I could be a little more convinced that 
these details really made a difference. 
 
But during this session, Mr. Chair, they’ve spoken out against 
minimum wage, they’ve spoken out against occupational health 
and safety regulations, they’ve spoken out against the Labour 
Relations Board, they’ve spoken out against The Trade Union 
Act, they’ve spoken out against workers’ compensation, they’ve 
been in favour of right-to-work legislation. And the member 
from Redberry Lake who fancies himself the next minister of 
Labour has called union leaders job killers. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, if I really believed they cared about the finer 
points of this Bill, it would be a little more worthwhile to have a 
discussion, and I will get into the jurisdiction by jurisdiction. 
But I have little belief that what they have at heart is the 
principles of good industrial relations or the co-operative 
relationship between employers and employees in a modern 
economy, Mr. Chair. 
 
I believe what they want is to establish a right-to-work state in 
which everybody goes back to making the least amount of 
money possible and worries about being on social security in 
their old age. And I think that’s truly the member’s objective. 
 
That being said I will answer the member’s question because 
certainly it’s fairly easy to answer them. 
 
You will find that no matter what the legislation, no legislation 
is identical from province to province. But what you will find is 
that there are underlying principles that are the same. And in 
this Bill, one of the principles is that a company cannot be 
union and non-union at the same time. 
 

The next one is that you have a democratic right to choose to be 
unionized. 
 
Another one is that unionized employers are at the bargaining 
table with unionized employees. 
 
And the fact of the matter is every province has a process like 
that. They may not have a CLR, but in this legislation the 
unionized employers have the ability, have the ability to draft 
their own bylaws, their own constitution, to elect their own 
people to represent them at that bargaining table. And quite 
frankly I don’t see how it gets any fairer than that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, it 
can get fairer than that — absolutely it can get fairer than that. It 
can get fairer than that if you give employers the right that they 
have almost anywhere else in the country — the right to choose 
who’s going to bargain, their own employer organization . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Yes, you give them . . . Well the minister chirps 
from her seat that they get the right to choose. And I guess they 
do as long as they choose who the government wants them to 
choose. There’s that choice or there’s the choice not to have 
one. And that’s a typical NDP choice in this province. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now the answer to the previous 
question was allowed to be heard and I thank hon. members for 
that. And I ask for the same courtesy as the member for Swift 
Current puts his next statement and question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is precisely the problem with this 
government, is this is a typical NDP choice given to the 
province of Saskatchewan. You either choose their way — you 
either choose their way — or there is nowhere to go. So it’s a 
choice of one. That’s what this is all about. 
 
And the point that we’re making here with respect to other 
jurisdictions is that employers have the right to choose their 
own organization. We don’t have that here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
There are several other jurisdictions too that allow — I guess 
one word you can use is spinoffs. But certainly there’s other 
jurisdictions that aren’t forcing unionization in their particular 
pieces of legislation, as you’re doing here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. New Brunswick, Alberta, Ontario is going to be 
revamping theirs, we’re told, and other provinces in the 
Maritimes. 
 
There’s also no reverse onus clause in so many of these 
provinces. And you know, Minister, you said in the answer to 
the last question that you would spend some time answering my 
question about how you could stand, when this Bill was first 
introduced, and claim that it’s the same legislation as anywhere 
else in the country when the facts are that it isn’t. 
 
You said you were going to stand and address that. You 
haven’t, Madam Minister. You haven’t addressed it neither to 
the members of this Committee of the Whole, nor have you 
addressed it to the construction workers, and you haven’t 
answered that question for construction employers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

And more to the point, on this particular piece of legislation, 
and on other concerns with our labour legislation here in the 
province, business groups have said they’d like a meeting. They 
said they would like to sit down and talk about that issue and 
other issues. 
 
Not long ago they sat up in the gallery, the Saskatchewan 
Alliance for Growth, representing literally thousands of families 
and thousands of small businesses in the province, and told you 
that they wanted to talk a little bit about it. 
 
And for someone who’s based almost her entire argument, or 
almost all of her rebuttals in this case, on the fact that she’s 
widely consulted on this Bill before it was introduced, we found 
it passing strange that you didn’t have 30 minutes for the 
members of PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers 
Association) when they were here, and you appear not to have 
30 minutes or 15 minutes for the Alliance for Economic 
Growth, representing all these business people. 
 
And the Premier himself, the Premier himself, from whom a 
meeting was requested by these groups, didn’t have time. And 
they simply want to ask the same questions that we’re asking. 
Why did you say things at the beginning of this debate that 
frankly seem to be contradicted by the facts? 
 
You said you would answer that question in the last answer. 
You didn’t. You sat down before you did. 
 
I invite you to do that again, Minister — to stand up and explain 
to this House how this Bill is the same as other legislation 
across the country. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I have to admit, Mr. Chair, I 
wasn’t totally frank about one thing: in Quebec it is different — 
it’s 100 per cent unionized there by law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The one thing I do want to say is this 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This Bill, Mr. Chair, makes it possible, 
if workers choose to unionize, to do that. It makes it possible if 
employers want to have certain bylaws or certain things in their 
constitution . . . I imagine if they put forward a resolution, they 
can even change their name. What’s in a name? 
 
The fact of the matter is it doesn’t proscribe anything about 
their organization other than that there will be an organization 
for collective bargaining. And they elect their members to it; 
that is totally within their control. It’s totally within their 
choice. 
 
And if the member opposite has some reason for opposing that 
the owners would have that much choice in what they do, I’m 
not sure that I can understand that. 
 
The second factor is the reverse onus clause. This clause, which 
the member objects to, was actually asked for by the employers 
in the last round of the Bill. Because what it gives them the 

ability to do is if they are declared a related employer, it gives 
them ability to go before the Labour Relations Board and make 
the case that they didn’t spin off for the sake of avoiding their 
collective bargaining obligations. And this was a clause that 
those contractors asked for. And so to have the member suggest 
that we imposed that seems a little unfair, Mr. Chair. 
 
And the fact of the matter is all of the elements of this Bill and 
even discussions about the CCTA went on for four years. We 
had a report from Kelleher that recommended some changes to 
the Bill, some to the CCTA — probably mostly in directions 
that you would likely not favour. There was an MOU that came 
very close to resolution, but at the end of the day self-interest 
prevented some of the players from taking that extra step. 
 
And Mr. Mitchell said in 1998, if they were not able to take that 
extra step, we would have to do it. And we’ve done it within the 
principles of the Canadian Labour Code and the implementation 
of good collective bargaining in a modern democracy and 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. I 
think one of the reasons why so many businesses and workers 
— like the ones I was quoting earlier — have a problem with 
Bill 59 isn’t just with the content of the Bill. I think there’s 
enough there to be concerned about. But I think it also has a lot 
to do with the attitude of the government and the attitude that 
they get; these people who are small-business men and women 
across the province who get attitude from the government. 
 
And the member for Regina Northwest, I think it is, seems to be 
shocked that I would make that statement. But I can’t 
understand why he would be shocked because I believe he was 
here in the Assembly, Mr. Chairman, when PIMA . . . when 
about 12 members of PIMA, the prairie implement 
manufacturers were in our gallery — concerned about labour 
issues in the province of Saskatchewan — when we raised those 
issues on their behalf. 
 
And what was the reaction of the front bench of that member’s 
government? The reaction was to laugh at them. And you know, 
Mr. Chairman, shortly after that question period I went outside 
and talked to some of the members of PIMA in the foyer and 
one of the members . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina South 
just did something that the NDP did that very day and they do 
all too often. He’s more worried about votes. They seemingly 
. . . they only want to respond to people that are going to 
support them. And if people disagree with them, it’s no big deal 
if they’re passing policies that affect their lives in a bad way, 
Mr. Chairman. That’s the problem with this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s why the people in Wood River said that is 
enough. But that day . . . and that is exactly the kind of attitude 
I’m talking about, Mr. Chairman, because they laughed at those 
members. 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

And one individual member of PIMA who employs dozens of 
people in his hometown in his business said to me . . . I asked 
him what did he think of the proceedings, and he said, well I 
was disappointed. And I said, well why is that? He said, well I 
took time off work — I shouldn’t be here; I have a lot of things 
to do — but I took time off work. Maybe I didn’t think the 
government would change its position because of a question 
period, but he said, I didn’t expect to get laughed at. That’s 
what he said, Mr. Chairman. 
 
He saw you laughing. The members of PIMA saw you 
laughing. Employers across the province see you laughing at 
them when they come to you with legitimate concerns about 
legislation that we’re supposed to openly discuss. You laughed 
at them. It’s absolutely disrespectful. 
 
The Deputy Premier I believe is the one who said from his 
chair, well . . . said from his seat, well there’s more employees 
than there is employers. So it just doesn’t . . . that’s what he 
said. The Premier doubts it but that’s what he said. 
 
And that is entirely the problem, Mr. Chairman, because Bill 59 
is further evidence of the fact that they don’t understand that 
without the employers, there are no employees, Mr. Chairman. 
Without the employers, there are no employees — they don’t 
understand that. 
 
But it’s all a matter of votes for the government — it’s all a 
matter of votes for them. The member for Regina South 
confirmed it today here chirping from his seat. He said well, 
they don’t vote for us anyway. Well, they’ve got something 
right, Mr. Chairman — they don’t vote for these guys anyway. 
 
They won’t be voting in the future for this government because 
of pieces of legislation like Bill 59. And they didn’t vote for the 
government in Wood River because of legislation like Bill 59. 
And come the next election, if they continue to introduce 
draconian legislation like this, Wood River is going to happen 
across the province in the cities and in the towns, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the minister indicated in one 
of her answers that after the Bill is passed, after 59 has received 
its Royal Assent, she’s open to discussing improvements. It’s a 
little like . . . I think, the horse is already . . . will be out of the 
barn by then. But we’ll take her at her word that she’s prepared 
to do that. 
 
And I guess that’s the question I have for the minister: when, 
when, when you start these discussions you say you’ve 
committed to have with the industry after you pass Bill 59, will 
you have a better attitude towards the employers of the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that 
having grown all my life in a family where people’s 
fundamental rights were considered very important, I do believe 
that what this discussion is about is whether people have the 
right to that choice. And fair labour relations means that people 

have a right to choose whether to certify or to decertify union. 
And I know the members opposite don’t like that, but that’s 
what fair is. It’s the choice to do one or the other. 
 
And I want to mention a couple of other people who have 
commented on this whole situation. In December 12, ’96, 
because the discussion was going on there, former 
Saskatchewan mayor Cliff Wright said: 
 

Wright opposes double-breasting saying “I think you 
should decide what you want to be and be it. You either 
walk one side of the fence or the other.” 

 
The other quote which I’ve been given permission to read from 
Ross Fraser, general manager of Supreme Steel says: 
 

Supreme Steel Ltd. came to Saskatchewan just over 10 
years ago and I’m pleased and proud of our work with the 
members of the International Association of Bridge, 
Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron-Workers 
Locals 838 and 771. 
 
I’m opposed to the views expressed in the CLR article in 
regards to disruption in the industry. I strongly support the 
government and the proposed legislation, and look forward 
to working in an environment where there’s a level playing 
field. 

 
Now I just say that there are many people who feel that way. 
They just don’t spend their days organizing themselves into 
coalitions. They get on with going to work; they get on to 
working with their employees, and get on with the industry. 
 
The member talked about . . . You know, I’m just going to take 
everybody on a little trip through memory lane. Some people 
may remember Henry Ford who — as much of a big 
industrialist as he was — had this warm and fuzzy notion that 
his workers should be able to afford the cars that he produced. 
And I’m not quite sure where the members are coming from in 
suggesting that workers don’t at least have the right to choose 
whether they want to be involved in that discussion with their 
employer. 
 
And the member talks about attitude. I tell you nothing strikes 
more at the heart of the question of attitude than the last copy of 
ChamberLink which has a sign on the front, “Welcome to 
ALBERTA — Wild Rose Country.” And, you know, I doubt if 
the Alberta Chamber of Commerce would put the US (United 
States) border sign saying welcome to the United States, 
because they know better. And they know better than you 
know. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is very frustrating to have people who are 
cheerleaders for another province sitting across from you in the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When the chamber did their report, 
and, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I read the entire chamber of 
commerce action report, and it mentioned four things in the 
Action Sask chamber report. It talked about the need to be aware 
of population growth. It talked about no excuses, no finger 
pointing, no running to big government for solutions. It said 
that there’s much more venture capital in this province than the 
entrepreneurs that are demanding access to it. It talks about the 
positive role that the Crowns play in development of our 
province. And it also talks about a need for more discussions 
over labour relations and the role that they play. 
 
So what’s the first thing they do in terms of all these issues 
they’ve identified? Send out a newsletter about Alberta and 
form a coalition to attack labour laws — that’s hardly the 
co-operative spirit I think in which the action report made its 
recommendations. 
 
And if we do want to compare population figures for a moment 
under different governments and their laws, the fact of the 
matter is, is during the ’70s the population of Saskatchewan 
grew by 50,000, Mr. Chair; during the ’80s, it shrank by 5,000; 
and during the ’90s it grew by 20,000. So I don’t think I need to 
tell the members opposite who was in government. 
 
But probably the most discouraging and disruptive thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is when . . . I have never in all the time I’ve been 
elected — and I know it’s only eight years so maybe this stuff 
has gone on and I just didn’t know about it — but I have never 
seen a sitting member solicit donations for his vote in the House 
on a Bill ever. 
 
And I’m tabling again this letter from Mr. Randy Weekes 
asking for donations of a thousand dollars, $5,000, and $10,000 
to support his anti-union tirades in the House. I have never seen 
this, Mr. Chair, and this is despicable in the history of 
legislatures in their practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was listening with 
great interest in the minister’s response to my colleague from 
Swift Current. It’s interesting that you’re comparing us to 
Quebec — 100 per cent unionization. Well there’s another 
comparison you should think about too, is that we’re the highest 
taxed province in the country. We’re only second to Quebec in 
tax rates. I wonder if there’s a connection there. 
 
And also your reply to the lists of a hundred meetings that 
we’ve been requesting locations and who you had them with. 
And I understand you’re kind of hiding behind some . . . hiding 
behind some reason that you can’t get these lists of names out. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Members, order. Order on 
both sides of the Chamber. The hon. member for Redberry Lake 
is addressing the minister almost directly across the Chair, and 
I’m having great difficulty hearing the member for Redberry 
Lake because of the other conversation. And I thank all hon. 
members on both sides for the anticipated co-operation in 
allowing the member for Redberry Lake to put his question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s interesting to note 

that you are having trouble coming up with the list of a hundred 
meetings. We understand that your officials are busy phoning 
around the province trying to find someone that you could say 
that you met with to make up this hundred meetings. I don’t 
believe you ever did meet with a hundred different groups, and 
that’s probably the reason why you can’t come up with their 
names. 
 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and Saskatchewan 
Construction Association have made a request to have their 
names taken off your list of groups to be consulted with. And 
the reason is because they didn’t want to be dictated to; they 
wanted to sit down and have a discussion with you concerning 
this Bill. And that was not the case and so they asked to take 
their names off. 
 
Madam Minister, you recently said that this legislation will not 
affect the mom-and-pop businesses in this province. Madam 
Minister, will you resign the day that your legislation will far 
transcend the big construction companies and impact on the 
mom-and-pop operations in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess the first comment I would 
make is I don’t decide who unionizes, Mr. Chair, the workers 
decide who unionizes. And a mom-and-pop would only be 
affected if their workers decided to unionize. And I’m not a 
union organizer. I don’t go out there and do that. That’s totally 
up to those employees, whether they choose to do that. 
 
And the only people who would be affected is people who have 
been unionized, who have a certification order, and have tried to 
avoid meeting their obligations. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin on her feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — To join debate. 
 
The Chair: — The hon. member from Meewasin wishes to 
enter the debate. The member for Redberry Lake has the floor 
now, but certainly I’ll recognize you when the hon. member for 
Redberry Lake is finished. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
you’re dreaming technicolor when you say that union workers 
in this province have the choice of unionization. This whole Bill 
is about forcing them into a union. Where do you come up with 
this stuff? I mean this Bill is forced unionization and you know 
very well that’s the case. 
 
Madam Minister, a couple of questions concerning . . . could 
you tell us how many employers does the CLR represent in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, first of all, I’ll say that, yes, 
I do like to dream in technicolor as opposed to the members 
opposite who like to dream in black and white. 
 
But the other comment I will make is that we have no way of 
knowing those figures. The industry has not shared them with 
us. We have asked them for those figures before. But we have 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

no way of knowing what the numbers are or how many workers 
that represents. We just don’t know. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. For the record 
once again, is it your view this Bill is necessary to bring about 
greater harmony in the construction industry, and if so, can you 
point out examples of disharmony in this province as far as 
work slowages and strike action in the last 20 years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, disharmony is not only 
labour conflict. And I have to say that our government and our 
labour relations department have a very good record of 
intervening early where there’s conflict, and I think that our rate 
of settlement of any kind of conflict is second in Canada. So 
certainly we don’t generally have a history of the kind of 
concern that the member is speaking about. So I don’t think that 
we can compare it to an environment that normally is kind of 95 
per cent peaceful in the labour relations area. 
 
But what I will say to the member is that he would be blissfully 
unaware of the tensions because he hasn’t been part of the 
hundred meetings that have gone on to try to resolve these 
issues. I can tell you that it has been very heated. I can tell you 
that people are very dug in in their positions. 
 
And at the end of the day, as Minister of Labour, it’s my 
responsibility to come down on the fundamental principles of 
good industrial relations and the ability for people to effect the 
choice to unionize and the ability for people to know that if 
they’re part of a union company, that it’s a union company, and 
if they’re part of a non-union company, it’s a non-union 
company. 
 
And this has got to do with the same law, so any of the 
companies you’re talking about that would go anywhere else in 
Canada would work under the same kinds of laws, because 
although the dots and t’s and whatnot might be a little bit 
different, the fact of the matter is fundamentally these laws are 
the same everywhere in Canada. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In your news 
release announcing the amendments to the CCTA and so on and 
so forth, you made a big deal about instability and tension in the 
workplace. And you just have to show some proof of any 
instability and tension, any concern out there at all. There was 
none whatsoever. None whatsoever. 
 
I mean, and I said this before, the only instability and tension 
was created by your spin doctors, and really we don’t see any 
justification in making that statement. 
 
And, Madam Minister, when the current Act was passed your 
government thought it wise to grandfather those companies that 
spin off companies. Now you think it’s bad. What’s changed 
between 1992 and today that makes you believe that you have 
to pull the rug out from under construction companies in this 
province by changing rules they have lived under for nearly two 
decades. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, one of the reasons why this Act 
was reopened was to resolve the issue of the REO 
(representative employer organization), which is something that 
the non-unionized and potentially unionized contractors wanted 

very much because they wanted to be able to be sure that were 
they to be unionized, that they would be represented at the 
bargaining table. So that is one of the reasons why this Act was 
reopened. 
 
The other one is, as you know, subsequent to the Act in ’92, the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement was put in place to 
make up for the fact that some companies had the right to — 
under the grandfathering clauses — to exist both union and 
non-union, and it was creating an unlevel playing field for the 
post-’92 contractors and for the contractors who never did the 
spin-off within their companies. 
 
So there was two reasons for doing that and we could not 
contemplate ending the CCTA without restoring the basic 
fairness that necessitated the CCTA. And certainly it was the 
comment of the employers that if we intended to continue the 
CCTA, that there would be war. 
 
Well apparently no compromise works in this environment, 
they’re determined to fight no matter what; and the fact of the 
matter is, just because you’ve had the benefit of 17 years of 
having it all your way, does not mean that it isn’t time for a 
little justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, incredible answer. Is it your 
view that these companies are not playing by the rules you set 
down in 1992? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m sorry, I must be a little deaf; I 
didn’t hear that question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My question’s concerning the so called spinoff 
companies. Were they not playing by the rules set down in 
1992? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the belief was then that there 
would be a limited number of spinoffs and over time this 
problem would take care of itself. 
 
But I want to . . . just a second, I have a document here that’ll 
help clarify the situation. Here it is here. 
 
What happened, in Ontario in 1995, there was a case of a major 
company that revealed that they had 32 different spinoffs 
operating under one company. 
 
And I would guess I would ask the member opposite what 
logical and legitimate reason can he think of that a construction 
company would need to have 32 spinoffs to conduct its 
business, if their objective, if their objective wasn’t to avoid 
either liability or collective bargaining obligations. 
 
And what we found out was a problem that we thought would 
take care of itself because there would be a limited number of 
spinoffs, turned out to be untrue. There was an unlimited 
number of spinoffs. So there was an endless ability to run away 
from your obligations on a, on a . . . on just spinning further and 
further out. 
 
So I would say to the member, this is why the grandfathering 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

didn’t work. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well for the record again, Madam Minister: 
how many new spinoff companies have been created since 1992 
that were contrary to the provisions of the current Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just be very clear about this, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. They haven’t been allowed since ’92 to create 
more spinoffs, but there was a whole bunch of spinoffs sitting 
on the shelf, so to speak, that became part of the grandfathered 
spinoffs. 
 
And nobody ever knew how many companies were on that 
shelf. But apparently a great deal of effort was put into storing 
away for the winter a number of numbered companies that 
could be used for spinoff purposes. 
 
And to this day, we don’t know how many are on that shelf. But 
the case in Ontario in 1995 by one of the same companies 
revealed that there was 32 spinoffs on that shelf. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, how many 
complaints have been filed with the Labour Relations Board 
regarding the illegal establishment of spinoff companies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m not sure what the member’s 
speaking to because there hasn’t been illegal spinning off. What 
there has been is spinning off with the intent of avoiding 
collective bargaining obligations. And because it’s legal has not 
made it right. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well then how many were there that did that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We would have to check with the 
Labour Relations Board to get that information. 
 
Now if what you’re talking about is cases involving related 
employer, there have been a few related employer cases. But no 
cases specifically on the question that you asked that I know of. 
We would have to ask that question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. How 
many certification applications have been made relating to these 
non-union spinoffs since 1992? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, that would be the same as 
asking me what happens on the court docket. I don’t keep data 
on what happens at the Labour Relations Board. But certainly 
where data is available, we can seek to get it for the member. 
 
But I know in general terms how many certifications and 
decertifications there is per year, but I can’t sort them out by 
industry. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you also 
find out how many unfair labour practices have been filed by 
employees of these companies since 1992? 
 
And if I could go on, you’ve talked a lot about the hundred 
meetings that you’ve had, and again, we’re asking who you had 
these meetings with. 
 
But on two occasions now, your government has an opportunity 

to discuss with the industry and the public: one is the debate 
that the North Saskatoon Business Association invited you to as 
well as the Saskatchewan Party, which you declined; and again, 
the Alliance for Economic Growth invited the Premier to a 
meeting to sit down and discuss this Bill. 
 
Is there any way that you, as the representative of the 
government, could put off this Bill for six months or a year until 
you’ve fully informed the business community of what’s going 
on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s no question 
that people can pretend whatever they want about the 
discussions that have been going on for the last four years. 
 
But there have been intensive, extensive discussions that my 
deputy’s been involved in, that special consultants have been 
involved in, that I’ve met with people. And the fact of the 
matter is just because, just because you don’t do what someone 
wants you to do, does not mean you haven’t heard them. 
 
(1645) 
 
I have said to the member opposite, I’m aware of what the 
competitive issues are, I’m aware why people are reluctant to 
give up this slightly advantageous position that they have over 
some of their colleagues in the industry — I understand all of 
that. 
 
But the fact of the matter is they were given many 
opportunities. As Mr. McLachlan says, they were close to 
signing an MOU. They didn’t make it down the home stretch 
and so today we are doing what we’re doing. And there is no 
further debate that’s needed because extensive consultation and 
discussion was held. 
 
And we’re debating today in the House and if people want to 
tune in — they’ve all got TV sets — I’m sure they can do that. 
But the fact of the matter is, is there was probably more 
patience and effort put into trying to get the parties together 
around this. And I urge you to not be part of creating division, 
but to encourage those employers to get real about sitting down 
and discussing these issues in a realistic way with the workers 
that are affected in this industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’d like to go back to the spinoffs. Could you provide us 
with documents that would demonstrate the example of 
unlimited spinoffs, that you so confidently declare, that takes 
place in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t know the exact number. I 
only know the number from the case that went through the 
Labour Relations Board in Ontario. 
 
But I will give you an estimate from former Saskatoon mayor, 
Cliff Wright, who is also head of his own unionized 
construction company, who says that spinoff companies hold 
more than half of the total construction market in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s as much as I can really venture, Mr. 
Chair. 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, but if you’re throwing out 
the number 32 you must have some proof or some 
documentation to warrant that number. Could you provide us 
with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I would say that that isn’t the 
issue. The issue is whether or not people have the choice 
whether to unionize or not and whether a company can operate 
both union and non-union at the same time. Those are the 
issues. 
 
I think that the research involved in the case in Ontario cost 
over a million dollars, and it’s very complicated to look through 
a complex corporate web of spinoffs and shell companies and 
whatnot. And certainly we haven’t undertaken that research. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that . . . I guess if we had stronger 
laws for corporate disclosure, it would be a little easier to know 
these things. And certainly if the member would like to propose 
such a Bill that would be a very useful thing to do. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, you’ve just introduced a Bill 
which is based on spinoffs and everything around spinoffs. You 
don’t know how many there are. How can you introduce this 
Bill on information that you don’t know or don’t have? Or you 
just made this up or what? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m not sure with knowing how many 
of anything has to do with anything. It’s about whether you’ve 
got . . . it’s about whether you’ve got the right to unionize or 
not. And it’s about whether a company can be union and 
non-union at the same time? And if there are no spinoffs as the 
member is suggesting, then I guess no one has a problem. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well you keep bringing up the right to 
unionize, and it’s incredible . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Members on both sides of 
the Assembly, I know there are very strong feelings on this Bill. 
But we are getting into a dynamic in which when the member 
of the official opposition speaks, there is interruption from the 
government side. And when the Minister of Labour is speaking, 
there is interruption from the opposition side. And I just want to 
urge all hon. members to give the speaker the opportunity to be 
heard on the floor and also by those listening in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You keep making the 
comment about the right to unionize or the right . . . what about 
the right not to unionize? You’ve kind of missed that in the 
whole equation. Workers should have rights. We believe they 
should have rights. And you’ve got this . . . you’ve brought this 
law in to take away the rights of workers, whether they want to 
belong to a union or not. That’s the issue that we’re discussing. 
 
If workers want to unionize. and they are given a secret ballot 
and vote they wanted to join the union, that’s great — but they 
have the right to make that choice. So I’m not sure where you 
come from when you keep talking about the rights of workers. 
You’ve taken the rights of employers away. You’ve taken the 
rights of workers away with this Bill. 
 
They have no right not only not to have a secret ballot with this 
Bill, but they’re not even allowed to sign a certification card, 

which is under the present rules. They have no rights. You are 
forcing them into a union whether they like it or not. And on 
what pretence? That there are all these spinoff companies and 
these bad, bad companies are having these spinoffs and hurting 
their workers. It’s all nonsense. You don’t even know how 
many spinoffs there are, let alone make some statement that just 
because they’re non-unionized that they’re bad in some way. 
 
Madam Minister, was your Bill reviewed by the Economic 
Development department for comment about the economic 
damage it is going to do, and if so, can you table any comments 
made by the Economic Development department about the 
effects this Bill is going to have on the construction industry in 
Saskatchewan or the economy as a whole? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to go through — 
or, I mean, Mr. Chair — these things in an orderly way. 
 
There is the same right to unionize that there is to de-unionize. 
The right to certify requires exactly the same number of votes 
as the de-certification. Exactly the same number. That’s the law 
and if the member can’t read it for himself, I guess I could 
come over and read it to him. But the fact of the matter is, the 
same rule exists . . . I’m sure that would be a rather sociable 
encounter. 
 
Now the next thing I would say, Mr. Chair, is that this affects 
only workers that are in a company that has been unionized. 
And I take the member back to the example, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
if you signed a contract with a person and then they 
subsequently moved all of their finances and whatnot over to a 
separate company to avoid obligations that they had with you 
under the first contract, I don’t think the member would agree 
with it. And I’m not sure why he agrees with it in this situation. 
 
On the question of forced unionization, I’ll take the example of 
IPSCO. That’s a unionized company. If you go to work at 
IPSCO, it’s a unionized company. If you work at IPSCO, you 
become a union member. IPSCO accepts that, the steelworkers 
accept that, most people accept that. That’s been the law in 
Canada for . . . probably since 1944 or earlier in terms of the 
Canadian Labour Code. 
 
And if the issue of how many spinoffs there are or aren’t is such 
an issue, then I invite the member opposite to tell me how many 
there are, because that number seems to be very important to 
him. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, it isn’t about how many there are, 
it’s about whether you can be union and non-union at the same 
time, and it’s whether workers have a right to choose to join a 
union or to choose to decertify their union. And certainly the 
member is very much in support of the rights to decertify, but 
he seems to be less in support of the rights to certify. 
 
And I really don’t know what else I can say to you on this 
because it’s fundamental to industrial relations in this country. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well the point 
about certification and decertification, I don’t know where 
you’re getting your information. You should know this 
information. 
 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

When a group wants to decertify a union, even if there’s a 100 
per cent of them has written a statement wanting to decertify, 
they still have to vote. When you certify a union, they are not 
given the opportunity to vote. It’s just sign the card and take it 
for granted that it was done without coercion. They don’t have 
the right to vote when they certify. 
 
That’s our point. They should have the right for a secret ballot 
to vote whether to join a union or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — And it really brings up the question is why 
these spinoff companies have not been unionized. Well I 
suggest that there’s been an attempt to unionize them. The 
reason they’re not unionized right now, because the workers in 
those spinoff companies don’t want a union. What other reason 
could it be? 
 
The union has total access to the employees. If they want to 
certify they . . . I’m sure they will try. That’s their right. And 
it’s also the right of the worker not to unionize, but the problem 
with this law is that they said no to unionization so you’re going 
to force unionization down their throat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Now, Madam Minister, do you still contend 
that only the three large construction companies in 
Saskatchewan will be affected by provisions of Bill 59? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ve never speculated, Mr. Chair, on a 
number. 
 
And I will remind the member opposite that when he’s talking 
about whomever these companies are — and they know who 
they are much more than I do, Mr. Speaker — the fact of the 
matter is you are talking about companies that were already 
certified. A vote already took place amongst their employees. 
And these were certified companies, just in the same way that 
the health sector is a certified unionized work environment. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, is that some of these spinoffs 
don’t even have workers because they were created simply as a 
legal entity to avoid collective bargaining obligations, and as 
soon as there was any attempt made to unionize that entity, 
people simply moved operations to a new entity. 
 
So in fact there’s an unlimited number of these entities who 
have no useful purpose. I do ask the member to be fair about 
this and explain to me why any legitimate company needs 32 
spinoffs to do construction? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Madam Minister, if those workers at 
those so-called spinoff companies want to unionize, what’s to 
stop them? I’m just saying the reason they’re not unionized is 
because they don’t want to be unionized. That’s the basic 
principle in the work force — if they want to unionize, they 
have the right. I don’t agree with the rules that exist but today 
they have the right to do it if they want. But they’re not being 
unionized. That’s the point. 
 
Will you acknowledge that the terms of several, province-wide, 

collective bargaining agreements in the construction industry 
for subcontracts are delivered by terms of those agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There would be a very limited number 
of situations where what you’re describing would apply. Now, 
if a non-union subcontractor was part of a work project where 
there was such a provision, the only requirement would be that 
for that project itself they would be required to pay the same 
level of wages and benefits. But there would be no requirement 
for their company to become unionized, nor for their workers to 
become unionized. And after that project ended, they would go 
back to doing what they do however they do it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As these three 
companies employ the vast majority of subcontractors who will 
now be subject to terms of the collective bargaining 
agreements, how can you say these small independent mom and 
pop companies will not be affected? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well what the member is implying, Mr. 
Speaker, by his comments, is that these companies have been 
indulging in spinning off, and that in fact they do believe that 
they have collective bargaining obligations and that they do 
believe it will affect their contracts. 
 
That being said, I’m not sure what the member would like me to 
do about the fact that people will have to meet their obligations. 
And there are only three trades areas where there’s any 
requirements on subs — that’s electrical, sheet metal, and iron 
workers. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, this 
Bill states that the minister shall designate the representative 
employer’s organization. How does the minister go about 
making this decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Currently, the REOs are designated in 
legislation but there can be application for designation of new 
REOs. But there has to be substantive reasons to fragment the 
bargaining in the industry. 
 
And sometimes if a new trade comes on board, a trade that 
hasn’t really been prominent before due to perhaps changes in 
technology, changes in what’s considered a trade — then there 
would certainly be consideration of a new REO. But certainly 
the goal is to minimize the number of REOs that multiply in the 
trades area. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
would like to come back and ask questions later, but at this 
point give other members an opportunity to speak. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Chair, I have 
a few remarks to make and a few questions for the Minister of 
Labour on this very important Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s important to clarify this issue because after 
all the incorrect information that we’ve heard from the 
opposition benches, it’s time to state again for the record, the 
intent of and the necessity for this very important piece of 
legislation. 
 
First I want to go through a little bit of history, because we’ve 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

heard such a jumbled variance of stories that I’d like to see if 
I’ve got it straight. And I’ll ask the minister to confirm that. 
 
Saskatchewan introduced construction-specific legislation in 
1979 when 75 per cent of the construction work was performed 
by unionized contractors. At the time it was thought that 
legislation was needed to counterbalance the influence that a 
highly unionized industry had. 
 
(1700) 
 
In 1983 the Devine government repealed the entire construction 
industry Act with the effect that collective bargaining 
effectively disappeared, Mr. Deputy Chair. Each time the union 
attempted to bargain, the company would spin off into a 
non-union firm to avoid their obligations. If the union 
successfully organized the spinoff, they would spin off again, 
creating a moving target. 
 
And it’s interesting that the member across the way keeps on 
saying, well if they want to be union why don’t they unionize? 
Well they had, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, organized many 
spinoffs, only to be left with another spin and a moving target. 
 
The other effect was that spinoffs would bid on the same job as 
the union parent company. Not paying union wages allowed a 
lower bid, and we can all guess which firm got the job and at 
whose expense, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Workers were forced to leave the province to find decent work. 
Union membership dropped to an all-time low, and where that 
might please the members across the way, that meant that many 
of those workers were no longer in this province and there was 
no construction workers to be had. 
 
And perhaps most importantly, the valuable work done 
co-operatively by unions, employers, and government 
in-training apprenticeship and journey person programs nearly 
came to a halt. 
 
The exodus of skilled tradespeople had a huge negative effect 
on the economy of the province, as did the reduced purchasing 
power of those who remained. Now that our economy is 
booming, and some would even describe it as sizzling, the lack 
of skilled tradespeople from the ’80s is still very apparent. And 
it’s very alarming. 
 
In 1992 the government acted on recommendations of the 
Construction Industry Advisory Committee, which was made 
up of members from the Saskatchewan building trades unions 
and unionized contractors, and passed legislation governing the 
unionized construction industry. 
 
Spinoffs that occurred prior to 1992 were left in place, so that 
although further spinoffs were prevented, companies were still 
free to place two bids on the same project — union and 
non-union — with virtually the same effect as before. Today 
less than 25 per cent of construction work is unionized. 
 
The government, however, wanted to ensure that employees 
were treated fairly on Crown work sites and negotiated a 
contractual agreement between seven Crown corporations, the 
employers’ representative organization, and the Building Trades 

Council. 
 
Although it was a negotiated agreement between the parties, the 
CCTA met with a great deal of criticism. It wasn’t good enough 
for some of the industry to get their fair share of work; they 
wanted it all. 
 
In addition, the non-unionized employer systematically set 
about to undermine and infiltrate the CLR. Two unionized 
contractors, who also operated non-union spinoffs, challenged 
the provision which prevented their membership in the REO on 
account of their non-union interests. 
 
Now tell me what could be more unfair than non-union 
employers having sway in the bargaining process of unionized 
construction firms. In addition, there were attempts to raid the 
REO and have the SCLRC designated as the REO. 
 
Mr. Chairman, clearly something had to be done, and so it is 
being done in a fair and responsible way. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, is my history in this correct, and is the 
reason for this Bill to level the playing field and restore stability 
and fairness to the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for her question 
and for the, I guess, the historical reminder. I would say that 
you’re right — in about 1984 is when these changes really 
started to take place. 
 
And I do say to the member that asked the question, as well as 
the members opposite, that this comes out of the history in the 
corporate world of trying to avoid liability. And what occurred, 
Mr. Chair, is that this principle of avoiding liability by creating 
shell companies or spinoffs was transferred into the labour 
world to avoid collective bargaining obligations. 
 
And certainly you did have the situation where a spinoff could 
bid against themselves. Of course that would be unfair 
competition because you would have knowledge of what 
monies you had to pay under a union contract and therefore 
would be in a very good position to underbid yourself because 
you would have full knowledge of what the costs would be 
under a unionized bidding environment. 
 
In fact some of the employers who have complained to me 
about this Bill have complained about that very fact. I had 
actually forgotten about that. They complained about the fact 
that the people with the spinoffs are able to underbid because 
they know what the figures are that the unionized contractors 
have to put into their bid packages. 
 
And certainly this issue of the lack of the journeymen has been 
brought to my attention. In fact one of the things that was 
interesting to me in discussion with the trades that they raised is 
that Aboriginal people haven’t done very well in this 
non-unionized environment, because one of the things the union 
shop does is that make sure — and I guess I would have to hope 
that the members opposite would be legitimately interested in 
this answer — they make sure that a tradesperson moves around 
to enough different jobs to get all the parts of their ticket that 
are required for the experiential parts of their journeymen’s 
ticket. 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

When a tradesperson gets locked in with one employer, they 
aren’t moved in an organized way through the various jobs in 
the various trades in order to get their ticket. Because in this 
kind of profession, on-the-job training and apprenticeship has 
always been very much part of the tradition throughout history 
of how the trades made sure that skilled people got trained and 
developed in the industry. So it was a matter of great pride 
amongst the trade unions that they made sure that their 
apprentices moved in a smooth way through the process of 
getting all the stuff they needed for their ticket. So I thank the 
member for reminding me of those things. 
 
And certainly the employers who have not had the ability to 
spinoff and the employers that had a close enough relationship 
with their unionized workers to feel it was unethical to spinoff 
have certainly been at a competitive disadvantage. 
 
Ms. Jones: —Thank you, Madam Minister. Now the members 
opposite have been doing quite a number this session, Mr. 
Chairman. They’ve taken a piece of legislation that affects only 
the construction industry, and they’ve used it as launching pad 
for the most heinous attack on working men and women that 
this province has ever seen. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to remind the Assembly of some of the 
remarks made recorded for all time in Hansard. The member 
from Redberry Lake on June 12, 2000, and I quote: 
 

. . . Why don’t you pick up the phone and talk to them 
instead of your union leader friends who are job killers. 
 

Job killers, Mr. Chairman, that’s a pretty awful thing to say. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition on May 30, 2000, and I’m 
quoting him: 
 

. . . Why are you trying to turn Saskatchewan into Cuba 
North, a labour dictatorship? 
 

What a hateful thing to say, a dictatorship indeed. 
 
And it might help, although I doubt it, if the member from 
Redberry Lake informs himself, in fact I think I’ll do that for 
him. That the pension funds of unionized workers amount to 
hundreds of billions of dollars, and the vast majority is invested 
in Saskatchewan in Canadian companies that employ 
Saskatchewan and Canadian workers. 
 
There are also 26 labour-sponsored venture capital corporations 
in Canada. Far from being job killers, Mr. Chairman, they are 
job creators. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the members opposite have adopted into their 
vocabulary the liberal use of “f” words. First we have the “f” 
word forced. Days and days and days on end we hear about 
forced, forced amalgamation which was never the intent of this 
government. I see I must have thrown a stone in the dark and I 
hit a whole pack of dogs which is never the intent of this 
government or the discussion of this government or of the task 
force. 
 
And then the opposition carries on in the same vein with the 
catch phrase of forced unionization which is not the effect of 

this Bill or the intent. 
 
Another little “f” word they like to use describes the opposition 
tactics. I like to use is fearmongering, fearmongering, Mr. 
Chairman. They pepper their speeches well with threats of 
businesses moving. We’ve all listened to them chirping over 
there, really hitting a chord with these people — chirp, chirp. 
 
They pepper their speeches well with threats of businesses 
moving with innuendo and the possible effect, and you should 
listen up to this because the way you’ve been treating our First 
Nations people, you’d want to know about this. The innuendo 
— innuendo — on the possible effects . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Ms. Jones: — I’d like to remind the Assembly that unions have 
been at the forefront in supporting self-government for First 
Nations people, for negotiating provisions in their collective 
agreements to include and provide job opportunities for 
Aboriginal workers in the North and in other workplaces, and 
have diligently worked against racism and for equal opportunity 
and harassment-free workplaces. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition on May 24, this year, has the 
nerve to say, and I quote: 
 

. . . now they’re also attacking business in Saskatchewan 

. . . they’re attacking the workers in these businesses . . . 
they are attacking First Nations people in this province . . . 
 

I say shame on you for your fearmongering. 
 

It’s worth mentioning here, Mr. Chairman, that the party which 
claims to be the defender of First Nations people is the same 
party whose leader just two weeks ago in Saskatoon called 
them, “an economic liability.” Shame. 
 
And here’s a new one, Mr. Chairman. The member from 
Humboldt now wants construction workers — and I assume 
young people too, trying to pay for their education — to work 
for less than minimum wage. Is there no end to their attack on 
working people? 
 
Now I can understand it if none of them have any firsthand 
knowledge of the labour movement and what it’s like to go to 
work every day. I have no control over your life or your terms 
and conditions of employment. And I can understand if they’ve 
never tried to imagine what it’s like to live in a body covered 
with a skin that isn’t white. But I can’t understand — I can’t 
understand — why they’d be opposed to governments and to 
organizations who try to do something to give these workers 
some control and some dignity. 
 
This is a democracy, Mr. Chairman, and those who own the 
means of production and those who sell their labour coexist in 
this democracy and each one of them have their rights. 
 
But not according to the member from Redberry. According to 
him, only employers have rights. And not only that, to maintain 
those rights, the member says that they should donate $10,000 
and that’ll help them maintain their rights. 
 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

Bill 59 is about a level playing field for all construction firms in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order, order, order. Order, order. 
Members on both sides will come to order. Order. I thank you, 
members. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill 59 is about a 
level playing field for all construction firms in Saskatchewan. It 
does not mean that companies cannot operate non-union. It does 
not mean that companies cannot operate as union companies. 
 
What it says is, you can’t do both at the same time. And that’s 
fair, Mr. Chairman, because you should have learned at an early 
age that you can’t have your cake and eat it too. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this government has done much to turn this 
province around since ’91. The free-spending, freewheeling, 
right wing policies of the previous administration left us with a 
crippling debt and an economy in a terrible state of depression. 
We have worked very hard to restore confidence in the 
economy, and it shows. 
 
We must continue to invest our energy and our resources in this 
great province and encourage employers and workers to work 
not against each other, but with each other, co-operatively, to 
keep this province the best possible place in which to live and 
to work. 
 
Madam Minister, is there anything in this Bill that would 
prevent the parties from co-operating in that fashion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for her question. 
 
And for the benefit of all the members, I’d just like to tell you 
that in my discussions with the fellow I mentioned who’s the 
president of one of the major companies from Alberta, I did 
make a commitment with him that we would bring players from 
the industry together to talk about the real and practical issues 
facing the industry today. And I would hope that we would be 
able to get the kind of factual and open discussion in those 
meetings that will make sure that we’re all working in the best 
interest of the economy. 
 
But I have made that commitment also to the tradespeople in 
regards of making a peaceful transition through whatever 
discussions will take place following the legislation. 
 
But certainly I think there’s a willingness by many members to 
do that, and to bring examples from other areas of how this can 
work. And we’re certainly interested in sitting down and 
discussing that together. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, over 
the last just about three months that we’ve been sitting in this 
legislature through the session, we’ve been subjected to 
countless uninformed speeches, incorrect representation of 
facts, and seemingly endless tirades by the members of the 
opposition as to the evils of working people and unions in this 
province. 
 
These opposition members have little or no understanding of 
the history of unions or the work that they undertake on a daily 

basis — not only to ensure workers in this province achieve a 
liveable wage to support their families, but to do so in a safe, 
hazard-free workplace. That lack of knowledge and 
understanding by the opposition has been obvious, not only in 
their remarks concerning Bill 59, but it’s also been glaringly 
obvious in the anti-worker legislation that’s been tabled by the 
opposition in this session. 
 
Now a lack of knowledge I can understand, and that can be 
corrected through information. But even more frightening is the 
thought that this is a direct attack and a guided attack on the 
workers of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1715) 
 
I’ve been a union member for the last 20 years. I’ve been on 
organizing drives to help facilitate educational programs, taken 
union-sponsored educational and developmental programs, and 
held many offices within the union. And, yes, I have walked the 
picket line in support of unionized workers. Mr. Chair, I make 
no apologies for supporting workers, nor for being supported by 
workers — both union and non-union — because, Mr. Chair, 
that’s who I am and that’s where I’m from. 
 
Working people built this province and they will continue to 
make a huge contribution. Working people — they are the 
backbone of our society and each makes their own valuable 
contribution. 
 
In the anti-worker legislation tabled by the members opposite, 
they talk about wanting a secret ballot for certification votes. 
When we join a union we already vote. We vote by signing a 
card. Signing a card, Mr. Chair, putting your name on a card, 
takes a great deal of conviction. It’s a serious decision that’s not 
taken lightly by anyone. 
 
Throughout the discussions on Bill 59, the members opposite 
talk about life being just fine in the construction trades as it is, 
that we don’t need our legislation to be the same in 
Saskatchewan as it is throughout the rest of Canada. They’ve 
made statements referring to 1983 when the Devine government 
began allowing construction companies to operate both union 
and non-union arms. 
 
Labour harmony during those years was how it was referred to 
by the member opposite. And to give a little more proof of that 
statement, he said that there hadn’t been a strike in the 
construction industry for about 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was active in the labour movement during those 
years, and I’m not sure what he considers labour harmony, but 
it sure wasn’t evident from where I stood. There’s a lot more to 
workers, unions, and labour harmony than whether or not 
there’s a strike in progress. 
 
Occupational health and safety, quality of work, job security, 
pensions, apprenticeship, on-the-job training, and just your 
basic being treated fairly, are naming but a few concerns. 
 
Mr. Chair, over 96 per cent of all contracts negotiated are 
settled amicably in a negotiated process. Less than 4 per cent 
will ever see drastic strike action. 
 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Mr. Chair, workers across Saskatchewan that I’ve spoken to are 
in favour of this legislation. With the passing of Bill 59, they 
look forward to fair and consistent working conditions, 
legislation that is comparable to other Canadian provinces, and 
an end to double breasting. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve heard members opposite state that 
non-union workers within the construction industry earn higher 
wages than unionized workers. What effect will the 
amendments have on them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s a very good question, Mr. Chair, 
because certainly, although it’s not the only factor that causes 
people either to join or to decertify a union, it’s certainly clear 
that wages and benefits are part of the package. 
 
What I will say is those choices are in the hands of the 
employer and the employees, whether that’s in a non-union 
environment where the employer makes their offer of wages 
and the employee decides whether they want to accept it or not, 
or in the unionized environment where they sit down at a table 
and negotiate that. 
 
But certainly if an employer that has been non-union becomes 
union, and wants to pay his employees those higher wages that 
he’s got, certainly nothing would prevent him from offering to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, many of the members on this side 
of the House, for the last number of weeks, listened to the 
members opposite talk about this government’s relationship 
with the working people in the province and their relationship 
with unions, Mr. Speaker, and so on and so forth. I’d like today 
to talk about some of the comments that the members opposite 
have made. 
 
I’m reading from the April 26, 2000, Hansard, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and the member from Redberry Lake says: 
 

Clearly this government and this Labour minister doesn’t 
realize the chilling effects its labour laws has on the new 
investment in this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Indian Head-Milestone on 
June 12, 2000, says: 
 

. . . one of the hardest things to keep business going and 
improving in our province is some of the labour legislation 
that we have in our province (that we have to endure) . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly, against not just The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 but clearly against all 
labour legislation that creates a fair and equal playing field for 
working people in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the comments on May 
24, 2000, made by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the 
Leader of the Opposition: 
 

. . . that’s the last thing we need in Saskatchewan is for this 
minister to chase more businesses and more people out of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And yet that’s what Bill 59 
would do. It would encourage more businesses and their 

workers to leave the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, referring to Bill 59; it will do just the opposite, 
Mr. Speaker — create an environment of good jobs for young 
people in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just make reference to a couple of other 
comments made by the member from Redberry Lake: 
 

I’d like to remind the minister that the alliance (the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth he refers to) 
represents three-quarters of all businesses in 
Saskatchewan. They are all job creators. Why don’t you 
(pick up and phone) pick the phone up and talk to them 
instead of your union-leader friends who are job killers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they have no interest in creating a fair 
environment for working people. They have only one interest 
and that’s to advance the agenda of big business in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one other comment before . . . 
it’s from the member from Swift Current: 
 

Businessmen and women who simply could not abide the 
labour environment in the province of Saskatchewan under 
the NDP government. This Bill and all the attendant issues 
and red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto the 
business community by this government, be it through 
Workers’ Compensation, occupational health and safety, or 
other various pieces of labour legislation (has driven) too 
(many) businesses . . . out . . . of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t just dislike this piece of legislation, 
they dislike any labour laws that are fair to working people in 
this province. 
 
And last but not least, the member from Humboldt: 
 

I have been informed by Kirsch Construction of Middle 
Lake that they have approximately 15 to 18 men on their 
payroll. They have 20 to 30 men waiting to work. These 
people are willing to work for less than minimum wage as 
long as they work. If it were not for labour legislation put 
in by your government, we could have construction firms 
(doing the work at lower wages). 

 
Mr. Speaker, what’s this about? It’s about not wanting working 
people to get ahead. It’s about wanting businesses to make 
greater profit. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read into the official record 
what I found most disgusting about this last two and a half 
months of debate on this issue. It’s a letter, a letter from the 
member from Redberry Lake. And I’m going to read the entire 
letter into the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The non-unionized construction industry in this province is 
under siege (it says). It is time for you to stand up and be 
counted in defence of your business. 
 
As you are no doubt well aware, the Liberal/NDP coalition 
government has brought in dramatic changes to provincial 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

labour legislation that will affect your business. For years 
non-unionized construction firms have been penalized by 
the NDP’s union preference Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. Now they have pushed ahead with 
amendments to The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act that will force a vast segment of the 
non-unionized construction industry to unionize — 
whether they want to or not! 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has taken a firm stand in 
opposition to this. In his May 9, 2000 press release, 
Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson noted the 
incestuous (I note the word incestuous) nature of the 
government’s relations with the union executives. 
 
The NDP got about $300,000 from the unions to fund their 
election campaign last year,” Hermanson said. “Now the 
NDP is paying the unions back, no matter how many 
workers and families they hurt. Forced unionization equals 
more union members equals more union dues equals more 
money for the NDP. It’s as simple as that.” 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is committed to fighting . . . (it’s 
not a very clear word, Mr. Speaker) for fighting these 
changes. But we cannot win this fight alone. We need your 
help to stop the destruction of the non-unionized 
construction industry. We need you to be just as 
determined and just as committed to this political battle as 
the union executives who are pushing the other side of the 
agenda are. 
 
Your generous donation to the Saskatchewan Party will 
have a direct and measurable impact towards bringing 
down this government that has been so hostile to you and 
your interests. I urge you to take a moment now to consider 
what you are willing to do to contribute to this fight. 
 
Thank you in advance for your consideration. 
 
Randy Weekes, Saskatchewan Party Labour Critic. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

Please find enclosed my contribution to getting rid of the 
Liberal/NDP union-preference policies. 
 

And they’re asking for contributions of 1,000, 5,000, or 
$10,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the middle . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Members on both 
sides, now . . . Order. I don’t know exactly how to say this so if 
. . . I don’t know exactly how to say this. We have guests who 
have been in the galleries for, in some instances, four hours on 
very hard benches. Guests . . . guests . . . Order. Guests who 
have taken the time to see democracy and see both sides of this 
debate, as is their right, and I think that all members should 
allow these people the opportunity to hear what is going on as 
well. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have seen and heard 
over the years many, many debates between political parties on 

philosophy, but never once have I ever heard of a fundraising 
technique where you drive a wedge between working people 
and their employers to try to defeat a government while you’re 
debating a Bill before the House. 
 
You have every right to go out and raise money outside the 
House but to use the issues in the House to raise money, to 
fundraise, to drive wedges between working people and their 
families is the most despicable — the most despicable — act 
I’ve ever seen in my political life. 
 
(1730) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my question for the Minister of Labour is: 
Madam Minister, could you please explain to the members 
opposite why this Bill creates a sensation or a feeling of fairness 
among workers and among employers in this province, and how 
it helps young people get jobs in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll try to do this 
quickly because I know the time is passing but I do want to go 
back to a little bit of history. 
 
You know there was a time, there was a time in this country 
when people actually took up arms against each other in these 
kinds of discussions. And I have to say that the most right-wing 
governments in the United States and other places eventually 
decided that fair labour laws were needed in order that people 
could have a democratic and peaceful resolution of the issues 
and the economy so that we could have a successful economy 
and get on with the business of having jobs, making money, and 
going to the beach on the weekend for those that could afford it. 
 
And these were not people who ideologically believed in 
unions. These were people who understood that that 
fundamental right was important to be able to create peace in 
the workplace and that people did have a right to a say in their 
working conditions, their safety, their training, and their 
conditions of employment. 
 
Now what is particularly chilling to me is, the member who is 
saying that this Bill will create discontent and disruption is busy 
sending faxes out creating that and manufacturing that 
discontent. Even to the point of sending it to people who it will 
not affect at all. And if the member wants to know where the 
division is coming from, he can look at no further than himself 
if that disruption occurs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he can sit there and smile about how 
humorous it is that he’s creating this unnecessary conflict. But 
the fact of the matter is, is people of good intent in this province 
who have always co-operated, I think will get together, and we 
may have to bypass the troublemakers who hope that this will 
create disruption. 
 
I will point out, just again from a historical perspective, that our 
labour laws were more or less the same in the ’70s. At that time 
the economy was hotter than it’s ever been and the province 
grew by 50,000 people. During the ’80s — I don’t need to 
remind you who was government — the economy went flat as a 
pancake and 5,000 people left the province. 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Again since the rebuilding has occurred, we’ve gone back to an 
A credit rating. The fact of the matter is we’ve grown by 20,000 
again. And I think that history speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of where labour law fits into growth of the economy. 
 
I want to read a quote, Mr. Chair. This is from a clothing plant 
that just recently opened up. It’s actually an Alberta garment 
manufacturing plant that is adding 50 jobs to Saskatoon. And 
what Adrian Bussoli, the vice-president and partner in this 
company, said is: 
 

“One of the benefits here is that the plant is unionized . . .” 
(He said) “Taxes are competitive, and we looked at that as 
well.” 

 
Now this is an outside person, an outside company from Alberta 
who, despite the doom and gloom and the negative cheerleading 
from the members opposite, has still decided to overcome all 
that and still come to Saskatchewan because the taxes are 
competitive and they are enjoying the benefit of having a 
unionized plant here. 
 
And I have a question, I guess, for the members opposite, is: 
why is it that this employer seems to be comfortable with this 
and you aren’t? It’s a very difficult question. 
 
The other thing that I’m going to mention is that the member, in 
his preamble to his question, he mentioned the member from 
Humboldt. And I have to say I was particularly alarmed that 
that particular member raised that. Because again the small 
history lesson — the original reason for the minimum wage . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The minimum wage didn’t used to 
apply to men — it used to only apply to women. And the reason 
it only applied to women, it was considered the minimum 
amount of money to keep a woman from living off the avails of 
the street. 
 
And to have the very member who claims to be concerned 
about these things speak against a minimum wage being a 
proper standard, I would be happier to hear her speaking for an 
increase in the minimum wage — not for removal of the 
minimum wage. And so I have to be more than a little bit upset 
with someone who doesn’t understand the relationship between 
poverty and the things that people do to survive. 
 
And I just want to end in my responding to the question, Mr. 
Chair, with . . . First of all I want to talk a little bit about . . . 
The member that was speaking previously, talked about our 
interest in economic development. And I want to talk about this 
for a minute because we have put a great deal of taxpayers’ 
money, including unionized taxpayers, into the diversification 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is in regards to manufacturing labour, the 
costs in Canada and in Saskatchewan are 30 per cent less than 
in the United States. We have higher productivity and 
dedication in our workers. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Why is the Opposition House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Chair: — Please state your point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s inappropriate 
in this House to have a beverage container that clearly identifies 
a customer or a company. If that could be removed, please. 
 
The Chair: — It’s gone now? Okay, I’m unaware . . . I’ll 
assume that . . . Order, order. Order. Thank you. 
 
The Opposition House Leader raised a point of order about a 
beverage container, and it is in the rules of the Assembly as 
recently passed that discreet beverage containers are allowed. If 
the hon. member saw some advertising, that’s inappropriate, 
and the matter has been taken care of. 
 
So I thank the Hon. Opposition House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was worried 
that Z99 had become verboten. 
 
But anyway what I would like to continue talking about is, the 
fact is that Saskatchewan’s manufacturing corporate tax rate is 
10 per cent compared to the United States federal rate of 34 and 
Canada’s average rate of 22 per cent. We offer a 15 per cent 
research and development income tax credit. Many of our 
municipal governments offer rebates on municipal taxes. There 
has been literally hundreds of thousands in loans to this 
industry. They get an investment tax credit of 6 per cent for 
manufacturing and processing. We provided legislation to 
protect the small manufacturers from the large equipment 
companies. We passed that before Christmas. 
 
Since 1996, there’s been over $2 million in government dollars 
spent on training grants with over a thousand people trained. 
There has been over 300,000 recently to develop export 
opportunities. 
 
And I would think, Mr. Chair, that that speaks volumes to our 
commitment to diversification. And to suggest that the absence 
of a second vote on certification destroys the merit of all that 
effort on diversification, I find cheap in the extreme. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome the 
opportunity to put some questions to the Minister of Labour. 
And may I say that in my brief political career I started out as 
the seatmate of the hon. member for Humboldt, and I’ve now 
after a few peregrinations around the Assembly, I seem to have 
landed beside the Minister of Labour. 
 
And while I don’t entirely understand everything that’s going 
on my life, may I say that if I have to choose between being the 
seatmate of someone who does not believe in the minimum 
wage and someone who does believe in the minimum wage, I’m 
pleased with my new digs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — As you know, the Liberal Party has not 
always agreed on labour matters with the New Democratic 
Party. However, we also find ourselves very much 
distinguished from hon. members opposite when they tell us 
that they are opposed to any unions and they are opposed to a 
minimum wage. 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

So while I must confess that I don’t always find myself in 100 
per cent agreement on all labour issues with the NDP, on the 
other hand when I hear hon. members opposite saying that 
they’re offended at the concept of minimum wage, well like I 
say, it gives me a lot more comfort about sitting beside the Hon. 
Minister of Labour, and I just wanted to tell you that. I knew 
that would make you feel so much better. How you feel about 
sitting beside me is something I won’t ask you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
However, if I may pose a question to the Minister of Labour. As 
you said, there are faxes going around the province suggesting 
that the legislation before us today is radical and a departure 
from the norm in this province and across Canada. 
 
So I would like to ask the Hon. Minister of Labour, as I 
understand it, the prime purpose of the present legislation is to 
end double breasting, which is defined as companies which 
simultaneously run unionized and non-unionized branches. 
 
And my question to the Minister of Labour is in what other 
provinces of Canada is double breasting allowed? Is this a 
radical departure from Canadian practice that we say that you 
will not be allowed to have union and non-union branches of 
the same company. Do other provinces in Canada allow this 
practice or do they not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m very pleased to answer this 
question, and I would say I’ve had considerable legal counsel 
on it, and the fact of the matter is that, in law, there is no place 
else in Canada that allows this. There is one jurisdiction that’s 
silent on it and that’s New Brunswick. But there’s nowhere else 
in law that double breasting is legal, including Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Now the next question I have, Minister 
of Labour, is that these faxes that are floating around the 
province at present also suggest that this legislation not merely 
ends double breasting for the large general contractors who 
have union and non-union branches operating simultaneously, 
but that this will also force unionization on all the other 
construction companies in the province which are not double 
breasted, which do not have a union . . . a union branch. 
 
So I want to ask the Minister of Labour, what does this 
legislation . . . how does it affect companies which are not 
double breasted, how does it affect unionization of those 
companies beyond the normal rights of certification which have 
existed in this province for at least 60 years? 
 
So does the passing of this legislation have a direct impact on 
those companies which are not double breasted? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. Mr. 
Chair, the only companies that would be affected by this 
legislation, and that’s only if someone takes forward a case on 
this, is companies that have existing certification orders. If a 
company is an independent company, it affects them not at all 
unless they were to be part of a certification drive, and their 
employees decided to be unionized, which is the normal process 
for every business in the province. 
 
So there would not be anything unusual happening in regards to 

those businesses. 
 
Just to give a little further comment because I have a bit of a 
quote here from the Ontario labour board. It just speaks to the 
case I mentioned earlier from 1995. It says: 
 

Ontario labour law prohibits unionized companies from 
setting up new non-union companies in order to get out of 
their collective bargaining obligations. 
 

And I just say that as another affirmation of the laws being the 
same. And during their recent review of their legislation, they 
did not change this provision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Now, Mr. Chairman, if this legislation 
does not affect companies which are not double breasted, which 
truly are stand alone and independent as opposed to sidebar 
operations of a company which is already under certification 
order, then can I ask how will this legislation affect — or does 
it affect non-unionized companies to bid on subcontracts? 
 
(1745) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, it would not affect their ability to 
bid on subcontracts. If there is a clause in one of the three union 
agreements I mentioned, they may in fact have to pay at the 
same level of benefits that are at the standard for that job. And 
one of the reasons why that’s done, Mr. Chair, is to create 
harmony in the workplace, because it’s very difficult to have 
people working side by side doing the same work, that aren’t 
paid at the same level. 
 
As you will understand, that was one of the issues when the 
many different workplaces were brought together in the health 
sector, to bring all of the employees at the various levels up to a 
common standard within their bargaining units. 
 
So these companies would not become unionized for a 
particular contract. There might be a situation, but that would 
then be reflected in the money they received for doing that 
work. And they would not become union nor would their 
employees become union, and their status would remain the 
same after the project and they could bid on that project as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Minister 
of Labour. Simultaneous with the announcement of this 
amendment, which is before the House this afternoon, was an 
announcement that the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement was being terminated and would not be renewed 
after December 1, 2000. And I would like to ask the Minister of 
Labour if that commitment is renewed this afternoon and what 
was the necessity of the six-month time lag between this 
amendment and the end of the CCTA? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because this legislation, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, doesn’t directly predict the outcome of the legislation, it 
was thought that a transition period was needed for the 
legislation to take effect because there will be a question of 
whether certifications are brought forward and how that affects 
the competitiveness. Because the primary purpose of this Bill is 
to deal with competitiveness and fairness issues, there has to be 
time for that to take effect before the more artificial mechanism 
of the CCTA that was put in place is terminated. 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

So certainly it would be our hope that six months is adequate. 
We’re not sure that it is. A longer period might have been 
better. But we’re hoping that this would be adequate to the 
transition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, in my other role, I am 
aware from my own department, that there are many projections 
which say that this country and this province are likely to face 
labour shortage, especially in areas of skilled labour, within this 
decade. 
 
And so of course what we all want for this province is that 
workers, whether they have asked for the protection of a union 
or not, that they are working, they are earning money in a 
prosperous environment and a strong and healthy work 
environment, which we are told there is every reason to expect 
we will have in this province in this next 10 years. 
 
And of course some of our friends opposite claim that this will 
throw the construction industry into chaos and turmoil and, I 
believe, shut down the province; I think the word World War III 
was even used. 
 
And so I wanted to ask you in regard these hysterical comments 
from people who can’t reconcile themselves to minimum wage 
laws, I wanted to ask the Minister of Labour, what in your view 
will this legislation do or what impact will it have on the 
primary function, which is simply having this province 
working, having business doing business and workers working, 
and skilled tradespeople remaining and earning good livings in 
this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well first of all, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d 
like to commend the members of the construction industry as 
there are many un-unionized firms who have — or 
non-unionized firms — who have been taking a very active role 
in apprenticeship in the province and have a good program in 
place for bringing Aboriginal workers into apprenticeship. 
 
And on the other hand, so have there many unionized, as I 
mentioned earlier in my example, have been meeting and 
setting up a project with 15 trades for Aboriginal workers and 
apprenticeship as well. 
 
But it would be my hope that all construction companies are 
committed to the development and maintenance of a skilled 
workforce because everybody benefits. Those workers are 
going to be working in a number of environments. 
 
Now most of the trade unions set aside a portion of the 
member’s union dues to pay for apprenticeship programs, and 
unionized employers also contribute to apprenticeship 
programs. 
 
The construction labour relations association, which is the 
representative employer organization, sets aside part of the fees 
it collects from its members to fund training programs for 
construction workers. So we have examples in the non-union 
sector of people doing training for apprentices, and we have 
examples in the unionized sector. 
 
And we of course last . . . was it last year? Oh, it must have 
been the year before because I was minister of Post-Secondary 

then — we did set up an apprenticeship commission which has 
representatives of labour, of business, of all the players in the 
industry. And certainly their common goal is apprenticeship and 
we don’t see no reason why that spirit of co-operation wouldn’t 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I thank the Minister 
of Labour for that question. And as she knows, one of my 
particular responsibilities is to make sure that we as a province 
do a better job than we have in the past at ending the 
marginalization of our Aboriginal people and making sure that 
they will be full participants in our workforce and in our 
economy. 
 
Now some of the hysterical facts as going around this province 
suggest that this legislation will compromise the ability of 
Aboriginals to access workforce placements in this province. 
And I would like to ask the minister if there is anything in this 
legislation which should deter Aboriginal people from finding 
their proper place in our work environment and in our economy. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because of the importance of this 
question, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m going to read a fairly detailed 
answer in because I think it is one of the most important 
questions that we have to deal with in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And there’s really two scenarios. If a general . . . and I would 
hope the members are interested in the answer because it does 
affect Aboriginal people greatly. A general contractor hires 
northern or First Nations subcontractors. If the general 
contractor is non-union, it can hire any individual or 
subcontractor and be subject only to the terms of the lease or 
management agreement or the human resource development 
agreement. And we do stipulate in many of those agreements 
that there must be attention to Aboriginal employment in 
business development. 
 
If the general is a union contractor, individual workers would 
then be required, as you would in a health district or anywhere 
else, to become a union member within 30 days of starting the 
job and the subcontractor would abide by the terms of that 
agreement, applicable to that trade, for the duration of that 
project. 
 
The construction collective agreements contain a provision that 
require all subcontractors directly or indirectly hired by a 
contractor to perform work within that jurisdiction and scope of 
the agreement. Now no individual or subcontractor is prevented 
from working on a project as long as they meet the terms of the 
project. 
 
There’s nothing in the surface lease agreements or human 
resource development agreements through which northern 
preference is subordinated to union contracts and hiring 
provisions within those contracts. 
 
Now if a construction company enters into a joint venture with 
a northern or First Nations construction company, as some 
companies do to assist in accessing the work, the 
non-Aboriginal company is typically the major partner in the 
joint venture and manages the project. The capital input of the 
Aboriginal company is limited, but it shares the profits. The 
objective of these joint ventures is job creation and training for 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

northern or Aboriginal people. 
 
A separate company may be contracted to hire employees for 
the project. The obligations are contained in the project 
agreement such as surface lease agreements or forest 
management agreements. 
 
The workers are employees of the joint venture and the status of 
such companies is a little bit unclear at the moment because, as 
I mentioned earlier, they can be exempted from ITA provisions 
because of their affirmative action efforts. 
 
But I would just repeat again that none of this is embedded in 
legislation in Canada. It tends to be effected through surface 
lease agreements, contracting and tendering, and other types of 
management agreements that exist for the purposes of 
development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — One thing that puzzles me, Mr. 
Chairman, and I don’t know if the Minister of Labour can 
speculate here or help me out, but my understanding is that 
Mike Harris of Ontario has this same legislation that we are 
bringing in this afternoon. 
 
Now my understanding is that Premier Harris did a review of 
the legislation and decided it should remain in place. Now from 
my reading, Premier Harris has not been known to lead a 
fanatic, left-wing, socialist, pinko, Bolshevik government. His 
reputation has been somewhat on the other end of the spectrum. 
 
Now I realize that the new member for Wood River has 
compared this government unfavourably to the now deceased, 
unlamented, former dictator of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu. 
Now I can see his understanding that he considers that we are 
running a brutal Trotskyite dictatorship. I understand that that’s 
where he’s coming from. But I don’t think he would say Mike 
Harris is another Nicolae Ceausescu clone. 
 
So my question to you is, if this legislation is acceptable in 
Mike Harris’s Ontario, why is it so far-out and radical and 
Bolshevik in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
happy actually to be able to refer to the press release of the 
Ontario government on this matter. This is a press release 
directly from the communications department of the Ontario 
government. It says: 
 

Legislation which would improve competitiveness in the 
Industrial, Commercial and Institutional construction (ICI) 
sector and lead to stronger economic growth and job 
creation in Ontario was introduced today by Labour 
Minister Chris Stockwell.  

 
I know you like that name. 
 

The reforms contained in the Labour Relations 
Amendment Act . . . fulfil a Throne Speech commitment to 
improve and modernize labour relations . . . 
 

It goes on to say that: 

“Everyone in the construction industry agrees that 
something needs to be done to make the industry more 
competitive, flexible, and responsive to local needs,” . . . 
“The solution developed by industry is reasonable and 
realistic, and is in the interest of both . . . (union and 
non-union) employers. I am very pleased that we have 
been able to come up with a consensus that is reflected in 
today’s legislation.” 
 

Now, the one thing I want to remind you of is the quote I read 
from this, and then I will make a further comment because I 
know what the members are getting at. It says: 
 

Generally, Ontario labour law prohibits unionized 
(employees) . . . from setting up new non-union companies 
in order to get out of their collective bargaining 
obligations. 
 

But what they agreed to at the table, when they had a process 
that worked out a little better than ours did, is they agreed that if 
there was a competitive issue in a particular agreement, they 
could go back and decide to suspend some of their agreements 
for the term of that project. 
 
Now that is an issue that can certainly be worked out at 
bargaining tables if the parties agree that there is a true 
necessity. There have been instances of that. But fundamentally, 
they just decided not to change their labour law in order to 
accomplish that and they decided to keep in place the 
prohibition for unionized companies from setting up new 
non-union companies in order to get out of their collective 
bargaining obligations. 
 
And why did they do that, Mr. Deputy Chair? They did it in the 
interests of both unionized workers and unionized employers 
and non-union as well. So this was a consensus that was 
reached. I think it was a very mature decision from the point of 
view of labour relations in Ontario, and I wish the members 
here could find it in their hearts to be as progressive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, the suggestion that the 
Saskatchewan Party should move far to the left so they can 
catch up with Mike Harris is certainly an interesting concept, 
but maybe one they can take to heart. 
 
I want to thank the minister and her officials for their answers 
this afternoon, and I think I’ve had some inquiries and I’ll 
pleased to relay these messages to the people who have 
contacted me. And may I say that I think the minister has very 
clearly and carefully answered all questions I put to her except 
the one about whether she appreciated being my desk mate. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and 
Madam Minister. I’m happy to be able to stand and ask some 
questions regarding the Bill. 
 
And my first question is the president of the Building and 
Construction Trade Council is Mr. John MacLeod, and I would 
like you to tell the Assembly what is your relationship to Mr. 
John MacLeod. 
 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. John MacLeod and I aren’t related. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I didn’t ask if you were related. I asked what 
your relationship to him was. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I discussed it with his wife and we 
agreed that John and I wouldn’t have a relationship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, is Mr. 
MacLeod an adviser or resource person in the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that Mr. 
MacLeod is a frequent visitor to the gallery. But no, he in no 
official way advises me any more than Manley or any one else 
does. He is simply one of the people who is involved in the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
why would the minister introduce Mr. MacLeod as a resource 
person to the media at the department March 14, 2000 media 
event? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would have to say that I introduced no 
one to the media. So whoever it was making introductions, it 
certainly wasn’t me, and I certainly wouldn’t have used that 
term. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Madam Minister, Mr. Chair, I understand 
you did at that meeting. And my final question is what makes 
you think, Madam Minister, that workers inside a union are the 
only people working? What does that say for the rest of the 
people in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Chair, even though I’ve 
taken great pains to explain that my role as minister is to create 
a fair bargaining environment for good industrial relations in 
the province, where people have a choice to be unionized or a 
choice not be unionized much as they do in Mike Harris’s 
Ontario, I do not know why the members are trying to paint me 
as being only in favour of the one. I have said repeatedly I am 
in favour of people having the right to a choice. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to just respond 
to the member from North Battleford when he’s comparing 
Saskatchewan to Ontario and so on and so forth. I have some 
information right in front of me here. 
 
Ontario has an associated or related business of legislation, 
section 1 of the Labour Relations Act, no reverse onus clause. 
Employers have the right to choose accredited employer 
association that have the support of a majority of employers in 
the provincial unit, section 136 of the Labour Relations Act. 
And accreditation can be revoked by the majority of employers 
in provincial unit, section 139. And also Ontario allows a vote 
for certification of a union. 
 
Madam Minister, as I have said before, this Bill states that the 
minister shall designate the representative employers 
organization. In fact you have struck from the current Act, 
section 5(1), 5(2) and 5(3). Can you tell us what the particular 
section is entitled in the current Act and what your amendments 

will do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Could the member repeat his last 
question. I really couldn’t hear it. I maybe should get a headset 
from the . . . 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I will, Madam Minister. You have struck from 
the current Act, section 5(1), 5(2) and 5(3). Can you tell us what 
the particular section is entitled in the current Act and what 
your amendment will do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just start with the first question 
now. I did mention earlier, so I’ll just repeat that the reverse 
onus clause was requested by the employers. This was not 
something that we decided to put in there. So this was 
something they saw as an additional protection for them to the 
arguments they could make before the Labour Relations Board. 
And that was in the Bill in ’92 as well. 
 
The second one, we’re unclear about whether you were asking 
about certification. We’re just unclear what your question was. 
 
And the third one was . . . the reason why 5(1) and 5(2) were 
removed is because they were no longer needed because the 
REOs are designated in the Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, you 
were striking out the section entitled the “Rights of unionized 
employers.” For the record, can you give us the gist of what 
rights this section gives to those unionized employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there’s some confusion. These 
provisions are about employers, not employees . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well that being clear that this is about the 
employers. Because the REOs have been designated in 
legislation, this provision just isn’t needed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Section 5(1)(b), I 
find particularly interesting. It states: “. . . employers have the 
right to bargain collectively through an employers’ organization 
of their own choosing.” 
 
Why do you see fit to take this right of association away from 
employers in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the best answer I can give to the 
member is the main complaint of the non-unionized contractors 
was that they wanted to have the right to be in this organization. 
And so now that the legislation clears up who’s union and 
non-union, given the processes that will subsequently take place 
if people so choose, then the fact of the matter is, is the 
representative employer organization is open now, as they 
wished, to all unionized employers. And that’s what they 
wanted and that’s what they’ve got. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think the point 
is, after the court case it was ruled that these non-unionized 
employers could join this bargaining group. So you’ve taken the 
approach that you unionize everybody in sight instead of just 
allowing them the right to appoint their own representative. 
 
Under this legislation you have the power to appoint any 
organization you see fit regardless of what a majority of the 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

employers or any employers think. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the case of where there’s a request 
for a designation, we certainly have contact with the employers 
and with the representatives who have been representing that 
trade before and get their opinions on whether there should be a 
new REO. And again, there has to be sufficient reason for 
splintering the representation provided in order to set up a new 
representative employer organization. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. The 
CLRA is now codified within the legislation as a permanent 
body. This is the first time organizations have actually been 
written into the legislation. Does this simply mean that the 
employers have absolutely no ability, if this Bill passes, to alter 
their representative organization without you, the minister’s 
approval? And why do you feel taking away this freedom of 
employers to choose their own employee representative is in the 
best interest of Saskatchewan public? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Maybe it would help if I was a little 
more specific with the member about what these REOs are. For 
example, the Boilermaker Contractors Association of 
Saskatchewan bargains with the boilermakers. The Canadian 
Automatic Sprinkler Association bargains with the 
sprinkler-fitters. 
 
The Construction Labour Relations Association of 
Saskatchewan Inc. bargains with bricklayers/tilesetters, 
carpenters, cement mason/plasterers, electrical, elevator 
constructor, glazier, insulator, ironworker, labourer, millwright, 
operating engineer, painter, plumber/pipefitter, roofer-labourer, 
roofer-sheet metal, sheet metal, and teamster. And in that 
particular REO the employers appoint their representatives as 
they do in all others, but I just want to make that clear. 
 
Then there’s the pipeline contractors, which is the 
labourer-pipeline operating engineer-pipeline, 
plumber/pipefitter-pipeline, and teamster-pipeline. And then the 
Saskatchewan powerline transmission contractors, who bargain 
with the electrical-powerline transmission workers. 
 
So those are the five different REOs and who they bargain with. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Can you tell us if any of these provisions in 
this Bill would have an effect on the situation which brought 
about the lawsuit between PCL and the CLRA and a lawsuit 
which PCL won? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think this solves the problem and is in 
compliance with what the court directed and the outcome of 
that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So you’re saying, Madam Minister, that this 
law, this Bill will really circumvent that judgment and will have 
no effect on it then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. This provision implements that 
judgment and confirms and puts it into effect. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — By unionized . . . and all the companies 
associated with it. 
 

I understand that the PCL wanted to join the association even 
though it was a non-unionized company, so if you’ve unionized 
everyone that’s the way of compliance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. What it specifies is that any 
unionized company would be eligible for membership as part of 
the organization that bargains with unionized employees. And 
certainly if it is determined that they are unionized, they would 
certainly have a seat at that table. 
 
And it is not up to the organization to decide if they’re 
unionized or not. That would happen in the course of whether 
their certification is in effect. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, will 
the workers at the companies which the Labour Relations Board 
finds to be double-breasted companies be given the usual choice 
to the certification rules whether or not they become a part of a 
union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Companies that have already been 
certified but spun off to avoid collective bargaining obligations, 
if it is confirmed that they are a related company and they are in 
fact certified, then they would be unionized because they 
always were unionized. They simply were avoiding their 
obligations under that. 
 
If in fact there is no relationship then they would not become 
unionized, and if there’s no certification order they would not 
be unionized. And so this is no different than the process that 
exists for any other unionized workplace in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, can you explain your 
statement that this Bill will not force workers to unionize — 
only the companies they work for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is very straightforward. If you’re a 
health worker and you work for a hospital that has a union, and 
you go to work for that hospital where there’s a union, you 
become a member of the union there unless the employees in 
that workplace take a vote and decide to decertify. And this is 
no different. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, will workers who freely 
choose not to become union members be required to pay union 
dues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again as the workers in the health 
sector, if they become part of a unionized workplace, pay union 
dues, then yes everybody who’s part of sharing the benefits that 
have been achieved by that workplace certainly are contributing 
members within that context. 
 
But this is not anything that the Bill imposes. This has to do 
with whether there’s a certification order and whether the 
employees choose to remain certified and not to decertify. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Will workers who are laid off, even for a short 
time, be forced to join a union if they want to go back to work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the same way that if you want to 
work for the hospital and that hospital is unionized, yes. If you 
work for a private care home and it’s not unionized, the answer 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

is no. And I use these examples because people have experience 
with them and they’re easy to understand. 
 
And so they do have the choice to work for a unionized or 
non-unionized contractor. But if they work for a unionized 
contractor, part of the rules is you become part of the 
organization that you’ve joined. And if a sufficient number of 
people join who wish to be certified, they certainly have that 
right as well. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. In a 
given year, what percentage of construction workers would you 
say are laid off for short periods of time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s impossible, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
to answer because some projects last two years, some last two 
weeks, some last three months. The important thing is that 
people are part of a process that moves them back into another 
job, and so that there can be as much continuity of employment 
as possible. 
 
And I think aside from that, there’s just no way of knowing 
because every project is specific to the needs of that project. 
 
(1815) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. How 
many workers do you estimate will be added to the union rolls 
in the first year of this legislation, the first two years, and over 
five years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We would have no way of knowing 
that, Mr. Deputy Chair. That’s up to whether the company is 
certified and how many employees that company has. That 
company may have some employees, no employees — it 
depends what that company has. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. So 
basically if an employee wants his job back, he’s forced to join 
the union. Would you call this a voluntary choice, other than the 
choice to make a living? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It has been a long-standing tradition 
everywhere in Canada that if you become a member of a 
unionized workforce, you then become a union member. 
 
However, if you and your other colleagues who have joined a 
unionized workplace — understanding that it’s unionized — 
choose to decertify, you also have that right because this is a 
choice that people have. And people can also choose to go into 
business for themselves. They can choose to go work for a 
non-union employer. And this was a choice that many 
unionized employees had to make when they lost their right to 
be unionized. They had to decide whether they were prepared to 
work non-union in order to work. 
 
So this is a choice that employees have traditionally had to 
make ever since the beginning of labour law in Canada. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So if a person 
decides they will not join the union under your forced 
unionization provisions, how can you deny that you as minister, 
the author of this Bill, is denying that person the right to earn a 

living in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will reaffirm again and again and 
again for the member that this Bill is about choice, it’s about 
democracy in the workplace, it’s about democracy in the 
economy. And it is no different than a hospital worker, a 
schoolteacher, a firefighter — whatever you choose to mention. 
All of these groups have a requirement that when you become 
part of their profession in a certain workplace that you follow 
the pre-existing conditions in that workplace. And this is no 
different. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Regarding new 
section 18(2), what is the purpose of this section? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This basically says that if your 
employer was to become unionized while you are working for 
them, but you had joined them while you weren’t unionized, 
you wouldn’t be penalized and lose your job as a result. So this 
is actually in support of that employee that perhaps you’re 
talking about who finds it unbearable to think that they might be 
unionized. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, in fact it basically takes away 
the employer’s right to run his or her firm as they see necessary. 
It precludes any layoffs caused by increased costs brought on 
by this Bill. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, the only employer that would be 
affected is one who had a certification order. So this should be 
no surprise to that employer. And in fact, they have not incurred 
any of those costs during all of the time that they have avoided 
these obligations. 
 
And certainly they can still lay people off by whatever method 
they have done before, which is totally arbitrarily. But the fact 
of the matter is this will not change that till they come to the 
end of that particular contract. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So, Madam Minister, do you foresee greater 
costs for companies under this provision then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The only way that one could see greater 
costs is if their suppliers who supply the equipment that they 
use raise their costs, much as farmers complain about with 
fertilizer and whatnot. 
 
It might happen if they negotiate an agreement that improves 
some benefits for their employees. But that’s certainly 
legitimate. It might happen if they had bad weather during a 
project and it ended up adding to their costs. 
 
I mean there’s many ways that people’s costs can be added to, 
but none of them are predictable. But if you’re in a unionized 
environment, they are certainly negotiable. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We have 
obtained figures from the construction industry. I’d just like to 
read some of them into the record, Madam Minister. It shows 
that many of the open shop rates pay higher wages than the 
union rates. 
 
I’d like to start with the trade carpenters probationary 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

apprentice receiving 8.25 an hour; open shop, average of 13.21. 
The journeymen — union rate, 18.59; open shop, 18.71. Metal 
sheet probationary apprentice — union 9.50; and the open shop, 
up to 13.29 is the average. 
 
And electricians probationary apprentice — 8.85, union hour 
rates; open shop, $12 average. Labour, unskilled — 8.98, union 
hour rates; open shop, 10.30 an hour. Operator, probationary 
apprentice — 12.06, union rates; open shop rates, $25 an hour. 
Journeymen — union hour rates, 24.12; open shop rates, $34 an 
hour. 
 
Then it goes on to include pensions, benefits, so on and so forth. 
Under the carpenter — union, they pay $1.40 for the pension; 
open shop, 1 to 3 per cent with an additional 3 per cent paid by 
the employer. 
 
Benefit package — union, 70 cents, and in most cases paid by 
the employer . . . I’m sorry, in the open shop, most cases are 
paid by the employer to a maximum of 18 cents per hour. 
 
Apprenticeship training — union, 15 cents; open shop, paid by 
the employer. And so on and so forth. 
 
Madam Minister, not only the wages are more in the open shop, 
or at least equal to, and by suggesting this is not the case you’ve 
been calling the employers liars, which I certainly do not 
believe they . . . the case to be. 
 
In fact, the increased costs stem from the onerous employee 
terms brought on by union rules; costs stemming from the time 
lost due to onerous, and in fact the silly rules that are placed in 
some union agreements. Do you believe these types of things 
will add great costs to the bottom line of employers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess I’ll just spend a little bit of 
time on the member opposite’s logic. If in fact the non-union 
employers are paying such higher rates, then in fact with the 
elimination of the CCTA, the cost of doing projects should go 
up because they’re paying so much more. And so when they 
don’t have to use union firms, perhaps the costs will increase 
for tendering projects because the wages are so darn good. 
 
But the other point I will make is — as hard as the member 
works at putting words in my mouth — the fact of the matter is 
it is always up to employees to choose whether they want to be 
certified, to be decertified. Certainly wages would be part of 
their consideration but it’s really up to the employer and the 
employee to come to that determination, and it is not the role of 
the minister to either sit in judgment on it or to advise them to 
do one or the other. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I think the point has to be made, Madam 
Minister, that it’s . . . under the union rules it’s a lot of 
inflexibility, inefficiencies because of the silly rules that they 
have to abide by. 
 
You believe these employers should not have the right to try to 
keep their companies solvent by cutting costs, including the 
costs of staff. You force these costs on the employers and you 
magically expect them to make up for them within thin air. Isn’t 
that what you’re basically saying, Madam Minister? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we missed the thin 
air part of the question. But I will say that all of the matters that 
the member is raising are really matters between the employer 
and the employee, and matters for the bargaining table. 
 
And if people are not satisfied with those rules, certainly the 
changes to the legislation which gives the employers 
representation at the bargaining table, certainly gives them the 
ability — and I presume the fact that they wanted representation 
at that bargaining table — suggests that they anticipate being at 
a bargaining table otherwise they wouldn’t need it. Suggests 
that they will have an opportunity to have those discussions and 
hopefully everybody is going to go to those tables concerned 
about economic development, concerned about keeping jobs in 
Saskatchewan, and keeping everybody employed. 
 
So I think if all of us work in that common effort to encourage 
people to go to that table — which they have argued they have a 
right to be at — then those issues will be dealt with. But that is 
not up to me to determine. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. So in 
one fell swoop in this Bill you’ve taken away employers’ rights 
of free association through free choice of the representative 
organization, and the choice of workers whether or not to 
support a certification drive. Do you believe this is fair? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Most of these REOs have been around 
forever; the CLR only since 1992. But I have to say that they 
have their own right to their own bylaws, their own 
constitution, their own choice of the members at that table. And 
I’m sure at some point if they chose to they could change the 
name and we would be supportive of that. But the fact of the 
matter is, is this is just a name for an umbrella that they have 
total determination and control over, and I’m really not sure 
what their problem is. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Speaker, many believe this is just a 
punitive action on the part of your government to get back at 
the industry for the pressure they have placed on you by 
strongly opposing your unfair CCTA policy. Can you give us 
some evidence to suggest otherwise? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think I explained to the member early 
on that there was two things that . . . well three things actually 
that prompted arriving at this point. One of them was knowing 
that the CCTA was about to terminate and that there was still 
unresolved issues that had caused the CCTA to exist in the first 
place. 
 
The fact that under the basic principles of labour relations in 
Canada we had a situation of unfairness, both in terms of the 
choice to belong or not to belong to a union but also the 
competitiveness issues of employers who didn’t have the ability 
to spin off because they were past the grandfathering clauses. 
So there was a level playing field issue. 
 
And in my view, in order to solve the related problems of the 
CCTA and the other problems in terms of unfairness and an 
unlevel playing field, it was my determination that it was my 
responsibility — as Bob Mitchell indicated in ’98 — that given 
that the industry couldn’t, as they did in Ontario, get sensible 
and get to the table, that we would in fact have to deal with 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

making a decision on this ourselves. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
closing I’d just like to sum up the points that have been made 
and the points that construction industry — and workers I might 
add — have been making to us that this is an unnecessary 
forced unionization. That not only have you forced unionization 
on the employees, but you also forced association on the 
employers of this province. 
 
Forced unionization, not only you still don’t give them a right 
for a secret ballot, but even the right under today’s regulations, 
to sign a certification card to join a union. They will be forced 
to join a union. And when they’re not part of the union, you will 
still make them pay their union dues. When they’re laid off and 
come back to work in the new season, they’ll be forced to join 
the union or else they’ll have to get employment elsewhere. 
 
And unfortunately you’ve left the door wide open for other 
companies from out of province to come in and take the jobs 
from Saskatchewan workers — unionized or non-unionized — 
because of this policy. And unfortunately more people will be 
leaving this province, going to provinces like Alberta when they 
can . . . Those companies come back to this province, bid on 
jobs, and get contracts because of the less cost of their 
open-shop policies, and take more jobs away from 
Saskatchewan people as well as the loss in tax revenue because 
of this situation. 
 
And unfortunately you haven’t proven to me or anyone on this 
side of the House that this isn’t anything other than a 
fundraising campaign on your party’s policy . . . position to pay 
off the unions and to get their support for the next provincial 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for his questions. I do wish that he may have shown 
more leadership in the consensus that’s going to be needed 
following this process. Because of course one always has a 
choice whether to be a leader of co-operation or a leader of 
division. 
 
And I would just say that he’s on very shaky ground on the 
fundraising proposition, given the letter that was tabled that he 
sent out. 
 
(1830) 
 
And with that in mind, I will just say that under this Bill, of 
which I received many more letters from workers regarding 
their desire to have this legislation than I did from workers who 
were concerned about it — and I guess it was a lot harder for 
the employers to get their employees to write those letters — 
but I would just have to say, Mr. Deputy Chair, that I’ve done 
my best to, within the principles of industrial relations, to 
answer these questions. And I thank the members for their 
questions. 
 
The division bells rang from 6:31 p.m. until 6:41 p.m. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 6:43 p.m. until 6:53 p.m. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to propose an 
amendment. My amendment . . . 
 
The Chair: — I’m sorry. I had a second conversation going on. 
I simply want to thank members . . . our guests in the gallery for 
honouring the parliamentary rule of non-participation that has 
been honoured almost without fault all day. I just wish to ask 
for your continued co-operation in not participating in the 
proceedings here, and that includes non-applause and 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

non-voice. 
 
Again, I do want to thank the gallery for their co-operation and 
continued co-operation. 
 
Now the hon. member for Redberry Lake, would you please 
repeat or whatever . . . 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to propose a — like to thank you, Mr. 
Chair — I’d like to propose an amendment. My amendment 
goes to the heart of clause 3 where the minister has taken all the 
power as far as designating a representative for the construction 
industry. And I believe that this amendment will give back 
some democracy to the employers. And our amendment speaks 
to allowing the employers to have a majority vote whether . . . 
to determine who they would like to bargain on their behalf. 
 
And I’d like to move this amendment, clause 3 of the printed 
Bill. It reads: 
 

Amend Clause 3 of the printed Bill by repealing clause 
2(m) as being enacted by The Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000 and substituting 
the following: 

 
‘“(m) ‘representative employers’ organization’ means 
an employers’ organization that is: 

(i) recommended to the minister by a majority of all 
employers who are parties to province-wide 
agreements for the respective trade division; and 
(ii) designated by the minister”’. 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d like to speak 
against this amendment. 
 
Essentially the right that the member opposite is referring to 
exists within every trade division and so there would really be 
no substantial effect of the amendment he’s proposing. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
The division bells rang from 6:58 p.m. until 7 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 

Nays — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 

Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 
The division bells rang from 7:02 p.m. until 7:02 p.m. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
The division bells rang from 7:05 p.m. until 7:07 p.m. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
The division bells rang from 7:09 p.m. until 7:09 p.m. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also have an 
amendment. And this amendment also speaks to the right of 
employers, by a majority, to pick their own representative 
employers association. And again this will take the power out of 
the minister’s hand. 
 

Amend Clause 6 of the printed Bill as being enacted by 
section 10.1 of The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act, 2000 by striking out 
“designated pursuant to section 9.1, or designated by the 
minister pursuant to section 10,” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes I’m going to speak against the 
amendment and it’s not merely out of being disagreeable, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. But the fact is that we have given effect in this 
provision to what the employers requested in their court case. 
 
They requested to be at the table and they now have that right. 
They have the ability to do their own constitution, their own 
bylaws. They just have to submit it to the department. 
 
They elect their own people. They elect who represents them. 
Everything that they wanted in that particular situation is in this 
Bill. 
 
The division bells rang from 7:14 p.m. to 7:24 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 

Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 
The division bells rang from 7:26 p.m. until 7:26 p.m. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude  
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski  Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:29 p.m. until 7:29 p.m. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:31 p.m. until 7:31 p.m. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:34 p.m. until 7:36 p.m. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:38 p.m. until 7:38 p.m. 
 

Clause 10 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude  
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have an amendment. 
This amendment really speaks to the heart of this Bill. It’s 
concerning how . . . basically concerning forced unionization. 
 
The minister has hidden behind the comments that the 
companies are unionized not the employees. And this 
amendment deals with the proper way of certifying workers if 
they choose to form a union. But right now they’re not even 
allowed to vote to join a union, but also with this Bill 59 
they’ve even taken away their right of signing a certification 
clause. 
 
And I’d like to move this amendment: 
 

Amend Clause 11 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) in subsection (1), by repealing subsection 18(1) as 
being enacted by The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act, 2000 and substituting the 
following: 
 
“‘(1) On the application of an employer or a trade union 
affected, the board may declare a company unionized only 
after a proper certification proceedings are followed and no 
union organization may take place without a vote by the 
employees affected’”; and 

 
(b) in subsection (2), by repealing clause 18(4)(b) as being 
enacted by The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 and substituting the following: 
 
“‘(b) are bound by a designation of a representative 
employers’ organization designated by the minister 
pursuant to subsection 10’”. 
 

I so move. 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

The division bells rang from 7:42 p.m. until 7:42 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 
The division bells rang from 7:44 p.m. until 7:54 p.m. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:56 p.m. until 7:56 p.m. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 

Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:58 p.m. until 7:58 p.m. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 7:59 p.m. until 7:59 p.m. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 



June 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 8:01 p.m. until 8:01 p.m. 
 
Clause 15 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
Clause 16 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To move an amendment to Clause 16. I 
want to move to: 
 

Amend Column 2 of the Schedule to The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992, as being enacted by 
Clause 16 of the printed Bill, by striking out “Glazier”. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to ask the minister why she wants 
glaziers stricken? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This isn’t a trade division. It was 
inappropriately placed in the Bill. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:05 p.m. until 8:05 p.m. 
 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 

Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The division bells rang from 8:07 p.m. until 8:07 p.m. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
Clause 18 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to propose an 
amendment. This amendment speaks to the fact that this 
government hasn’t spoke to the public in the construction 
industry of the consequences of this Bill in any great detail. 
 
They have turned down a debate sponsored by the North 
Saskatoon Business Association and the Premier has refused to 
meet with the Alliance for Economic Growth to discuss this Bill 
saying there isn’t enough time to discuss the matter. And we’re 
now giving the government an opportunity to discuss this with 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Clause 18 of the printed Bill is amended by striking out 
“proclamation” and substituting “July 1, 2001”. 

 
I so move. 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:11 p.m. until 8:11 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 
The division bells rang from 8:13 p.m. until 8:23 p.m. 
 
Clause 18 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Labour on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I could have waited for you to ask me, 

Mr. Chair, but I was going to move the committee report the 
Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Redberry . . . 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d just like to take this opportunity to thank 
the minister and her staff for today’s debate. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that 
Bill No. 59 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Third reading of 
this Bill will be at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:29 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


