





























































Hansard: April 07, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 577 
 April 7, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand today on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are opposed to forced 
amalgamation, I read the petition as such, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Muenster, from Plunkett, Carmel, Guernsey, 
and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today for cellular coverage for Watson and area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower in Watson. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

As you may expect, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed 
this petition are from Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens in 
my constituency concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Lake Lenore, Beatty, Star City, and 
Brooksby. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
present petitions, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals in 
the community of Melfort. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 
the amalgamation of municipalities, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamations of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And it’s signed by people from Caronport, Regina, and 
Mortlach, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from Beatty, Tisdale, 
Melfort, Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of Swift Current and area people concerned with the 
Swift Current hospital. And I’ll read the prayer. It’s as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital by providing approximately 
$7.54 million, thereby allowing the Swift Current District 
Health Board the opportunity to provide improved health 
care services. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too stand to present a petition 
on the opposition to enforced rural amalgamation — municipal 
amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And is in duty bound, your petitioners ever humbly pray. 

 
And these petitions are from Caron, Moose Jaw, and 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

surrounding area. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce the 
fuel tax. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Petitioners are from Davidson, Regina, Saskatoon, various other 
places. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens who are concerned about forced 
amalgamation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the RM (rural municipality) 
of Hillsborough and the RM of Colonsay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
today in regards to the reduction to the fuel tax. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial government to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These signatures are from Findlater, Regina, Bethune and 
Craven. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of the citizens concerned with forced 
municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And it is signed by citizens from the communities of Caronport, 

Moose Jaw and Caron. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring a 
petition regarding forced amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And I have petitioners signed from Moose Jaw, Caron, and 
Caronport. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning on the following 
matters: 
 
To halt any plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: for each of the fees or 
charges that your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee; and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: for each of the fees or 
charges that your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee; what 
is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the 
following question: 
 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

To the Minister of Agriculture: for each of the fees or 
service charges your department levies against the public 
for a provision of a certain service, what is the annual 
amount collected by your department for each charge or 
fee, and what is the cost to your department on an annual 
basis for providing each service? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give noticed that 
I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: for each of the fees or charges 
your department levies against the public for a provision of 
a certain service, what is the annual amount collected by 
your department with each charge or fee, and what is the 
cost to your department on an annual basis for providing 
each service? 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present a 
question, a written question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: for each of the fees or 
charges your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee, and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service? 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Property Management: 
for each of the fees or charges your department levies 
against the public for a provision of a certain service, what 
is the annual amount collected by your department with 
each charge or fee, and what is the cost to your department 
on an annual basis for providing each service? 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: for each of the fees or services your department 
levies against the public for a provision of a certain 
service, what is the annual amount collected by your 
department with each charge or fee; and what is the cost to 
your department on an annual basis for providing each 
service. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: for each of the fees or charges 
your department levies against the public for a provision of 
a certain service, what is the annual amount collected by 
your department with each charge or fee; and what is the 
cost to your department on an annual basis for providing 
each service. 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: for each of the fees or charges your department 
levies against the public for a provision of a certain 
service, what is the annual amount collected by your 
department with each charge or fee; and what is the cost to 
your department on an annual basis for providing each 
service. 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: for each of the fees 
or charges your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee; and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: for each of the fees or charges 
your department levies against the public for a provision of 
a certain service, what is the annual amount collected by 
your department with each charge or fee; and what is the 
cost to your department on an annual basis for providing 
each service. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a written question. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan): for each of the fees or charges your 
department levies against the public for a provision of a 
certain charge, what is the annual amount collected by your 
department with each charge or fee, and what does it cost 
your department on an annual basis for providing each 
service? 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall also 
on day 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: for each of the fees and 
charges your department levies against the public for a 
provision of certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee, and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service? 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: for each of the fees or 
charges your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee, and 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training: for each of the fees or charges your department 
levies against the public for a provision of a certain 
service, what is the annual amount collected by your 
department with each charge or fee, and what is the cost to 
your department on an annual basis for providing each 
service? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Justice minister: with reference to the Assiniboia 
court house, how many Court of Queen’s Bench trials or 
other Queen’s Bench proceedings took place in the 
Assiniboia court house in 1999? Please give the dates of 
each proceeding and/or trial. What is the detailed 
breakdown of cost savings the provincial government will 
experience through the removal of Court of Queen’s Bench 
services from Assiniboia? What will be the increase in cost 
for other court houses in other communities as a result of 
the closure of the Assiniboia court house? How many jobs 
will be lost as a result of this closure, and how many of the 
current employees have been offered other jobs within the 
justice system? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Energy and Mines: for each of the fees 
or charges your department levies against the public for a 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee, and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service? 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: for each of the fees or 
charges your department levies against the public for the 
provision of a certain service, what is the annual amount 
collected by your department with each charge or fee, and 
what is the cost to your department on an annual basis for 
providing each service? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased today to have the opportunity to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen, who is seated in your gallery. 

Dr. Parker-Loewen was appointed as Saskatchewan’s first 
Children’s Advocate in November of 1994, and the Legislative 
Assembly confirmed her appointment in March of 1995. 
Through The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, and as 
an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly, she has the 
authority to promote the interests of and act as a voice for 
children. The Children’s Advocate works to resolve disputes, 
conducts independent investigations, and recommends to 
government or the Legislative Assembly improvements to 
programs and services for children. 
 
With Dr. Parker-Loewen today are . . . I would ask at this point 
if Dr. Parker-Loewen could stand to be recognized, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with Dr. 
Parker-Loewen today are members of her staff, and as I call out 
their names I would also ask them to rise, be recognized: 
Glenda Cooney, the deputy Children’s Advocate; Carol 
Sookocheff, executive secretary; John Brand, advocate; Marcel 
St. Onge, advocate; Roxane Schury, advocate; Rhonda 
Johannson, advocate assistant; Bernie Rodier, office 
administrator; Sharon Chapman, communications and public 
education co-ordinator. 
 
Also seated in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, with Dr. 
Parker-Loewen are her husband Rob Loewen — if he would 
stand to be recognized — her daughter, Sarah, her son, Trent, 
her sister, Linn Gallagher, and nephew, Ryan Gallagher. 
 
In addition Barbara Tomkins, Provincial Ombudsman, and 
several members of her staff are also in the Assembly today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask all members to join me again in welcoming Dr. 
Parker-Loewen, her family and staff and other dignitaries to the 
Assembly here today. Thanks very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, we would like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Deborah Parker-Loewen and her family 
and the staff to the Assembly today. Would the members join 
me in extending that welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great honour 
today to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly 
some members of my family, very special guests: my husband, 
Martin Draude; my daughter-in-law, Patti Draude; my son, my 
oldest son, Tim; my oldest daughter, Angela Weber; and my 
oldest granddaughter, Brianne Weber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had to draw 
straws before the session in order to see who would introduce 
people first because when the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena was so kind enough to introduce her 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

daughter-in-law, Patti Draude, I was also equally proud because 
that is my daughter and Carole’s daughter, Patti Gantefoer 
formerly. 
 
And it’s always a pleasure when your children can come and 
watch you in the House and it’s deeply a pleasure when they 
can come and watch both of their parents. I’d ask members to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the members 
of the House, I’d like to introduce a couple of people from the 
city of Regina who’ve come here today to view the proceedings 
and to see how the budget will impact their lives and other 
people from the province of Saskatchewan — Brad Nameth and 
his father, Mr. Ed Nameth. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Invermay Senior Drama Group Wins Competition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise today to tell the 
members of the Assembly about the Invermay Senior Drama 
Group. This group of dedicated and talented actors recently 
competed in the Region 4 Drama Festival in Kamsack where 
they received the award for the best overall production for their 
play “Blind Dates”. The Invermay Senior Drama Group will 
now advance to the provincial final to be held in Yorkton in 
May. This is a double honour for this group, Mr. Speaker, since 
this is the first time they’ve ever won at the competition, and 
more importantly this is the first time the drama club will be 
competing in the provincial drama finals. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t mention that one of 
the directors of this play is Gail Krawetz, wife of Ken Krawetz, 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Canora-Pelly. 
The 55-minute play presented an ensemble of acts intended to 
portray how the numerous anxieties children go through are 
much like a blind date. The adjudicator was quoted as saying: 
 

A play should have the ability to educate, to entertain, and 
to transport the audience. Invermay did all of those things 
with a very balanced act that worked very well together. 

 
We congratulate the Invermay School Senior Drama Group on 
their double win: the best overall production, and for advancing 
to the provincial finals in Yorkton, and we wish them the best 
of luck. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatchewan Leading in Job Growth for Western Canada 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is Friday, and 
Friday means good news for this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — It is my pleasure to inform you — and the 
members opposite will want to listen to this, and take out their 

pens and take note — for the third month in a row 
Saskatchewan is leading Western Canada in job growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Better job growth than Manitoba; better job 
growth than BC (British Columbia); better job growth than 
Alberta. According to Statistics Canada, Mr. Speaker, there 
were 15,000 more people working in Saskatchewan this month 
than a year ago — 15,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, those 15,000 new jobs are 
full-time jobs. And of those 15,000 new jobs, I’m very, very 
happy to tell you that 5,700 of them — more than a third — are 
being held by young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would 
let you think that there is nothing good going on in 
Saskatchewan — 15,000 more people disagree with you this 
year than disagreed with you last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And when we approve this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, let me tell you that the job growth will continue. Good 
news for Saskatchewan. Good news for all people here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Governor General’s Certificate of Commendation Awards 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Thursday, April 13 of this year, 10 people will be honoured 
with the Governor General’s Certificate of Commendation. This 
award is based on the recommendation of the Canadian 
Advisory Committee. 
 
These people are being recognized for their role in the rescue of 
a 16-year-old, Christin Knutsen of Tisdale from a submerged 
vehicle in the Doghide River in August, 1998. Had it not been 
for the efforts of Barbara and Dwight Marleau, Jim Brady, Gary 
McPeak, Dennis Koenig, Ken Bridges, and Mike Thorpe of 
Tisdale, Judy Blair of Melfort, Michael Berard of Regina, and 
Ron Cowie of Saskatoon. 
 
Christin Knutsen would have drowned in her overturned vehicle 
— these people were out enjoying a game of golf when they 
heard the sounds of the accident nearby. Their quick response 
and courageous efforts saved this young girl’s life. 
 
Would the Assembly please join with me in congratulating 
these local heroes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Successful Vaccination Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for the 
province. 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I would like to start by giving special 
thanks and recognition to the health workers, the three northern 
health districts, the First Nations health authorities, plus the 
federal and provincial departments in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The story is based on action to counter hepatitis A and 
childhood meningitis. 
 
Here is the story. In 1996 there was 450 reported cases of 
hepatitis A in Saskatchewan — more than 150 of them in 
northern Saskatchewan. In 1999, the number for the whole 
province had dropped to 15. This remarkable reduction is a 
result of an immunization program in collaboration with the 
department, the health boards, and the workers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in another disease which strikes mainly 
children; there has been a great reduction as well. One of the 
most common forms of childhood meningitis has dropped from 
26 cases in a three-year period to just three in the past five 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the health boards have 
declared October 24 to the 30th as the first ever Northern 
Saskatchewan Immunization Awareness Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the team spirit and accomplishment 
for the people in the North. This is a success story . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Provincial Curling Tankard 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today and invite 
members to join with me in recognizing the accomplishments of 
many Swift Current area volunteers who recently helped host a 
very successful provincial Tankard in my hometown. 
 
Saskatchewan is proud of its curling heritage and its reputation 
for being home to world-class curlers. And, Mr. Speaker, from 
February 9 through until the 13th, Swift Current was the centre 
for curling attention in the province as the city hosted the 2000 
Provincial Men’s Curling Championship. 
 
The Tankard turned out to be a huge success. One of the main 
reasons for that of course is the hard work and dedication of the 
organizing committee. Volunteers spent over 16 months 
planning and preparing for the men’s curling championship and 
they are to be commended for their achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to represent the people of Swift Current 
who are known for their talent in hosting world-class events. 
Congratulations to local Tankard Chair, Dean James, and to all 
of his host-team volunteers for an outstanding job at the 
Tankard. I’d also take this opportunity to acknowledge the lead 
sponsorship of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current has worked hard to earn a 

reputation for hosting best-ever events. Thanks to Dean, his 
army of volunteers, and the corporate sponsors, the 2000 
Tankard can now be added to that list. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford North Stars Win Northern 
Division Hockey Championship 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 
Humboldt Broncos rode into the Battlefords to play hockey. 
Bad news for Humboldt. The North Battleford North Stars rode 
the Broncos out of town with their tail between their legs. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was the final game of the Northern 
Division championships for the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League; and as I predicted, North Battleford slaughtered 
Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my sincere condolences to the hon. member from 
Humboldt. I’m certain her Broncos did everything in their 
power to win but when you take on North Battleford, what do 
you expect? 
 
The North Battleford North Stars are moving onward and 
upward to the provincial championships against the Weyburn 
Redwings. Bad news for Weyburn. My prediction — the Wings 
will get clipped. And I’m willing to put my money where my 
mouth is, that’s if the hon. member from Weyburn doesn’t mind 
donating to my next campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating coach Jim Fedyk, 
assistant coach Cory McKee, and all the winning squad from 
North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Businessman to Leave Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to tell 
the members of the Assembly about a conversation I had last night 
with a gentleman named Steve Zablocki. Steve lives in Clavet, and 
like many people in rural Saskatchewan he does what he can to 
make enough money to pay the bills, give his children an 
education, and put some money away for retirement. He now feels 
that in Saskatchewan this has become impossible to fulfil his 
dream however. I was saddened to hear Steve tell me that as soon 
as he sells the final portion of his business, he and his wife are 
moving. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, another family and another business are leaving 
the province. Steve says the government’s obsession with control 
is just one of the main reasons why they’re leaving. And the 
others? Well how about high taxes, too many restrictions, forced 
amalgamation, no support of agriculture, utility rate hike . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all members for their 
co-operation in allowing the member to read her statement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes on. 
 
But the real reason why I wanted to tell the hon. members about 
my conversation with Steve, Mr. Speaker, is to relay a story that 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

he told me. A number of years ago he owned an auto body shop in 
Saskatoon and a young lawyer brought in his wife’s car to be fixed 
and painted. The young lawyer could not afford the price that the 
shop was charging because he was just starting out and he didn’t 
have a lot of money. Steve said he knew what this was like and he 
gave him a reduced rate to help him out, and so the lawyer had his 
wife’s car fixed. That young lawyer, Mr. Speaker, is now the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Taxes 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday during interim supply you admitted that 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) could have balanced the budget 
without increasing the PST (provincial sales tax). The obvious 
question that I’m sure people all across the province are asking, if 
the government could have cut taxes without a massive increase 
— $160 million increase in the PST — why didn’t you do it? 
 
Mr. Minister you’ve admitted that you didn’t need to gouge 
taxpayers with this massive PST increase, so I’m asking on 
behalf of all taxpayers this morning, why didn’t you do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
people of this province and I want to tell this House just how 
ridiculous the numbers these people come up with are. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the public record, the record in Hansard will bear me 
out. 
 
Last week in this House the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues were accusing me of sitting on a $700 million slush 
fund, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they were saying. 
 
Yesterday the member from Cannington was up on his feet 
accusing me of having a budget that contained a $396 million 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I ask even the members of the opposition to realize, Mr. 
Speaker, you can’t have a $700 million surplus and a $396 
million deficit at the same time, Mr. Speaker. You can’t have it. 
 
And I say to that member opposite that the record will show 
that I told the members opposite yesterday that yes, you could 
spend $160 million more this year and balance the budget but 
you’d be in deficit in two years and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the obviously 
confused Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister you just don’t get it. You came within a whisker 
last fall of losing the election because the NDP had buried the 
families of this province under a mountain of taxes and the 
message was very clear. People expect the government to cut 
taxes, not to invent new ones. 
 
Mr. Minister, what part of that message didn’t you understand? 
If you didn’t need to pound the people of this province with 
$160 million increase in the PST, why didn’t you do it then? 
 
It’s a simple question, Mr. Minister, you admitted yesterday 
that you didn’t need to increase the PST by 160 million; why 
don’t you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s the same old funny money, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s just the same old Tory math. And I say to the 
members opposite that what this budget does is reform the tax 
system more than it’s ever been reformed before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — When you do that, Mr. Speaker, there will 
be some negatives, there will be some positives. But I’ll tell you 
the positive side outweighs the negatives, Mr. Speaker. Because 
this budget is going to eliminate the flat tax, eliminate the 
high-income surtax, eliminate the debt reduction surtax. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, means a savings of $1,000 a year for 
ordinary families. And I’d like to know why the members 
opposite don’t support that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Why don’t they support the elimination of 
a flat tax, and why don’t they support taking 55,000 
low-income people off of the provincial tax rolls altogether, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, you’re certainly right about that, Mr. 
Minister. There are some negatives and there are some positives 
in this. Let’s review this a little bit. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I would ask the 
co-operation of all hon. members in the House to allow the 
question to be asked and the answer to be given. I ask you to 
please co-operate. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You keep bragging 
about your so-called tax cut. Well let’s do it a little bit of review 
here. Let’s do a little bit of review. 
 
If we can believe, if we can believe, Mr. Speaker, the budget 
documents, this year’s so-called tax cut will be about 43 
million. But you forgot to mention during all the budget hoopla 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

what taxes were actually going up. SaskTel and SaskEnergy up 
40 million; SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) up 11 
million; camping and hunting fees up 9 million; long-term care 
up 8 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s $68 million in new budget increases, new 
taxes on the people of this province. So much for your tax cut. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you finally admit what everyone knows, that 
your so-called NDP tax cut actually results in an NDP $25 
million of new taxes added to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same old Tory 
math — it didn’t add up in the 1980s, it doesn’t add up today. 
 
And I say to the members opposite: be careful what you say 
because you’re playing fast and loose with the numbers, and 
you can’t have a $700 million surplus and a $396 million deficit 
at the same time. 
 
And what this budget does, Mr. Speaker, is to look to the future. 
That’s what it does. And what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, 
is we are going to give Saskatchewan people, starting this year, 
a $260 million tax cut, Mr. Speaker. We are going to go to a 
new, simple, competitive tax structure and the members 
opposite know it. 
 
And the reason the members opposite are going on as they are, 
Mr. Speaker, is they don’t support a tax cut for ordinary people 
— they support a tax cut for the rich, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
so-called tax cut will amount to $43 million this year. But we 
also know, but we also know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Kindly allow the question 
to be heard. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — . . . we also know, Mr. Minister, that your tax 
increases in your budget will total 68 million and counting. That 
means that the NDP is gouging the taxpayers of this province an 
additional $25 million this year alone. And we don’t even know 
about many of the other tax increases because you won’t release 
a list. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to stop the charade. It’s time to stop the 
bleeding. Will you agree to freeze all government fees and 
charges immediately? Will you release a complete list of all 
government fees including the ones you plan to increase this 
year? And will you stop the hidden taxes and establish an 
independent commission to review all government increases 
and fees and any other tax increases that you have planned for 
the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I found the smoking 

gun in answer to the member’s question. And it appears on page 
64 of the budget document that was tabled in this legislature last 
. . . a week ago Wednesday. And on that page, Mr. Speaker, it 
says this: General Revenue Fund, statement of revenue, other 
revenue, other licences and permits — it says the forecasted 
revenue for last fiscal year, $43 million. Forecasted revenue for 
this fiscal year, $41.7 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s not an 
increase, Mr. Speaker, it looks like we’re going to have a 
reduction. 
 
The next line, Mr. Speaker: sales, services and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the answer. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the next line is: sales, 
services and service fees — revenue last year, $95.5 million. 
Revenue estimated for this year, $71.4 million. 
 
So get your numbers right, Mr. Member of the opposition, get 
your numbers right before you raise numbers that are . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Administration of Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Finance. There seems to be a lot of confusion about 
your new PST tax grab, usually consumers are paying the price. 
Bradley Nameth of Regina had the misfortune to buy a used 
truck on March 30, the day after your massive tax grab; he paid 
$7,000. He then went down to his SGI agent to transfer the 
plates and was charged PST on the full sale price of the vehicle 
instead of the sale price minus the $3,000 deductible. That 
means he was overcharged by $180. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t your SGI agents know the rules? Have 
you informed them? Have you consulted with them? What are 
you doing to clear up this confusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if anyone has been 
overcharged any fee then they should . . . the member should 
bring that forward and the fee will be refunded. There’s no 
problem with that, Mr. Speaker. But I want to say to the 
member that what this change in our tax system represents, and 
it certainly represents an expansion of the PST. That has not 
been denied. I mentioned that in the budget speech, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But the reason for that is because we are building a new 
taxation system which will eliminate the flat tax that hits 
low-income people that was brought in by the members 
opposite when they were in government, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s what we’re going to do. And the members stand up day 
after day and say that you can cut income taxes by hundreds of 
billions of dollars and have no re-balancing anywhere else. 
 
And I say to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
the kind of thinking — although in the short term it may be 
politically popular — that leads to deficit and debt. And we’ve 
been there, we’ve done that, and we’re not going back to . . . 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Nameth did follow his advice, 
realized the mistake, so he went down to your Department of 
Finance to apply for a refund. They told him he wasn’t going to 
be charged on the $7,000 sale price — instead the tax would be 
calculated based on a value of $8,400 because that was the 
red-book value of the vehicle. The red-book value — that’s an 
appropriate name I would say. 
 
Mr. Minister, the sale price of the truck was $7,000. Where do 
you come off charging tax based on some inflated NDP red 
book? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I say again that I’m not going 
to discuss the personal taxation situation of any taxpayer in the 
House because it’s not proper to do that, Mr. Speaker. But if 
there’s a problem . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Kindly allow the 
minister to respond to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If there’s a problem with respect to any 
taxpayer, that matter should be brought to the attention of 
myself or the Department of Finance, and, Mr. Speaker, we will 
deal with the problem. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that he should try to 
solve the problem in the proper way — not try to play politics 
in the House. And I say, I say to the member opposite that while 
he’s talking about the interests of taxpayers, he should realize 
that most taxpayers in this province want us to eliminate the 
Saskatchewan flat tax, and that’s what we’re going to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, he did go through the proper 
channels. What he got was a bulletin saying that they were 
going by the red book price. Yet if you go through your budget, 
you say for the sale of the . . . of the seller’s price, of the seller’s 
price — not on the red book. Never anywhere does your budget 
say on the red book — it’s on the seller’s price is what, is what 
it’s paid on. 
 
So why is your department misleading the public? Why is your 
department misleading the public? And why are you gouging 
people like Brad Nameth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time, I will tell 
the member that if the member wishes to bring the information 
to me, I will ensure that the proper officials in the Department 
of Finance review the information and will respond to the 
citizen. 
 
But I want to say to the member, the member should have a 
look at the fact that in our budget we are eliminating the flat tax 
and we’re removing 55,000 low-income people from the 
income tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the member is really interested in the citizens of this 

province and the future of this province, the member will join 
with us in a tax cut for ordinary people, Mr. Speaker. And not 
just adhere to their policy of a tax cut for the rich. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, we’re just talking about this 
instance. Why have you charged PST based on the red book 
value? Why don’t you base it on the $7,000 sale price, the way 
it should be? Not the $8,400 NDP red book value. 
 
Will you provide him with full refund of the difference? Will 
you do that, Mr. Minister? Will you turn around and say, yes, I 
will do that — we will follow the rules that we set out by saying 
seller’s price, not red book price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, for the fourth time, I will ask 
the officials of the Department of Finance to look into the case 
if the member would provide me with the information. And we 
will respond to the taxpayer. That’s what we’ll do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that one of the things we 
need to do in this House is concentrate on the big picture and 
concentrate on the future of the province, Mr. Speaker. And 
what this budget is about, Mr. Speaker, is the future. This 
budget is about saying that we should eliminate the flat tax, that 
we should take low-income people off of the tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The level of noise is a 
little bit too high. I’m barely able to hear the minister’s 
response. So please, please co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, that 
we will not mortgage our children’s future by following the 
advice of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Expansion of Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Finance. Mr. Minister, I have a letter here from the 
Saskatoon Real Estate Board. They’re concerned that their 
industry had no time to prepare for the collection of this PST. 
Yet other professional organizations have been given until July 
1 to implement the PST. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you determine which businesses should 
have charged PST expansion immediately and which ones were 
given a grace period to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite have 
pointed out on many occasions, there were many changes to the 
provincial sales tax that took place on midnight on March 29. 
There are a few that take place on July 1. 
 
As a matter of taxation policy where it’s practicable we try to 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

have taxation changes simultaneous with the presentation of the 
budget for reasons I think the member will understand. 
 
The real estate commission . . . The PST with respect to real 
estate commission has been collected since midnight, March 29. 
That is the policy that was announced in the budget. That is the 
policy that will be adhered to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, the real estate industry as well 
as every other business who until now has not had to collect the 
PST, needs time to implement this new tax. There is a 
tremendous amount of work involved in adapting their books 
and their computer systems, and examining how it will affect 
their members and their customers, as well as the problems that 
continue to arise daily. 
 
Mr. Minister, what actions are your department taking to help 
these industries and businesses across this province and not to 
hinder them deal with these new problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if there are any problems of a 
practical or administrative nature, the officials of the 
Department of Finance will be more than happy to sit down 
with the real estate association and work those problems out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs in this NDP government has 
spent a considerable amount of money on two studies — close 
to $1 million. Yet the minister is indicating to SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and the 
taxpayers that he doesn’t want to wait until Mr. Garcea’s final 
report is done, he wants to make a decision before all the results 
are in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, meetings all over this province are sending the 
minister a clear message — no to forced amalgamation. Mr. 
Minister, will you listen to a large majority of Saskatchewan 
people and back off of forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member that in this province over the last 10 
years, there has been a far greater investment in looking at what 
we should be doing in restructuring municipalities and giving 
greater authority to municipalities across the province. 
 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, I hold up here now, there are four 
reports that have been done. And these reports have been done 
by bodies of SUMA and SARM; this one here entitled the 
advisory committee report on intergovernmental community 
quality of life. I have another report here that was done by 
SUMA and SARM, a memorandum of understanding that was 
signed. 

And this province which talks about voluntary consolidation, 
greater powers for municipalities, it talks about greater revenue 
sharing with municipalities; and now we have two more reports 
in this province, Mr. Member, which are the one by Stabler and 
the one by Garcea, and they all say the same thing. They talk 
about expanding the role of municipalities, giving 
municipalities more authority and more responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all inquiries and issues . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
hit the nail on the head. You said voluntary. No one has a 
problem in this province with amalgamation if it’s voluntary, 
not forced by you and your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the question should be easy 
for the minister to answer. Will you listen to the Saskatchewan 
people and drop your obsession to destruct and mute the people 
of rural Saskatchewan by forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer that 
question by reading a little piece here that I have from a 
member . . . from an individual from Maple Creek. And the 
member . . . This individual from Maple Creek writes, Mr. 
Speaker, that amalgamation of governments or government 
services should be all governments. It should be the provincial 
government and the municipal governments, it should be about 
all governments. 
 
And he talks about how in fact you might be able . . . and this is 
how he reads, this is what he says: 
 

Let us also look at our own provincial government with 
one million people in our province and we would really 
need to reduce the number . . . do we need the number of 
MLAs that we have? Do we need the number of 
departments? Could we devolve some of those services to 
the municipalities (Mr. Speaker). 
 

And then I read an article, Mr. Speaker, then I read an article, 
Mr. Speaker, that comes from Yorkton out of a meeting that the 
member opposite was at in Wroxton. And this is what he says, 
this is what they want to do he says. They want to also do away 
with 58 MLAs and guess where they’re going to come from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about that member and that party 
fearmongering across Saskatchewan 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, next question. 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, your 
government has been working on the Saskatchewan Health 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

Information Network for a number of years now. And yet it’s 
difficult to tell what progress is really occurring. 
 
We know that you use the board of the SHIN (Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network) network as a place to put 
patronage appointments, but it’s not clear if anything more than 
that is coming out of all the money that’s been spent. 
 
Would you share with the House and the people today, Madam 
Minister, how much money has been spent on the SHIN 
network so far? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 
pleased to be one of the original board members of SHIN, so I 
appreciate the questions. 
 
The SHIN network that has been developed in this province is 
actually being looked at across the country as a model. We have 
done this very slowly, very carefully, and we have invested 
very wisely. 
 
The money that we have said we will have spent over the few 
years we’ve got it running, we have done so. And we’ve done 
so very transparently and very wisely. 
 
Other provinces have not gone as far as we have and are 
looking to us for advice and leadership. We again have shown 
that what we do, we do carefully, prudently, financially 
responsibly, and with a great deal of leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again a question. And I wish you would, number one, answer 
the last question — how much money has been spent so far? 
 
And, Madam Minister, the other question that I’d like to ask is, 
has the SHIN network actually been put into place? Is it just an 
expenditure of money on a theoretical system or is there 
actually some concrete system in place at this time? 
 
So to answer the last question please, how much money has 
been spent to date? And what have we got to show for the 
money that’s been spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we first 
assumed office and assumed our various portfolios, I invited the 
member opposite as Health critic and the deputy Health critic 
for a meeting in my office and offered them a briefing on SHIN 
and what was happening in SHIN. They have yet to respond to 
that. And I wanted to show them what we were doing. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I was unable to 
hear the response from the hon. minister, Hon. Associate 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we have 

offered this briefing to all of the province. The media has had it. 
Our coalition partners have had it. Groups all over the province 
have had it. I offered it to the opposition critic, the Health critic, 
and his whole caucus in fact, and he has yet to respond, as has 
none of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is 
for the Minister of Health again. Madam Minister, will you 
stand in front of this House and explain to the House — not just 
to me in a private meeting — but to this House — to this 
House, Madam Minister — what money has been spent on 
SHIN? Is this system in place and is this system a priority for 
your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, anyone 
can have the briefing on SHIN. We have a full presentation that 
the public — anyone — can have a look at. We are investing 
what we have said we will do. This year we will be investing 
5.4 more million into SHIN. 
 
The health network, the health industry is the last industry to 
come into the technology age. We need technology. We need 
information sharing and gathering. And as I’ve said before, we 
are open to having anyone come and see the presentation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery, 
right up near the top, is a very, very special person in my life, 
my son, Matthew, who attends Luther High School in grade 9. I 
think he’s here for an elocution debate later on today and 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. And I just want him to know that I am 
going to stay in this seat for some years to come. I wish him 
well in his elocution, but take your time in getting here. 
 
And I would like all members to join with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 19  The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 19, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

Bill No. 20 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1100) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Reappointment of Children’s Advocate 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a 
motion that Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen be appointed by this 
Assembly to a second five-year term as the Children’s 
Advocate for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Back in 1987 the Provincial 
Ombudsman recommended to the government that children in 
Saskatchewan needed someone to speak for them, to advocate 
on their behalf. He made this recommendation because of the 
quantity and nature of the problems with which children and 
young people approached his office. 
 
In 1992 the government appointed an independent task force to 
examine options for child and youth advocacy. 
 
The task force undertook extensive public consultations and 
concluded that Saskatchewan needed an advocate who would: 
be willing to be a strong voice for children and youth in crisis; 
protect the interests of children and youth receiving services 
from the government, and ensure the services provided are 
appropriate; conduct research to improve the interests and 
well-being of children; review and investigate the matters that 
come to his or her attention; provide advice to any minister 
responsible for services to children; engage in public education 
and prevention activities; and be visible and accessible to the 
community. 
 
The government adopted the recommendation of the task force 
and recruited the most suitable candidate for this important 
office after an open and public competition. After a thorough 
and intensive search, and a consultation process which involved 
members of both opposition parties. We were fortunate enough 
to find such a person in Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of this Assembly will 
agree that Dr. Parker-Loewen has proven to be more than 
capable as the Children’s Advocate. As the province’s first 
Children’s Advocate, she had the task of establishing the office, 
clarifying its mandate, and setting its initial direction. I think 
this Assembly would agree, Mr. Speaker, that she has done a 
good job. 
 

Since it was established in 1994, the office has seen a 
tremendous growth in the number of people who have turned to 
the Children’s Advocate for assistance. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
between 1996 and 1998 the number of files opened by the 
Children’s Advocate almost tripled to nearly 900 annually. In 
addition to that, in 1998 alone, the advocate and her staff 
completed 111 public presentations. 
 
Dr. Parker-Loewen’s qualifications for this position are beyond 
question. A Masters of Education in educational psychology 
and a Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) in developmental 
psychology; along with her experience as regional executive 
director of the Yorkton mental health region, director of child 
and youth services; and an early childhood psychologist for 
Yorkton community health services; a member of the Yorkton 
race relations committee; and an off-campus lecturer for the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College on the Cowessess 
Reserve leave no doubt as to her qualifications and ability. 
 
Since Dr. Parker-Loewen officially assumed her position as the 
Children’s Advocate on November 7, 1994, she has 
demonstrated an unwavering commitment to the children for 
whom she is responsible. And, Mr. Speaker, she has performed 
her duties in a professional and judicious manner. Mr. Speaker, 
the original appointment of Dr. Parker-Loewen was the result of 
the consultation and unanimous agreement of all members of 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I am confident that this Assembly will once again extend a solid 
vote of confidence in Dr. Parker-Loewen’s ability and 
performance by appointing her to a second five-year term as the 
Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making 
the following motion: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council reappoint Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen, of the city of Saskatoon, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as Children’s Advocate pursuant to section 
12.1 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for North 
Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just make a 
few comments before I would like to move an amendment to 
the motion. 
 
In regards to the child’s advocate position and certainly the 
office that it holds and certainly the member that currently 
holds that office, as the minister indicated that this is a five-year 
appointment, as are all the other appointments in the Legislative 
Assembly. All bodies in an opportunity to review. 
 
And our caucus has always felt, even when we agreed to and 
participated in the original appointment and the open discussion 
in regards to the appointment to which Ms. Loewen eventually 
received the appointment, that there should be an open and 
consultative process in this appointment. 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

And we have suggested to the government that there be an open 
process after the five-year term, as we do have in other 
agencies. And that doesn’t take away from any individual, 
including the current child advocate, of reapplying having 
shown that she has really been working diligently on behalf of 
the children of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s with that regard and looking at the institution and the 
fact that we have an open and consultative process, that we feel 
that that should be continued to be noted rather than just 
accepting the fact that if a person’s been automatically 
appointed that that continues to roll. 
 
We feel, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day that people want to 
have that open and consultative process; the opportunity to 
really review, if you will, the position, not taking away from the 
work. 
 
And I believe Ms. Loewen, as well, currently is in the process 
of putting together a report which we look forward to receiving 
in this Assembly in the near future. And at that time we look 
forward to reviewing the report. But at the same time it’s 
appropriate that we honour the institution and the process of the 
institution. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an 
amendment to the motion, seconded by the member from 
Melfort: 
 

That all the words after “that” be deleted and the following 
substituted: 
 
the Legislative Assembly conduct an open search and 
hiring process to fill the office of The Children’s Advocate. 

 
The division bells rang from 11:11 a.m. until 11:13 a.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Elhard Julé Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — 29 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley  
 

The division bells rang from 11:16 a.m. until 11:17 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 51 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley Elhard 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Hon. members, the Table 
officer is directly in front of me and I can’t hear him. Please. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Education Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to outline for all members the background and 
substance of the amendments to The Education Act, 1995 that 
are included in this amending Bill. 
 
The Education Act, 1995 provides the fundamental statutory 
underpinning for the provisions of K to 12 education in our 
province. It sets out the governance structure of service delivery 
through locally elected boards of education. And within this 
broad framework it reflects the constitutional provisions for 
school divisions operated by electors of the Protestant or 
Roman Catholic religious minority and the francophone 
linguistic minority. 
 
Members will appreciate that in view of the broad range of 
matters covered by the Act, there is a regular need to update its 
provisions to reflect changes in the system, to remove outdated 
provisions, and to address issues of law, policy, and 
administration. I understand that in virtually every year for the 
past decade or more amendments of some type have been 
needed for one or more of these reasons. Mr. Speaker, the same 
is true again this year. 
 
The amendments in this Bill do not reflect any major policy 
direction shifts or any significant change in the legislative 
framework; rather they deal with a number of discreet, specific 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

topics which each require some type of change. In a moment, I 
will outline the specific amendments involved. 
 
First, however, I want to emphasize that these amendments 
have all been prepared in consultation with our provincial 
partner organizations: the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the 
League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents, and the Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials. In some cases, the need for an amendment 
was first identified by one of these organizations, while in 
others the amendment originated within the department, or the 
Department of Justice. But in all cases the partners have had an 
opportunity to review the proposed changes and comment on 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to speak briefly about each of 
the categories of amendment in the Bill. First there is a series of 
amendments dealing with the process whereby members of the 
Roman Catholic or Protestant minority faith in a community 
can determine whether they wish to establish a minority faith 
separate school division. 
 
Experience with the existing provisions over the past couple of 
years has shown that they are not sufficiently clear in certain 
respects and that they have been very difficult to administer in 
an efficient and effective way. The amendments are designed to 
overcome these problems in several ways. 
 
The current provisions allow for minority faith electors to 
petition to establish a separate school division based on the 
boundaries of a historical school district. These districts ceased 
to exist entirely when the current structure of school divisions 
was established in 1978. And many of them had disappeared 
long before then as they became part of larger school units in 
1944. 
 
These old school districts were based on an area only 5 miles by 
4 miles. In the context of education delivery today, they are 
clearly no longer a viable basis for establishing a school 
division. 
 
The proposed amendment will eliminate the option of 
establishing a separate school division in this way while 
retaining the more reasonable option of using current day 
school attendance area boundaries. 
 
A second amendment will increase the number of signatures 
required on a petition to initiate the process for establishing a 
separate school division from three to six. As well, petitioners 
will now be required not simply to provide a list of electors of 
the minority faith in the proposed area but also to provide 
reasonable evidence showing that these electors do in fact 
constitute a minority of electors in that area. At present there is 
no clear requirement or process for establishing this key 
information. 
 
The final amendments in this area will separate the vote among 
minority faith electors from the meeting that the electors are 
required to hold to discuss the petition. The current process 
calls for the vote to be taken at the end of the meeting and 
usually means that the vote is conducted and the ballots are 
counted by the individuals who actually sponsored the petition 

in the first place. 
 
The proposed amendments will provide for the vote to be 
conducted on a later date by neutral officials. All minority faith 
electors in the area will then have an opportunity to cast their 
ballot in a neutral environment through a more standard voting 
procedure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that the amendments I have 
just described do not in any way affect the substantive 
constitutional rights of the Roman Catholic or Protestant 
religious minority to establish a separate school division. The 
sole purpose of the amendments is to help ensure that these 
rights can be exercised through a clear, fair, and consistent 
process. 
 
These amendments have the support of the Catholic section of 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association which has 
described the existing provisions as archaic and dysfunctional. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will move on now to the other amendments of 
the Bill. First, several sections of the Act prescribe dollar values 
for purposes of tendering requirements for school divisions. 
That is, when a board is obtaining goods or services beyond a 
certain value, it must call for public tenders. The dollar amounts 
currently prescribed in the Act have not been changed since 
1978. Given the impact of inflation over the years, the amounts 
have become smaller and smaller in real terms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while boards of education need to be open and 
accountable to the public for the conduct of their affairs; they 
also need the capacity to conduct business in an efficient and 
timely way. To update the accounts set out in the Act to more 
realistic, current-day levels while maintaining reasonable 
accountability, the dollar amounts will be doubled from those 
that have been in place for over 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second amendment deals with the important area 
of services to pupils with a disability. At present, these sections 
still include several references to the provision of such services 
in institutions. These references are inconsistent with the 
philosophy that services for these pupils should be designed on 
an individualized basis and that wherever possible, these pupils 
should be integrated into the regular classroom setting. 
 
Although removal of these references will have no practical 
impact on service delivery, it is important that the language we 
use in our legislation reflect the principles and policies to which 
we all subscribe. 
 
The third amendment I wish to outline deals with the sale of 
school property. The basic requirement of the legislation is that 
boards of education must publicly tender the sale of school 
property. Certain exceptions are provided where the property is 
to continue being used for educational purposes or is to be used 
for some other community purpose. In these cases, the school 
property can be sold directly without tendering to authorities 
such as a municipality, the federal or provincial government, or 
an Indian band. 
 
This Bill includes an amendment that will extend a list of 
organizations and authorities to whom a school board can sell 
school property without tendering to include a registered, 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

independent school. 
 
Registered, independent schools are recognized by the 
Department of Education based on having acceptable standards 
in terms of program, staffing, and facilities. For legal purposes, 
their students are defined as meeting the compulsory school 
attendance requirements. In some cases, Mr. Speaker, these 
schools have entered into close working relationships with the 
school divisions in their community. The proposed amendment 
will enable a school division that no longer needs a school or 
part of a school to sell that property directly to a registered 
independent school for continued use as an educational facility. 
 
The amendment will not impose any obligation on a board to 
sell school property in this way, but will simply eliminate a 
barrier to their doing so in a case where the board believes that 
it would be in the interests of the community and in the interests 
of their students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the other amendments in this Bill either deal 
with straight forward administrative matters or can be described 
as housekeeping or consequential amendments, and I will 
describe them very briefly. 
 
First, the provisions dealing with the conflict of interest for 
school trustees are amended to restore the original meaning and 
intent. When the Act was thoroughly revised in 1995 these 
provisions were re-drafted in a way that inadvertently changed 
their substance. 
 
Second, for purpose of collective bargaining every teacher is in 
scope unless he or she is designated out of scope by the 
educational relations board. An amendment will designate 
directors of education of school divisions as being 
automatically out of scope given that they are the chief 
executive officers of those divisions. This amendment will 
eliminate the need for boards to go through the administrative 
process of having their director designated out of scope every 
time they appoint a new director. 
 
Third, on the advice of the Department of Justice certain 
provisions relating to the school division tax loss compensation 
fund are being moved from the regulations into the Act itself. 
There is no change in the actual legal requirements. 
 
And finally all provisions of the Act that relate to 
post-secondary education are being amended or repealed. These 
changes are consequential to the introduction of a new statute 
by my colleague, the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training that will make these provisions redundant within 
our Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the amendments that I’ve outlined contribute 
to ensuring that The Education Act, 1995 remains up to date, 
and that it continues to serve the various needs and interests of 
all those involved in the delivery of K to 12 education services 
to Saskatchewan students. As I’ve previously indicated the Bill 
has been prepared in consultation with our education partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 13, 
An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 be now read a 
second time. 
 

(1130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just before 
I move to adjourn debate on this discussion this morning 
regarding The Education Amendment Act, 2000, and I would 
like to just compliment . . . First of all, as I was listening to the 
minister and the explanation, there’s no doubt we needed some 
real clarification on a number of issues in regards to education 
and educational services, schools, school districts, divisions, 
separate schools, and this piece of legislation certainly does 
cover a number of areas. 
 
It’s not just a simple Act, and I believe my colleague, the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena will want to take some more 
time to really review the legislation that’s been presented to us, 
take some time to digest exactly where the legislation is 
heading, what it’s trying to address, the concerns that we may 
have with the legislation. And just from the few simple 
comments that the Minister of Education has given us, certainly 
there are a number of issues as I was listening to the debate, that 
it seems that clarification was needed on a number of issues. 
 
Some things we’d like to address and look at very carefully so 
that we’re not just giving a nod to a piece of legislation that on 
the surface may seem and may address some very simple issues. 
And as well, as we look in a little more in depth, there may be 
some concerns we would like to bring forward to the Minister 
of Education to see to it that the current changes to the Act 
indeed address all the issues and all the concerns out there. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak 
to The Farm Financial Stability Act, and in saying that, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say these amendments will strengthen the 
livestock loan guarantee program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the livestock loan guarantee program has been 
instrumental in expanding and diversifying the livestock 
industry in Saskatchewan for a number of years. Our 
government has expanded the livestock loan guarantee program 
and last spring we added bison and sheep to the program. This 
program gives individual producers in these trying times, 
economically, another option in their farming operations. 
 
I might add, under the program, individual producers can 
benefit by forming producer associations and these producer 
associations have the advantage in that they can access 
competitive financing and interest rates. With the government 
guarantee, association members have the added benefit of 
minimum down payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are required to strengthen the 
procedures where producer associations are winding down or 
where guarantee has been paid by the government to the lender. 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

We want to authorize the producer association to be able to 
deduct from the proceeds of sales, the amount a producer owes 
to that particular association. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, by strengthening the procedures, the risk to 
the association, the lender and the government are reduced. 
These amendments were developed in consultation with 
lenders; most importantly, with producer associations from 
across the province; and of course, the Saskatchewan Cattle 
Feeders Association. These groups are in agreement with the 
amendments that I have mentioned here. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry as we 
know it is very vital to the long-term stability of rural 
Saskatchewan, and I would ask all members to support these 
amendments and quickly give second reading passage to this 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I would ask the Hon. 
Minister of Agriculture to please read the Bill that he intends to 
move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned I 
would like to repeat this part at least, I’d ask members to 
support these amendments and quickly give passage, and I 
would move second reading of the Bill No. 1, An Act to Amend 
The Farm Financial Stability Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments, and I might add at the outset, that I was listening 
very intently and I caught that little comment by the minister 
about the fact that he felt the Assembly could move very 
speedily to move this Bill forward. 
 
However, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if most people were 
listening to . . . or are listening to the debate this morning and 
they hear the term, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment 
Act, there are many producers out there would begin to wonder 
exactly where the government is heading. Because I think a lot 
of producers are, would . . . don’t really believe we have a farm 
financial stability in the province of Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Now I understand where the minister’s going with this piece of 
legislation. The minister is certainly looking at the livestock 
end, the livestock sector in this legislation and trying . . . the 
government, as I understand it, is trying to come up with 
programs that would encourage more and more producers to 
begin looking at livestock as an option in their farming 
operations, given the current crisis we’re facing in the grain 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, I think a lot of producers as well would love to have 
seen the provincial government give some leadership in 
addressing some of the problems in the grain industry and 
coming forward with some suggestions and even entering into 
some serious debate with the federal government to bring, if 
you will, some stability into the farm economy when it comes 
to the grain sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt about it that there is a place for 
livestock production in this province, and many producers have 

been making that choice and will continue to make that choice 
as a . . . not only as a result of the economic times, but because 
the realities are the livestock sector is a growing sector and will 
be an ongoing sector that is needed in regards to agriculture in 
the province of Saskatchewan and the economy not only of this 
province but of this country as well. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day I think what most 
producers are looking for, what small communities are looking 
for, what businessmen and women are looking for is some 
stability in the overall sector of agriculture, not just one area — 
not just the livestock sector, but the grain sector as well. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that 
we do take some time to review this piece of legislation in 
depth, in a little more depth, to see to it that the concerns that 
are being raised with our caucus, with our members, are indeed 
listened to, the issues that the minister has been talking about in 
his presentation are addressed very carefully, and that the 
legislation indeed, at the end of the day when this Assembly 
passes it, do meet the needs of the ongoing livestock industry, 
the producers, and the expanded livestock industry including 
bison and elk and other forms of livestock production. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
speak to The Animal Identification Act amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sustainable growth of the livestock industry is 
vital to the rural economy of our province. The livestock 
industry has always seen the need for animal identification or 
brands which ensure ownership. 
 
In consultation with the livestock industry, the government 
enacted the governance and enforcement of legislation of the 
marks for identification of animals amendments in 1978. 
Included in that was electronic identification. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting when we look around 
the world and identify that many consumers in many parts of 
the world are becoming more and more concerned about where 
the food they consume comes from and a record of what was 
the process from the time of birth of an animal. For example, 
what feedlot it was fed in, which slaughtering plant it was 
processed at, what company shipped it. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that in some areas of Japan and 
Germany and other parts of the world, many consumers want to 
be able to read on a bar code — if you pick up a package of 
meat — the complete history of where that particular product 
came from. 
 
And I might add in doing that, there’s a very large growing 
body of economists who believe that Canadian producers can 
achieve a very large premium on the products that they produce 
because of the pristine atmosphere that we grow our livestock 
in and the great care that we as producers take. That by using 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

electronic identification that we can actually add a great deal of 
value at a very low cost to the particular livestock that we 
produce in this province. 
 
And electronic devices are being used for horses and pets, but 
these animals are different from cattle, obviously, which go to 
slaughter. So far, electronic identification devices have not been 
feasible for cattle because the devices migrate throughout the 
animal and packing plants do not want to . . . a microchip 
showing up in somebody’s steak or hamburger. 
 
So there are these concerns. And there may come a point where 
the technology will make it feasible for this kind of electronic 
monitoring in our cattle herds and even in hog production. 
 
And for that reason the government has consulted with 
stakeholders in the livestock industry, and Mr. Speaker, we 
want to take the registration and the enforcement of electronic 
devices out of the Act and repeal the provisions for dealers of 
electronic devices to be licensed. 
 
At the same time, we want to broaden the provision of the Act 
to enable the government to regulate registration and licensing 
of electronic identification devices at some future date if the 
need is expressed by the industry. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, these amendments have 
full approval of the shareholders, as we like to be able to 
consult and get approval. And I would ask members again to 
support these amendments and that we quickly move through 
second reading. 
 
And I would move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Animal Identification Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I rise to 
my feet, I hear the minister telling me how good his piece of 
legislation is. I think that still . . . there’s still a question out 
there in regards to the legislation that is before us. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, over the past few weeks, just attending 
some auction sales and auction marts, bull sales, around my 
constituency and other parts of the province, I run into many 
livestock producers who have some real serious questions about 
the animal identification that we’re talking about. And we’ve 
certainly heard discussion about implants, and the minister 
referred to that in the debate this afternoon. 
 
What we’re seeing right now is the idea of possibly ear tags. 
And the unfortunate part in that regard, Mr. Speaker, anyone 
who’s been involved in the livestock industry through the years 
has found that we still haven’t come up with an ear tag system 
that is fail proof. 
 
And what I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, is a system or a tag that 
does not get lost. And whether it’s an ear tag or a brisket tag or 
a larger tag or even just a small metal tag, there are still some 
issues that arise from that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about consumers wanting to 
know where the product that they are eating or consuming is 

coming from, the minister’s quite correct. The consumer is 
becoming more demanding and certainly looking for something 
that would identify the food that they’re eating is coming out of 
a base that there aren’t a lot of additives in the product, that it’s 
coming out of an environmentally friendly atmosphere. 
 
And I know the packing industry and the feedlot industry in this 
province, and certainly in Western Canada, are quite concerned 
about that as well. And that’s why I believe you will find many 
feedlot operators are doing everything in their power to 
establish a feeding system that really treats the livestock in their 
care with a lot of regard and respect, thinking about the 
consumer at the end of the day. 
 
(1145) 
 
While I appreciate the fact that the minister is talking about a 
system that we need that can be traced back and that we can 
follow through on, one has to wonder if at the end of the day we 
have this animal identification and it’s something like an ear tag 
number, if indeed that will still alleviate some of the concerns 
out there. 
 
Certainly we have the animal rights movement continue to — if 
you will; I have to use the word — fearmonger with the 
consumer, and basically putting a lot of onus on the producer 
out there. 
 
And I believe many producers are working very diligently, and 
the livestock that they raise is their livelihood. And I haven’t 
seen a producer yet that mistreats an animal. I have seen a 
producer doing everything he can to treat that animal with 
respect because his livelihood depends on that animal. 
 
But if there’s a real concern out there, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
concern arising from the fact if a producer doesn’t enrol in the 
system, does that producer then not have the ability to buy or 
sell in the marketplace? Does that producer actually have the 
ability to continue to raise livestock? 
 
And those are some of the questions we want to look at. 
 
I believe, as well, that there is a current Bill before the federal 
House as well, in dealing with this issue. And there are a 
number of questions that we certainly want to take the time to 
debate and to raise with the minister. 
 
We want to review the Bill somewhat more carefully to indeed 
make sure that we are representing the voices and the concerns. 
 
And so, at the end of the day, when the piece of legislation 
moves forward, and if you will, if there are some amendments 
needed that producers would like us to bring forward . . . that 
we can discuss this with the minister, and see to it that when the 
Bill finally passes this Assembly, it meets the needs of the 
industry out there and the producers involved and all those who 
are concerned. 
 
With having said that, Mr. Speaker, I now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Members of the Assembly, the business 
before the committee is continued consideration of an 
Appropriations Bill. And just before we get started on that, I’d 
like to invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials 
with me today are the same officials that were with me 
yesterday and they are Mr. Paul Boothe — or Dr. Paul Boothe 
if you prefer; I’m sure he’d settle for Mr. — the deputy minister 
of Finance is sitting to my left. 
 
And to my right is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. And 
behind Mr. Boothe is Terry Paton, the Provincial Comptroller. 
Behind me is Glen Veikle, the assistant deputy minister of the 
Treasury Board branch. And behind Mr. McGregor is Mr. Len 
Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue division of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, or is it Deputy 
Chairman, today? Deputy Chairman. 
 
I have a few questions concerning the estimates of the interim 
supply that apply primarily to the Highways department budget. 
But there is another element or matter that I want to clarify 
before we get to that. 
 
Yesterday in a conversation here with the Minister of Finance 
and our people, there was some debate at length as to whether 
this was a tax-grab or a tax-relief budget, and I don’t want to 
belabour a lot of that argument. But in his defence, the Minister 
of Finance said that there was a couple of areas that were going 
to provide immediate relief in terms of tax reduction. One of 
them was, of course, was the PST credit that he would make 
available earlier in the year than most of the other provisions 
come into effect. And the other area he mentioned specifically 
was the fuel tax rebate as an actual reduction or income . . . I’m 
sorry, tax break that would come into effect early. 
 
Unless the minister has some method by which he plans to 
rebate the fuel tax at the pumps or on the farm site or through 
both fuel dealers, I would beg to differ with his evaluation or 
his description of this tax as an immediate tax refund. It’s an 
assumption that won’t be borne out by the procedures that will 
be in place unless they have been changed. 
 
As it stands right now, when you apply for a fuel tax rebate you 
get your results from your purchases at bulk fuel dealers mailed 
out to you and then you add your retail sales and you send them 
in, in the spring of the year; and if it’s done by March 31, you 
are likely to get a refund sometime in May or June. 
 
And unless that procedure’s been changed, even though this tax 
will be credited to you retroactive to the first of the year, it still 
will not be payable to anybody who is eligible for the rebate 
until sometime after March 31, 2001. So in effect, even though 
the provision has been made for a rebate, it will not be available 
to anybody who claims it — as I understand it — at least not to 
the farmers until some time in the new calendar year. 

And I would like him to clarify that situation for the taxpayers 
of this province and tell us if he has made any changes to the 
procedure in order for people to get their tax on their fuel back 
sooner than that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 
think what the member is saying is largely correct, that there’s 
tax relief retroactive to January 1 in the sense that the producer 
can take their receipt for gas that they’ve purchased for farm 
purchases — or farm purposes, I mean to say — and send that 
in, you know, and as they get more gas receipts they can do 
likewise. 
 
But the member is right. The farmer is still paying the tax 
upfront, the gas tax — not diesel because there’s no tax on farm 
diesel except a federal tax — but the member’s right. And then 
the farmer will have to send in the receipts, and then we will 
send a cheque back to the farmer. And I think the member has 
described it correctly. 
 
But I’ll say this also, that one of the things that I’ve asked the 
Department of Finance to look at — this isn’t for the year 2000 
but for the year 2001 — is whether we could devise a system 
whereby when the farmer went to buy the gas for farm 
purposes, that we would somehow be able to provide an 
exemption or a rebate at the point-of-sale. 
 
And I cannot today, I cannot today commit to the member what 
the system would be, but I can make this commitment: that we 
want to look at the way we’re doing this and see if we can do it 
in a way that either would not charge the farmer the tax to begin 
with instead of sending it back after the fact; or alternatively, 
whether there would be some way that we could send it out on a 
more timely basis. And all I can commit today is that we are 
definitely looking at that and I am very serious about trying to 
do something about the situation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I appreciate the 
indication that some effort will be made to look at streamlining 
that process. If I could recommend — from my own point of 
view as a farmer who’s already overburdened with paperwork 
by all levels of government — if you could devise a system 
where the tax would be removed at the site-of-purchase, that 
would be far superior and would be much more broadly 
appreciated and accepted by purchasers of tax-free fuel. 
 
Having looked at the interim supply summary, I just noticed 
here that the provincial government is planning to give the 
Department of Highways an increase of about 6.6 per cent in its 
budget, taking it to a total of $250 million. Now while I’m sure 
that the department is grateful for that increase, I’m wondering 
if the imposition of the 6 per cent sales tax on many of the 
things the department will have to purchase won’t undermine 
considerably that amount of money. And if you could address 
that particular issue, I would appreciate it. 
 
Also the two-twelfths interim supply amounts to $41 million, a 
little more than that, 41 and a half; and I would like you — at 
least on this piece of paper that I’ve got that says that — I’d like 
you to confirm that amount if you would please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, I’d like to say with respect 
to the member’s suggestion about treatment of the farm fuel, I 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

think that that’s a good suggestion and I’m going to ask my 
officials . . . and the deputy minister in charge of the revenue 
division is here so he has made note of your suggestion that is, 
in fact, something we want to pursue. 
 
With respect to the observation about the sales tax, there may 
be some . . . the 6 per cent would not apply to the entire $250 
million budget. In fact it would be some considerably smaller 
part of that because there would be many things they’d spend 
money on, such as labour costs, for example, that would not . . . 
there’s no PST on repair to real property, which includes not 
only home building and buildings, but also road construction 
and so on. 
 
So there wouldn’t be an impact of 6 per cent on $250 million. 
There would be an impact on some smaller sum of money, 
although I cannot tell the member today what that would be, but 
there would be some impact. The impact would be mitigated by 
virtue of the fact that if it was not the province but say a road 
builder that was incurring some cost, then they would write that 
cost off as against their income, and the net effect of it taking 
taxes into account may not be as great. 
 
But to the extent that the member says would there be some 
impact, I think there would be. Would this be a major impact in 
terms of the overall increase to the Highways budget? I 
wouldn’t describe it as major, but I’d say there would have to 
be an impact to some extent, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you for this time to 
ask more questions. On the second page of this summary, I 
noticed that under the 2000 and 2001 Estimates, there’s an 
amount of what will be I understand $3,823,000 that show up in 
the column under lending and investing. Can you tell me what 
that amount of money represents, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like — 
and I apologize — but I’d like the member to again repeat 
which numbers in this lending and investment table he’s asking 
about? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m glad to do that. On the second page of the 
interim supply summary under lending and investing, there is 
an amount of $3,823,000 included in the 2000-2001 Estimates, 
and I was wondering if you could clarify that amount please? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I can, and thank you for repeating 
your question. I want to say first of all, further to the last 
question about the PST, I should have said also that there is an 
exemption to be provided for sand and gravel purchased by 
rural and urban municipalities and the Department of Highways 
and Transportation. So the PST would not apply to sand and 
gravel purchases by the RMs, the urban municipalities, and the 
Department of Highways. 
 
Moving on to the other question, the $3.8 million, what that is, 
is the . . . under the short-line railways assistance program, and 
that was established in 1998 to provide equity financing for the 
purchase of abandoned branch rail lines to establish short-line 
railways. And the program is subject to various conditions, one 
of them limiting the province’s total commitment to $4 million. 

And the other — I won’t detail all of them unless the member 
wants me to — but the others generally requiring that there be 
an indication from RMs and perhaps urban municipalities and 
producers that they’re actually interested in purchasing the short 
line and so on. 
 
And, last . . . in the last year, 1999-2000, $700,000 was 
budgeted for loans under this program. The forecast that they 
actually will have loaned last year is $177,000. For this year, 
$3.823 million is budgeted, and it represents the remaining 
balance of provincial financial assistance commitment of $4 
million. 
 
Now, so the money is there for short lines, and it can be used 
for that purpose. How much of the money will be accessed and 
so on would depend upon whether we were able to find 
producers and municipal governments, you know, that wanted 
to purchase the short lines, in which case, we would get 
involved with the program. 
 
And I want to say to the member . . . just perhaps in anticipation 
of another question that might arise. If at the end of the day, we 
don’t actually commit this money to this program — if there 
aren’t takers for it — it’s my general view that we would want 
to use this money to support the transportation system in rural 
Saskatchewan in some way. But we’ll see what happens over 
the next year in terms of whether we get more short lines going. 
But that is what that money is for. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, my thanks to the 
minister for that response. 
 
I would like to continue my line of questioning, in keeping with 
the 6 per cent PST. I appreciate that the tax will not be 
applicable to sand and gravel stockpiled by the government or 
the RMs. Will that tax, however, work its way into the costs of 
the department through the purchase and sale of equipment by 
various road-building contractors that might be asked to do 
work to the department? And have you factored that particular 
cost to the contractors into your estimates for both road repair 
and maintenance and road construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, as I said earlier the PST would affect 
the cost to some extent of the road builders as they purchase 
some items where the PST might apply where it didn’t 
previously apply. That would not be with respect to all of their 
costs because there would be many of their costs where the PST 
would not be charged such as for labour. But I think we have to 
acknowledge that road builders, like others, would to some 
extent be affected by the expanded PST. It would not be to . . . 
on all of their purchases. 
 
It would not be to the full extent because they would also have a 
tax write-off, if you will, with respect to the PST that they pay. 
So that the net to them would not be 6 per cent, it would be 
some lower percentage than that on some of the things they 
buy. So it would have some affect on them, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, let me pursue that just a 
little bit. Are the machines that road builders going to be . . . the 
ones that they’re going to be buying and trading in — will they 
be subject to the same types of rules as automobiles and trucks 
in terms of the cash difference application? 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, they would be subject to the same 
rules as if you were purchasing a vehicle. And in some cases 
this would amount to a tax saving in the sense that right now, if 
they buy a new piece of equipment they will pay the PST on the 
total value. If they have a piece of used equipment that they . . . 
if they traded it in, they would pay the difference between the 
trade-in value and the value of the equipment that they buy. 
 
That might also apply to a used piece of equipment. I mean, 
they might buy a used piece of equipment that is newer than the 
used equipment they had now, they would trade it in and pay 
the PST on the difference. 
 
With respect to new vehicles generally we have to recognize 
that there may be offsetting savings because for some people, if 
they’re buying new vehicles on a regular basis and if they’re 
trading in, their PST bill will actually go down. It would depend 
on the circumstances so that in its . . . some will pay more, 
some will pay less. 
 
But there is an offset to increased PST costs. And if it was done, 
I guess, if you were able to do it in just the right way, you 
actually could reduce your PST costs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I want to change the . . . 
kind of the direction of my questioning now and ask the 
minister if he confirmed that this figure of 41 million, the 
interim amount of money that is designated for the Department 
of Highways, is accurate. I believe he confirmed it somewhere 
in his answer. I don’t remember hearing it but I’m assuming he 
did; let’s put it that way. 
 
And I’d like him to tell us if he can, if he can this morning, in 
what areas of the department are those expenditures expected to 
be made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I can confirm that certainly the 
amount to be allocated to the Department of Highways for April 
and May pursuant to this appropriation Bill would be the figure 
stated by the member, which is 41.674 million. And that money 
will be made available to the Department of Highways. 
 
How they will spend it would be according to the estimates that 
are before the House in the sense that we have estimates that 
outline what they will spend over the year. And essentially what 
this does is simply give them one-sixth of their budget so that 
they can start to spend that money. 
 
And in terms of exactly where they’ll spend the $41 million, 
that question would be more appropriately put actually in 
estimates for the Department of Highways, but this is the 
amount of money that would be appropriated to them as a result 
of this appropriation Bill. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would have asked the 
minister right away but he just left; I don’t suppose that would 
have been appropriate. 
 
Can you tell me, sir: what amount of revenue is anticipated to 
be taken in by the government in this two-month period through 
various fees and other charges that are applicable throughout 
the department? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Chair, just for clarification, 
when the member says fees and charges throughout the 
department, is he referring to the Department of Highways or is 
he referring . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, he is referring 
specifically to the Department of Highways he’s indicating. 
And I’ll just confer with the officials and come up with the 
answer. 
 
I’m advised by the officials, Mr. Deputy Chair, that there are 
not a lot of fees and charges levied by the Department of 
Highways. Last year — I’m looking actually at the Public 
Accounts for 1998 and ’99 just by way of example — the fees 
and charges, other than some transfers from the federal 
government for highways programs, but fees and charges to 
individuals amount to something in the order of $1.6 million. 
 
And if we assume that that would be . . . actually they amount 
to about $1 million perhaps because $600,000 of that is under 
the category, other. But the point is we’re not talking about a 
large amount of money. My guess is that the fees and charges 
that they have for licences and permits of various kinds and 
motor vehicle fees that they receive, as distinct from SGI, 
probably are something in the order of $100,000 per month, 
roughly — not a big sum of money in the scheme of things. So 
that’s the information that I have. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’d like to pursue that 
line of questioning just a bit. I understand from what the 
minister has said that the list isn’t extensive. But I was 
wondering if you could give me a list of the government fees 
that are applicable in that department? And any other charges 
that are, are undertaken by the department to generate the 
revenue over the upcoming couple of months? And would he be 
willing to table a schedule of all the fees and charges for the 
Department of Highways for this committee’s use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Chair, not meaning to be 
difficult, but just to say this is actually a question that would be 
appropriate for the estimates of the Department of Highways. 
It’s not really an appropriate question for the Appropriation Bill 
in the sense that we don’t get into all of the detail of every 
department here because we do do that when we get into the 
estimates for the Department of Highways. 
 
And the Minister of Highways indicates that he’ll be happy to 
take note of the question and to, to answer it in due course. 
 
But I’ll just, I’ll just say that we don’t see a lot of fees and 
charges in the Department of Highways; it’s not a large amount 
of money. 
 
But the Minister of Highways will be pleased to provide that 
information. And I really cannot appropriately provide more 
information in this, in this forum. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to address this 
additional question then to the minister. 
 
As a result of your budget, can you tell us which programs or 
services in the department may have been eliminated or 
reduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that would be a detailed 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

question for estimates of the Department of Highways. But I 
can tell the member that — if my memory serves me correctly 
— there was a question, a written question put to the Chamber, 
and the Department of Highways is going to have to file a 
response with respect to the question, to answer that question. 
And that question would appropriately be put in the estimates of 
the Department of Highways. 
 
And I’m not meaning to be difficult; I’m just meaning to say 
that there are many, many detailed questions about 
departmental expenditures, and we’ll be bringing every 
department before the Legislative Chamber for those questions 
to be asked. And we’ll be looking at the budget of each 
department on a line-by-line basis. 
 
But those questions . . . the questions today are more in the 
nature of more general questions with respect to the 
appropriation, The Appropriation Bill before the House. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Deputy Chairman. As this is a 
learning experience for many of us, I’ll beg forgiveness and the 
minister’s indulgence, and I’ll leave the questioning at that. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have 
questions for the minister, and I want to welcome all his 
officials here. And I’m looking forward to trying to learn a little 
bit more about what is stated in the Estimates, and in particular, 
with the urgent need for the interim. 
 
First off, if I could, Mr. Minister, I want to just go back a little 
bit from the things that I heard yesterday and I was listening 
very intently — when you were talking about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund amount — and trying very hard to 
understand. 
 
So please forgive me if we go over some of this material again 
because I think it’s very important for people on this side, 
people in the House generally, people in the province to 
understand how these different numbers and things fit together 
because I guess in my estimation of what we’re doing here is 
something like this: I try to think of a situation that . . . what I 
would understand maybe in a commercial world or a corporate 
world, and what you’re doing is you’re projecting what you, as 
a corporation or the government, is expecting to expend next 
year, what the revenues will be. 
 
And on that basis, you are in fact coming to the legislature for 
the approval of that, just as a corporation would go to a bank or 
a lending institution for an operating line of credit or to get 
permission to move ahead with your particular business plan. 
And I look at the budget as a particular business plan for your 
operation. 
 
Now in any corporation, it would seem to me, the thing that you 
have to do is what you were talking about yesterday, and you 
were trying to put some contingency in a fund called Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
And I assume that that fund is, as in any corporation that sets 
aside quote “money” for a stabilization or a contingency, the 

fund does not have any money in it other than it is — and 
maybe the fund is the term that is confusing — the fund is 
rather a contingency and you will draw on that, if in fact things 
don’t happen the way you plan or if there’s something 
extraordinary. 
 
So that fund being a contingency, you deduct it I guess from the 
total amount that you feel will be a surplus for the year. But in 
fact it is there; it’s a protected amount of money. And if it is 
there and protected, tell me where in the papers that you 
presented that that will actually show as an asset even though 
there isn’t any money in that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank, Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the 
member for the question. It shows on page 10 of the Estimates, 
there’s an item called Fiscal Stabilization Fund and the amount 
scheduled to be in the fund at the end of the fiscal year is stated 
there in the Estimates on page 10. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
noted it was there, and if that in fact is included in the overall 
assets that you’re virtually coming to the bank with as part of 
your business plan, I would accept that. 
 
In the event that a contingency is not needed and the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is virtually intact, how will that be shown at 
the end of your business plan term, March 31, 2001? And I 
know you’ve covered some of the detail before, but just for my 
information again, would you repeat how that will go, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. In fact it’s a very 
good question. 
 
What we have been doing since about 1995 is putting out a 
four-year plan in every budget that will deal with projected 
revenues, projected expenditures, and so on. But dealing with 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund specifically, in the budget 
document this year for the first time, at page 49 of the Budget 
Address book, there’s a description of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. And then at page 51 there’s a forecast. 
 
Now of course as the member knows, because the member’s 
had a lot of experience in business and government both, I 
think, and farming, a forecast is a forecast and we hope that 
we’ll do it as well or better than we forecast. But in any event, 
at page 51 of the Budget Address we forecast that at the end of 
the fiscal year we’re in now, so at March 31, 2001, the plan is 
that we will have $405 million in that fund. 
 
And then in the next fiscal . . . And so in answer to the question, 
what will I report next year — I hope to report next year that 
that money’s in the fund, that we haven’t drawn on it more than 
we say, because we’re not budgeting any draw on it this current 
year. 
 
But the following year, 2001-2002, we’re estimating that we 
will draw $55,000 out, and then the next year $30 million out, 
and the year after that $30 million out. So we’d be left with 
$290 million in the fund. 
 
And I think the member has actually described it quite well as a 
contingency fund. If things go as we plan, that’s how it will 
work. If things don’t, then we may have to draw on it for other 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2000 

purposes. And of course neither I nor the member, nor I guess 
anybody else, knows how that will go. But we’re hoping we all 
do well. 
 
I might add that if our projections are correct and we maintain 
the fund down to the $290 million level as projected, which 
would be approximately 5 per cent of our revenues, we would 
not be putting more money into the fund next year or the year 
after — we would simply be leaving it at that level. But if we 
had to draw it down, then we would have to budget next year to 
supplement the fund. 
 
So that’s probably a little more detailed than the member asked 
for, but I hope that the information is helpful. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister, that is helpful. 
Then pursuing that same line of thought that I was trying to get 
my head around, that protected amount of money in this 
particular budget, you had to find revenue somewhere else to 
offset that particular asset that is being set aside. 
 
And I notice in the statement of revenues that a lot of the 
estimated revenues for this particular year — and I’m referring 
to page 12 of the statement of estimates — on that particular 
page I noticed that under the heading, taxes, several of those 
items have been increased rather substantively, the corporation 
capital tax, corporation income tax in particular. Sales tax of 
course has been talked about extensively up till now. 
 
And under the heading, others, there’s a 30 per cent tax increase 
from estimated 1999-2000. Is that the area that you have 
projected that you’re going to increase — in that 30 per cent 
increase — is that the area where a lot of these sudden surprise 
fee increases and maybe service reductions can be . . . I can 
assume that they come out of that particular category, other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, that’s not correct, Mr. Deputy Chair 
. . . Or is it Mr. Chair? Mr. Chair. The other is other taxes, but 
what we’ve been debating in the legislature with respect to 
some of the other matters, they would not be in here. The other 
is going up mainly because of the changes to the insurance 
premium tax which are detailed in the budget, and that amounts 
to approximately $14 million more and that takes you from the, 
basically, the 50 to the 65. 
 
I should mention to the member also, it’s always a bit — well 
not misleading — but confusing to look at the income tax of the 
. . . the corporate capital or the corporate income or the 
individual income tax estimates in the budget, the reason being 
that those revenues are dependent very much on when the 
federal government sends us the money. 
 
And they send us the money . . . like for this current year we 
really may get that money for the next three years, if you know 
what I mean. And the figures here with respect to the corporate 
capital, the corporate income, and the individual income tax, 
they will be as reflective as what may have gone on a year ago 
or two years ago as they will be about the rate of income tax 
this year, if you see what I mean. 
 
But in answer to your question about other, that would mainly 
be with respect to the insurance premium tax changes and that 
is detailed in the budget under other revenue initiatives at page 

40. That would be the main change. 
 
And you’ll see by the way, at the bottom of page 40, a 
description of the various revenue initiatives introduced in the 
budget. And the other category basically reflects the items 
there, and not the other items that we’ve been debating which 
would be reflected in the figures I was referring to earlier today 
in the House, which are at page 64. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one or 
two more items that I would like to clarify and it’s kind of in 
the general sense. I would like to reserve the opportunity, as we 
all will I’m sure, to ask more specific questions in different 
departments and so on. 
 
But I guess the one thing that still has me a little bit confused is 
because of that . . . and it goes back to that Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund thing again. Because that was protected money set aside 
as a contingency fund, in order to show the surplus for the year 
that you did you had to generate other revenues to offset that set 
aside in the books, but that’s set aside anyway. And I guess that 
was . . . the tax question was basis of that. 
 
But I’ve also noticed that under the revenue, again on page 11 
of . . . sorry, 12 of your document, transfers from Crown 
equities has shown a substantive increase. Crown Investments 
Corporation looks like, from last year’s estimate, has increased 
about 20 per cent, and other enterprises and funds have 
increased quite substantively — it looks like up to the 40 per 
cent range. 
 
Can you tell me how that fits in with having to set aside that 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund but achieving the revenue from 
somewhere else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund comes 
largely from the Liquor and Gaming Authority funds — 
retained earnings that are being transferred in, Mr. Chair, from 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority to the General Revenue Fund. 
And the member is correct. There is a sum of $695 million in 
retained earnings that’s being transferred into the General 
Revenue Fund, and from that amount the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund will be transferred out. And really it’s being created out of 
those retained earnings. 
 
And then some of those retained earnings are going elsewhere 
because we’re putting $405 million into the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. But we also have $150 million going into the health 
transition fund and $50 million into the forest fire contingency 
fund and so on. So the other monies are being spent in other 
ways. But the Fiscal Stabilization Fund really largely comes out 
of those retained earnings. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I’m going 
to reserve further questions at this time. Yes, and I would at this 
time if I could, thank the officials for joining the minister in 
helping us understand this budget. 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d just like to thank 
the members of the opposition for their questions which I think 
are very helpful, and I’d like to thank them for their 



April 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

co-operation in getting the appropriation Bill passed, as I’m 
hoping it will be passed. 
 
And I’d like to thank my officials in the Department of Finance 
who I think do a very excellent job for the people of the 
province, and I thank them for their assistance today. Thank 
you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I would like to move, Mr. Chair, 
resolution no. 2 which reads: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2001, the sum 
of $915,254,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 21, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2001, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:39 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 21 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 2001. 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:41 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I adjourn, I would just like to wish 
once again all members well. The time has sped quickly to this 
point where you can enjoy a weekend with your family, your 
constituents. And once again I look forward to your exuberance 
when you return on Monday. This House stands adjourned till 
Monday at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:42 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


