





























































Hansard: May 25, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1331 
 May 25, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDING 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to stand in the House on behalf of the citizens of Gull 
Lake and area to present a petition requesting that the 
government reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure also to rise today on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
particularly in the areas of Cudworth and Saskatoon who would 
like to see improved cellular telephone services. And their 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon and Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the increasing cost of fuel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from my 
community of Melfort but also from Saskatoon, Naicam, and 
Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people of Cut Knife 
and Neilburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Swift Current; 
Virden, Manitoba; Preeceville, Saskatchewan; and even places 
in Ontario. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people from Swift Current, and actually a few other locales 
concerned about the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, from Regina, and Cabri. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition for citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And I present this on behalf of citizens from Swift Current and 
Lucky Lake. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I also would like to read a petition concerning 
the high fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

From the good people of Swift Current. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
about concern with the high fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from Saskatoon, Delisle, Davidson, and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to read a petition of 
citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly 
pray. 
 

The petitioners are from Swift Current; Prince Albert; Regina; 
Stewart Valley; Winnipeg, Manitoba; Peace River, Alberta; and 
Thunder Bay, Ontario. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I rise to bring a petition to your attention to stop 
municipal reserve account confiscation. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of the 
rural municipality of Paddockwood, No. 520. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to bring forth a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents 
a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners are from the good cities of Shell Lake, 
Leask, and Langham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with forced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by individuals from Moose Jaw, Lumsden, Chaplin, and 
Mortlach. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 

 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 

 
To provide reliable cellular service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 

The Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Addley, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Estimates presents the first report of the said 
committee which is as follows. 
 

The committee considered estimates for the Legislative 
Assembly and adopted resolutions with respect to the 
Provincial Auditor, the Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate, Information and Privacy Commissioner, 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and for the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
And further, your committee recommends that upon 
concurrence of its report by the Assembly, the sums as 
reported and approved shall be included in the next 
Appropriation Bill for consideration by the Legislative 
Assembly. 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Watrous: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a notice of a 
written question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 51 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: with regard to the recent 
certification of Doepker Industries of Annaheim, 
Saskatchewan, how many employees of this company 
signed certification cards; and what percentage of the total 
workforce at this company at the time of certification was 
this? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 51 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many people in the 
Saskatchewan Health system currently treated for a 
Nephrotic Syndrome and Focal S. Glommerosiolous; how 
many of these people receive all or part of their treatment 
in another jurisdiction? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 51 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide detailed 
ambulance logs for the month of April showing the number 
of trips made to St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A couple of 
weeks ago I was very privileged to be able to introduce in this 
legislature, students from the Lakeridge School. Today, I would 
like to introduce students from the Lakeview School. 
 
Now these students, as you will know, are probably some of the 
very best students in one of the very best schools in the very 
best constituency in the absolutely most wonderful city in the 
best province in the best country in the world. 
 
There are 62 students from Lakeview School accompanied by 
their teachers: Ms. Block, Mme. Elbardouh, and Ms. 
Widenmaier. They are also accompanied by chaperones: Ms. 
Korolis, Ms. Yee, Ms. Davies, Ms. Turton, and one very special 
chaperone, Ms. Metz, who is related to one very special person 
in this legislature. Ms. Metz’s sister sits as the member for 
Watrous constituency. Her nephew is also here today and I 
would like everyone to welcome the Lakeview students to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to . . . It’s quite an honour to introduce the very best school 
chaperon, which is my sister, and the very best little nephew, 
Adam Metz. It’s too bad they didn’t have the very best 
representative for the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 32 students 
from the Lashburn High School in my constituency in Lashburn. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re sitting in the east gallery and I would, I 
would welcome them and highlight the fact that it is a very long 
trip from Lashburn to Regina and we appreciate their attendance 
here. 
 
And I’d like to also welcome teachers Tracy Doering and Mary 
Fraser. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you in the west gallery — we have 19 students from Pelican 
Narrows in northern Saskatchewan; along with 19 students are 
teachers Shaunna Currie, Linda Linklater, Delores Como, and 
chaperone Alphonse Dorion. 
 
In Cree, Mr. Speaker, a special welcome and I will say, Tawaw 
Opawigischiguneek. Opawigischiguneek is the name of Pelican 
Narrows. It is actually, in Cree, means the narrows of fear, in 
reference to a famous battle that took place years and years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a tremendous pleasure to see the northern 
students who have travelled over 400 miles to come and visit 
Regina. When I was talking to them, of course, they corrected 
me when I looked at my reports and it said grade 4 to 6 and one 
of them emphasized they were actually grade 3 to 5 she told me. 
Now they travelled along to Regina. I asked them how many 
had their first trip to Regina? About two-thirds of them had 
their first trip to Regina. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome the students and the 
teachers and the chaperone from Pelican Narrows: tawaw, 
Opawigischiguneek. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Child Find Day 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today in recognition of Child 
Find Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the month of May has been declared Green 
Ribbon of Hope Month. There are many important causes that 
we must all be aware of, Mr. Speaker, but I cannot think of a 
cause that is more important than reuniting a missing child with 
their family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in Canada over 50,000 children were 
reported missing. And those of us in this Assembly who have 
raised children recognize that there is not a more fear-filled 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

experience than not knowing where your child is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we wear green ribbons as a symbol of many 
things. We wear the ribbon to raise awareness of the growing 
problem of missing children, we wear them as a symbol of hope 
for those whose precious children are missing, and finally we 
wear these ribbons as a reminder to pray for these children — 
pray that they are safe from harm’s way and that they will one 
day return home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also take this opportunity to commend 
Child Find Saskatchewan on all of their hard work and 
dedication in assisting families to search for their missing 
children. Without the commitment from members of this 
organization, many missing children would be forgotten and 
just become a statistic. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Find Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Child Find 
Saskatchewan in partnership with Child Find Canada is holding 
its ninth annual Green Ribbon of Hope campaign. The 
campaign which began earlier this month continues throughout 
May. 
 
Each year in Canada police departments receive thousands of 
reports of missing children who are classified as runaways or 
the victims of parental or stranger abductions. 
 
In 1986 the Solicitor General of Canada declared May 25 to be 
Missing Children’s Day in Canada. The Green Ribbon of Hope 
campaign which runs for the entire month of May, is designed 
to draw public awareness to the issue of missing children in 
Canada. 
 
The Green Ribbon of Hope is recognized as a symbol to 
remember missing children and to seek their safe return. It is 
also used as an expression of our thoughts for missing children, 
their families, and friends. 
 
Proceeds generated by the green ribbon campaign will enable 
Child Find to continue their mandate to reduce the incidence of 
missing children through education, prevention, and local 
programs. 
 
I’m sure all members will join me in supporting the efforts of 
the Green Ribbon of Hope campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Monument to Honour Canadian Soldiers 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 
House to make all members aware of a very important event. At 
this time, even as this House is sitting, the remains of an 
Unknown Soldier are being received by Ottawa from Vimy 
Ridge in France. 
 
This weekend these remains will be laid to rest at the Tomb of 

the Unknown Soldier, a new monument erected in honour of the 
more than 100,000 Canadian soldiers killed in the 20th century 
wars. This monument will serve as a tribute to the great 
sacrifices that Canadian soldiers have made. 
 
It is important to note that the soil from provinces across 
Canada was sent to Ottawa to be used as part of this monument. 
Here in Saskatchewan, soil was lifted from the grounds of the 
war memorial located near the legislature. 
 
As a young province Saskatchewan was proud and honoured to 
join in the fight for peace and freedom. Even today many of our 
regiments are still being recognized and are well respected 
throughout the world. Who can forget the South Saskatchewan 
Regina Regiment or the Royal Regina Rifles, just to name two. 
 
As one who’s had members of a family serve in one of the 
wars, I know how important it is to recognize the significance 
of events such as this. 
 
As Canadians we must all be united in our continuing quest for 
peace. Our country was built on the principle of peace and the 
value of freedom. We must not forget those who fought so 
valiantly to protect and preserve this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Saskatchewan Farmers 
 

Mr. Wartman: — A little update, Mr. Speaker. The members 
on this side of the House would like to congratulate 
Saskatchewan farmers on seeding more than 80 per cent of this 
year’s crop. This is well ahead of the five-year average of 43 
per cent and last year’s progress of 28 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to update the House on the 
Canada-Saskatchewan adjustment payment activities. 
 
Of the applications that were mailed out on April 13, 2000, 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance has received back from farmers 
about 44,000 applications, and of those, has processed just over 
42,000. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, that SCIC (Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation) has paid out approximately 95 per cent 
of the applications they received back. 
 
To date, just over $175 million has been paid out to 
Saskatchewan farmers to help with this spring’s seeding. This 
$175 million is in addition to the $40 million in tax cuts on farm 
fuel and education land tax, $300 million available under the 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program, and 
$400 million available under the spring credit advance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is that these programs that have 
been put in place as a lifeline for seeding the 2000 crop are 
working. Saskatchewan farmers have now seeded more than 80 
per cent of the 2000 crop, which is ahead of last year and the 
five-year average. 
 
Congratulations and best wishes to everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

Swift Current Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Swift Current 
business community has many things going for it. It has a 
collective determination to successfully compete in a free 
market. It has diversified with strong retail, service, and 
manufacturing sectors, and its compassion for the community 
knows no bounds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it can also brag of the strongest business 
associations in our province — the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce. Mr. Speaker, last week I had the privilege of 
attending the second annual SCABEX (Swift Current 
Achievement in Business Excellence) awards, and I can assure 
that all of the qualities that I have mentioned above were clearly 
on display during those business excellence awards. All sectors 
of our business community were also represented in the 
award-winning categories. 
 
Congratulations to 7th Heaven Hair Design for property 
appearance, Stark & Marsh for community involvement, Kurt’s 
Take Out & Catering service for the heritage award. The new 
business award went to Legault Manufacturing. The customer 
service award, Mr. Speaker, resulted in a tie: the Pharmasave 
and Sentiments Gifts & Crafts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the business of the year in Swift Current last 
year was awarded to National Manufacturing. A hearty 
congratulations to Bill Medland and all of his staff at National 
Manufacturing, one of our country’s largest fastener 
manufacturers. They successfully compete around the globe, 
Mr. Speaker, with both American and Far East firms. 
 
And congratulations as well to all the businesses who were 
nominated and to the Swift Current Chamber of Commerce for 
the second annual SCABEX awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Area Businesses 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. It seems like we are always bringing good news 
into the House about the Saskatchewan economy and the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well here’s another good bit of news, right from the backyards 
of the members of Weyburn-Big Muddy and Estevan. In the 
May 17 edition of the Weyburn Review, the title, “Rural 
business affected by seeding and oil activities: Sales average to 
above-average” appears. 
 
The first paragraph goes on to say that businesses in the region 
surrounding Weyburn report that their activities have been 
average to above average compared to last year. This article 
credits seeding activities and a resurgence in the oil industry as 
contributing factors. 
 
When business people in the area were interviewed for the 
article, they stated that they have noticed a definite difference in 
business compared to last year. One business person stated that: 
 

It’s been busy all winter, much better than last year. If I 

had to compare it to a year ago, it’s been substantially 
busier. 

 
So much for gloom and doom, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
economy is doing well. Most people in this province know that 
the sky is not falling, Mr. Speaker. They look at the positive 
things in our province, unless your name is Chicken Little of 
course, or you are a member of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 
Assembly today to talk about an important improvement to the 
Arm River constituency. The recent announcement by the 
Minister of Highways to resurface Highway 15 from Kenaston 
approximately 20 kilometres west is welcome news, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This stretch is long overdue for repair and has long been 
recognized as a hazard to motorists. It is good to see that this 
government has finally listened to my repeated requests that 
something be done to this maze of potholes and broken surface. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project is due for completion in mid-July and 
will employ about 45 people. I must remind the Minister of 
Highways that I’ve several other highways in my constituency 
that are in bad shape or worse, such as Highway 19 and 
Highway 44. I would hope the minister would strongly consider 
these and other Saskatchewan highways as a way to improve 
employment across Saskatchewan and providing safer 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is simply a matter of priorities as to whether or 
not our highway infrastructure is improved. These better 
highways will ensure economic benefit and employment and 
traffic safety. I remain strongly committed to a better highway 
system in my constituency, and for this province. 
 
With the Highway 15 project underway the residents of Arm 
River can at least see a beginning to better a highway system. I 
will continue to press for larger commitment from this 
government to improve our provincial infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Teachers’ Collective Agreement 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Education. School teachers across this province have now 
rejected the tentative provincial collective agreement. Their 
federation will be meeting to determine whether or not they’re 
going to go back to the bargaining table. 
 
Teachers know this NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
has underfunded the education system in this province. They 
have to live with the results daily. They know school boards 
have had to pass on their budget shortfalls to taxpayers. So the 
teachers are going to test your mettle. 
 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

Mr. Minister, in light of the rejection of the proposed 
settlement, what is your next step in reaching a new contract 
with Saskatchewan school teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly the member is correct that the tentative 
agreement was not ratified by 56 per cent. 
 
Obviously we’re disappointed. We recognize that negotiations 
have been going on since October; that many, many items have 
been negotiated and agreed to. Certainly the conciliation report 
where the member from the teachers’ federation was an 
economist from the Canadian Teachers’ Federation, all put 
forward unanimous endorsement of that conciliation board 
report, which was included in the tentative agreement. 
 
We believe that 7.2 per cent over two years was a fair package 
— obviously teachers do not believe that. And what we’re 
waiting to do now is to hear from the teachers’ federation, and 
I’m hopeful that we can resume negotiations as soon as 
possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people waiting 
for a decision on the teachers’ contract. Teachers are 
questioning the government’s commitment to education. And 
the school boards are holding their breath because they’ve 
already set their mill rate for the year, and they don’t know 
what this final contract’s effect will have on them. 
 
Parents and students are wondering if the future holds strike 
action by the teachers. They are all at the mercy of you and your 
NDP government. 
 
So now we’re going to wait and see what your Liberal influence 
really has on the coalition caucus. 
 
Mr. Minister, the teachers have rejected a 7.2 per cent contract 
proposal. Are you willing to up the ante in light of the 
settlements imposed by SaskPower workers and the nurses 
recently? And if so, how much? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly we 
believe in collective bargaining on this side. We believe that the 
process should occur at the table; that the government trustees’ 
side and the teachers’ side have been negotiating in good faith, 
and we’re hopeful that this will continue. 
 
We also recognize that funding is an issue. Certainly funding is 
something that we’ve looked at. 
 
But we also recognize that in our budget we put forward 28.5 
million, budget over budget — 18.5 million on the foundation 
operating grant. And we recognize that the members opposite 
had said that they would provide funding based on inflation. 
Our funding is two to three times the rate of inflation, and it’s 
more than doubled over the last three to four years. 
 

So what does that mean when they ask a question about what 
we would do? Well, we know what they would do — they 
would provide no funding for teachers or education in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association has released the 2000 mill rate set by 
school districts across this province. Out of 53 rural school 
divisions, 32 raised the mill rate. Out of 17 town and district 
divisions, 9 raised the mill rate. And out of 22 urban school 
districts, 16 have already raised the mill rate. 
 
Mr. Minister, these increases do not include the final cost of the 
new contract for the teachers. Mr. Minister, school boards 
cannot go back to the ratepayers now. That deadline was May 5. 
 
Who is going to pay for the teachers’ settlement when it’s 
finally reached? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly we 
recognize that school divisions have set their mill rates. But I 
think the members opposite — and I’ve answered this question 
on several occasions — don’t understand the foundation 
operating grant. 
 
And we must, we must recognize that it is an equalization 
formula. And the commitment from this government was to 
provide money in excess of any negotiated teachers’ contract. 
And we will do that. 
 
What we have also said though is that some school divisions, 
because of high assessments . . . and to give an example. 
Weyburn Central, which has an assessment of 730,000 per 
student, has significant resources within its own jurisdiction to 
fund its education system. So the money from the provincial 
government is an equalization formula. And the fact of the 
matter is that the external review committee, which included 
trustees, SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials), teachers’ federation, etc., agreed that the 
money should go into the pool on the foundation operating 
grant, not the way they would have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there are 35 school divisions in 
this province are getting less money from the government this 
year than they did last year. The minister claims there is lots of 
money for education in the provincial budget, but that rings as 
false as his comments on no-fault insurance last week. 
 
We’ve all seen the effects of the budget of this year. Basically it 
was across the board increase for every taxpayer in this 
province. And we still don’t have the teachers’ contract settled 
yet. Mr. Minister, you’ve got a problem. 
 
School boards have their fiscal belt as tight as possible. Their 
only other recourse is going to be to cut programs or to fire 
teachers. 
 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

School teachers are facing large class loads, classroom 
numbers, added responsibility, and no contract. And provincial 
taxpayers have had enough taxes and enough of you. 
 
Mr. Minister, how are you going to meet the needs of the 
education system within the constraints of this provincial 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve itemized that the 
foundation operating grant is an equalization formula and that 
the external review committee which presented its report this 
past February agreed that any increases by the provincial 
government to the foundation operating grant would be based 
on an equalization formula. 
 
But I remind the members, I remind the members opposite that 
their program in the last election, their platform provided no 
funding. And the pamphlet from the Education critic did not 
even mention education. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we have their cousins in Ontario 
and Nova Scotia, and let me just read some things from The 
Toronto Star here: 
 

Harris Tories heading for war with teachers. 
 
Hundreds of Nova Scotia teachers lose jobs because their 
provincial government provided no new funding. 
 

Our provincial government increased funding by $18.5 million. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Office Accommodation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last answer just 
talked about so-called cousins. Well I would suggest that 
individual should realize he has no brothers or sisters left in his 
party anywhere in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
SaskEnergy. Just the other day, Mr. Speaker, we learned that 
SaskEnergy customers will likely face another huge rate hike 
this fall. Meanwhile, what are SaskEnergy executives doing to 
control their own internal costs, Mr. Speaker? They’re shopping 
around for more expensive office space in downtown Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, we understand that SaskEnergy is very close to 
approving a move to the Wascana Energy building. Some of the 
current tenants in the Wascana building have already received 
their notices to vacate to make room. 
 
Mr. Minister, will SaskEnergy be relocating its head office to 
the Wascana Energy building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to receive a 
question from that member about SaskEnergy that has nothing 

to do with pipelines. 
 
Basically SaskEnergy, last summer, put out a public request last 
July, about 10 months ago, saying that in the year 2002 they 
will be looking for corporate office space. And they made a 
request for proposals. That’s a process that takes a long time 
and that’s why they started three years before the end of their 
lease. They’re still in that process and at this point there’s 
nothing further to report. But the process will continue like it 
always does, in a fair, consistent manner. And that’s what’s 
going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well he talked a bit 
about process and I think there’s a few more things we need to 
know and that he needs to report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re wondering, why is it necessary to move in 
the first place? SaskEnergy has been in its current location for 
several years now. Why not just stay there? The move alone is 
going to cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. Why is that 
necessary? 
 
Mr. Minister, how much will it cost to relocate SaskEnergy’s 
entire head office to the new location? Why can’t you just stay 
where you are right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is a 
process that involves all of the people who have space available 
making proposals to this corporation, and I assume that would 
include the existing space. Nothing has been finalized at this 
point. 
 
What I would say though is that one of the difficulties that we 
have had as a government over the last number of years, in fact 
since 1991, is sorting out all of the leases that the members 
opposite entered into. And we are in a situation where we don’t 
want to be stuck with any of the kinds of things that we had in 
1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Interesting comment about his problem that 
he had with sorting out leases. So part of his solution is to look 
for the most expensive lease in the city. Rather strange. Very 
troubling, Mr. Minister. At a time when SaskEnergy rates are 
on the rise, SaskEnergy executives are moving into some of the 
most premium office space in Regina. Obviously this is going 
to cost more than they’re paying right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you table the document to show how much 
SaskEnergy is currently paying for office space, and how much 
they will be paying once they move into the Wascana Energy 
building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is a 
process that takes some time and eventually there will be 
appropriate times to report all of the things that are being talked 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

about. But the importance is that we do this in a way where we 
look for requests broadly and not end up with some of the 
difficulties that we had from earlier this last decade. 
 
And so what I would say is, that we in the Crown sector and 
especially in SaskEnergy are very proud of the fact that we’re 
providing natural gas for the consumers in Saskatchewan, both 
residential and industrial, at rates which are the lowest in the 
country this year. We’re looking at dealing with the sharp spike 
in prices for next year, but we have some great deal of 
confidence in the people who are working on this that they will 
both provide good natural gas prices and a fair and efficient 
system of managing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister speaks 
of difficulties, well I’ll tell you who’s having difficulties. It’s 
the people in this particular province. 
 
SaskEnergy rates just went up and they’re going to go up again 
this fall. You’re creating most of the difficulties in this 
particular province. 
 
And now we learn that Ron Clark and his boys are shopping 
around for more expensive office space. You’d think that would 
bother them a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But I’m sure they’ll get 
over it as they relax in the sauna or work out in the 
state-of-the-art fitness room, Mr. Speaker, at the Wascana 
Energy building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people at SaskEnergy will be paid well enough 
that I’m sure they could afford a membership at the Y. I don’t 
think taxpayers should be paying to make sure they get a 
workout room and a sauna. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s wrong with the current place where 
SaskEnergy is at? Why do they have to move to the new 
building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the request 
for proposals for the initial process started almost a year ago. 
It’s an ongoing process. All of these various factors are 
involved in the review of what decisions are made. At this stage 
they’re still in the final parts of this process. At the appropriate 
time the results will be laid out. 
 
I think the important thing to acknowledge is that we need to 
end up with the best, fairest administration of how these 
companies work. And that’s what we seek to do. That will 
include reviewing all of the options that are available, because 
that’s the best way to do business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well maybe we 
should discuss the best way to do business. Those bids for the 
new location that he wants to move his company to were 
publicly requested. Therefore, Mr. Minister, will you table the 
proposals that you received? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the process 
that’s arranged for setting all of this out proceeds in a fashion 
that includes the review of all of the information, and at the 
appropriate times in that process, whatever information that is 
supposed to be publicly available will be publicly available. 
 
This is something that we have instituted as a government to 
deal with many of the problems that we inherited. And we’re 
pleased to say that we’ve been able to develop processes that 
are fair to all of the people in the province in a way that allows 
us to provide the best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
SaskEnergy’s current home is moderate office space. Wascana 
Energy building, Mr. Speaker, is premium office space. Clearly 
it’s going to cost a lot more money. 
 
You’re looking for about 130,000 square feet of space. If that 
extra cost was just $10 a square foot more, that’s $1.3 million a 
year, Mr. Speaker; 10-year contract, that’s $13 million. That’s a 
lot of money, Mr. Speaker, just so Ron Clark can sit in a sauna 
an open up his pores. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much more will it cost SaskEnergy to move 
into the Wascana building? Will you table the current contract 
and the new contract so we can see what the difference really 
is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it always surprises me when 
the members opposite come out and attack competition. That’s 
what a request for a proposal is, competition. What you have is 
a situation where you ask people to provide results. So I just 
don’t understand what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I was unable to hear the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that we have been 
involved in providing the process that we have around office 
space is to deal with the kinds of issues that we inherited when 
we took over government. 
 
We don’t want to get in that kind of a mess again. And what we 
do want to have is a situation where the process will provide the 
kind of place that we need for this business. 
 
Our goal is to provide safe, reliable natural gas for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Through SaskEnergy we’re going to continue to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Safety of Water Supply 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Minister, people across this country are alarmed about the 
situation in Walkerton, Ontario. So far there have been five 
people die after the town’s water supply became contaminated 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

with E. coli bacteria. Ten people are still in critical condition, 
and hundreds of people have been treated for symptoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been confirmed today that the local 
treatment plant in Ontario knew of the contamination several 
days before they notified the public. 
 
Mr. Minister, what testing and reporting procedure does the 
provincial government have in place to monitor the water 
quality and ensure that a Saskatchewan community does not 
have the same experience that has happened in Walkerton, 
Ontario? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
has a very good tracking system and a follow-up system. 
Municipalities are required by Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management to submit water samples to the 
provincial laboratory on a routine basis for testing. If the results 
have higher than acceptable levels of contamination, repeat 
testing is done as soon as possible. And SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) notifies the 
municipality and the local medical health officer if the repeat 
results are positive. And an appropriate action is initiated 
immediately, such as a boiling water advisory to the 
communities. 
 
And SERM is also developing a mandatory program for water 
system operator certification that will be introduced this spring 
to enhance the current voluntary system of certification and 
provide more public assurance of a safe drinking water supply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this outbreak follows recent 
reports that water quality in Saskatchewan are below acceptable 
levels. 
 
In 1999, 306 out of 528 municipal treatment plants tested 
positive for bacteria. Hans Peterson of the Safe Drinking Water 
Foundation in Saskatoon says overall drinking water quality in 
this province is quite poor. And he is deeply concerned about 
how water is being used and treated in Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
In fact the Saskatchewan Water Corp recently presented a study 
saying that 99 per cent of tested drinking water sources for 
individual use would fail one or more criteria set out in the 
Canadian Drinking Water Guidelines. Madam Minister, why 
are provincial drinking water sources failing common tests, and 
what are you doing about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said before, we do have a process in 
place that municipalities follow, and we do have follow-up and 
we do have tracking. And more detail on the actual process is 
when we do have positive results that show higher than normal 
contaminates, the testing is redone. 
 
And then the municipality is sent back the positive results and 
the medical health officer gets involved. Our provincial medical 
health officer says we do have the lowest rates in the country. 
And we keep very current on our water testing. Each 

municipality is mandated to follow those protocols and they do 
so, with the provincial lab. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
they’re so busy looking at processes that they’re failing to look 
at the reports. Mr. Speaker, we may not have suffered an 
outbreak of E. coli in Saskatchewan so far, but there are other 
health concerns that officials directly attribute to poor water 
quality. 
 
The Safe Drinking Water Foundation believes unsafe drinking 
water is tied to the fact that Saskatchewan’s infant mortality 
rate is twice as high as other provinces, and 50 per cent higher 
than the national average. 
 
It is the responsibility of local communities and health districts 
to deliver and monitor the water in small towns. But that means 
quality varies widely across the province, and so may health 
symptoms caused by poor water. 
 
Madam Minister, what is your government doing to monitor 
health problems that may be attributed to areas where drinking 
water is below standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, I’ll repeat my answer from the 
last two times the question was asked. 
 
We do have a very strong set of protocols that the 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management and 
Sask Health and the districts participate in. And if there are . . . 
we do look at a case by case, risk-management approach and 
look at things like treatment, distribution systems, the water 
source, the connections. All those sorts of things are looked at 
in detail, and then we do follow the process. 
 
If there are positive results coming back from the provincial lab, 
then the municipality is notified of that, the medical . . . local 
medical health officer is notified, and then certain processes do 
kick into place, like the boiling water advisory, and continuing 
on depending what the bacteria or what the contaminant is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister keeps 
giving the same answer for a different question, and I think 
that’s where the problem begins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have two government, two government 
departments overseeing water quality in this province. SERM 
says if you have a water system that is failing a bacteria test, 
you shouldn’t panic. But what about over the long term — 
should you panic then? 
 
In this province the last year about 60 per cent of water 
treatment plants failed bacteria tests. That doesn’t sound like a 
very good record to me. 
 
Sask Health says that they may be sure water quality meets 
provincial objectives. But do those objectives include passing 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

bacterial tests? Sask Health has also downplayed the 
seriousness of the number of water treatment plants that have 
failed bacteria tests. 
 
Does your government have any plans to ensure safe quality, 
healthy drinking water for the rest of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. None of us are 
interested in panicking. What I have said is that Saskatchewan 
has a very good tracking system and follow-up. 
 
Each municipality is . . . has the protocols that they should 
follow. Our medical health officers have protocols that they 
should follow. And people should be reassured that we are 
tracking this system and are keeping good watch on what is in 
our water and where it is and what the problems are and doing 
our best to fix them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan Party 
members are receiving ever escalating numbers of calls to their 
offices concerning the deplorable state of Saskatchewan 
highways. Your government simply isn’t doing enough to 
ensure our highways are safe to drive on. 
 
Last week the Canadian Taxpayers Federation released a 
nation-wide study comparing the amount each province 
collected in gas tax to the amount each province spent on fixing 
highways. And where did Saskatchewan rank? We ranked dead 
last. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan highways are a disaster. How can 
you say you are addressing the problem when the study shows 
that we’re in dead last? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advice the 
House and to inform the member that this year we’ll be 
spending more than 80 per cent of the net revenue we take in 
from gas tax on the roads and highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can report to the House and inform the 
member, Mr. Speaker, that this year we’ll be spending the 
highest amount ever on our roads and highways in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s as a result of the budget that the 
members opposite voted against, Mr. Speaker. They voted 
against the investment in roads and highways that we know we 
have to make in this province. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Speaker, what have they been calling 

for? They’ve been calling for less money spent on roads and 
highways in the province because, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been 
calling for a reduction in funds available to fix the roads and 
highways. We’re going to continue with the job of building the 
highway system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskPower and ATCO Power Partnership 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House today to announce an innovative new 
partnership that will generate electricity and jobs for the people 
of Saskatchewan and business opportunities within our Crown 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s development arm, SaskPower 
International, and ATCO Power of Alberta will be developing a 
world-class cogeneration facility in Saskatchewan. It will be 
built at the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s Cory mine 
near Saskatoon. 
 
SaskPower will produce . . . will purchase the electricity 
generated at the plant, while the Potash Corporation will use the 
resulting steam to help meet their energy requirements at the 
Cory mine. The plant will add 228 megawatts to 
Saskatchewan’s power supply, Mr. Speaker, enabling 
SaskPower to help meet the future energy needs of our province 
and providing opportunities for export sales. 
 
SaskPower’s top priority is delivering safe, reliable, 
cost-effective power to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
corporation is committed to the highest standards of due 
diligence in developing new sources of supply. 
 
This proposal, together with the upgrading of the Queen 
Elizabeth power station announced last week indicate the solid 
long-range planning that SaskPower has undertaken to meet the 
province’s energy needs in the coming years. This cogeneration 
project, Mr. Speaker, is driven by a solid business case that 
offers both environmental and economic benefits to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that cogeneration is a very cost-effective 
and environmentally friendly way to generate electricity. 
Cogeneration captures waste heat from the generation process 
and uses that heat to produce steam for industrial use. Through 
this process, Mr. Speaker, less fuel is burned to generate 
electricity and the fuel that is burned is used more completely. 
These two factors reduce the volume of greenhouse gases 
vented to the atmosphere. 
 
In addition to the environmental advantages, this cogeneration 
project offers important business benefits. By partnering with 
industry to build this cogeneration facility, SaskPower is 
delivering on its commitment to serve customers while sharing 
capital costs and generating economic spinoffs for the province. 
The Saskatchewan economy will benefit from an estimated 220 
person years of work to build this facility as well as the work 
associated with its ongoing operation. 
 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

On a business level, this project also speaks to the value of the 
relationship between SaskPower and its subsidiary, SaskPower 
International. As the corporation’s development arm, 
SaskPower International works to diversify and grow 
SaskPower’s revenues. In keeping with its commitment to due 
diligence, SaskPower International has selected a project 
partner with impeccable credentials. 
 
ATCO Power is an experienced developer of cogeneration 
projects. Together, both SaskPower International and ATCO 
worked diligently to determine the optimum site for this project. 
I’m sure my learned colleagues across the floor will agree with 
me, Mr. Speaker, when I say SaskPower International has taken 
the initiative to develop a world-class cogeneration project that 
we in Saskatchewan can be proud of. 
 
This project, Mr. Speaker, is a first step in establishing what is 
hoped will become a long-term relationship between SaskPower 
International and ATCO. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my 
colleagues will agree that this project is also a powerful 
example of how government and private sector can work 
together to invest in our province and achieve business success. 
 
I congratulate all those involved on a collaborative effort and 
will watch with great interest as construction gets underway on 
the project, which is targeted for completion by November, 
2002. I commend SaskPower and SaskPower International for 
their ongoing efforts on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
and wish you every future success in the future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in the last 
decade or two, I think the concept of cogen has become more 
popular. I think it is something that everyone should be looking 
at. It’s just highly unfortunate that it’s taken this government 
this long to come up with the first two announcements on 
cogen. 
 
For years, for decades, there’s been all sorts of ideas and 
proposals put forward to the NDP government in this particular 
province on cogen. And time after time after time, they’ve 
turned those down. So it’s good to see that they’ve finally seen 
a glimmer of light in this particular area and are now 
considering some cogen possibilities. 
 
The other thing that’s of concern in the statement that was just 
made, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that as they looked for groups to 
cogen with and take care of the project, they couldn’t find 
anyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to do the work for them. 
They had to look out of province. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the reason for that is that 
this NDP government in the past years has been so negative 
about cogen that all the cogeneration people essentially have 
left this province and they had to go looking outside of 
Saskatchewan to do that. 
 
So the cogeneration concept is a great concept. This 
government is to be commended that they finally decided to 
take a step. It’s too bad it’s 10 years late. It’s too bad they’ve 
chased out a lot of the other developers in that area who had to 

go elsewhere to look for work and to look for other 
governments that were more receptive to cogeneration. 
 
But we are looking forward to what’s happening. I think the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to be pleased to know that 
there’s going to be a larger supply of locally produced 
electricity in the province. That’s good as well. 
 
And on a last positive note, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the 
statement that was made and I’d like to read that from the 
statement I’ve given, the statement the minister made where he 
says, I’ll leave the technical aspects of cogeneration to the 
experts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just good news. We wouldn’t want to hear 
about big parts and small parts again on how this cogeneration 
is going to work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 71, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 144 and no. 145 converted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 – The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000 
/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi d'interprétation de 1995 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Interpretation Act, 1995 establishes rules that 
apply to the interpretation and application of all other Acts and 
regulations. It’s being amended to clarify and codify the law 
respecting the ability of a minister to exercise powers and duties 
through his or her officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the law respecting a minister’s ability to carry out 
powers and duties through his or her officials is currently found 
in both The Interpretation Act, 1995 and the common law. Mr. 
Speaker, the 1995 Act for example expressly provides that a 
minister’s powers, other than the power to make regulations, 
may be carried out by a deputy minister. 
 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

However, the common law, Mr. Speaker, has two inconsistent 
themes. In some cases the courts have acknowledged that the 
minister’s responsibility is not to actually perform every duty 
imposed on him or her by the law, but to be responsible to the 
legislature for insuring that they are done properly. However, in 
other cases the courts have suggested that in naming the 
minister in the Act, the legislature has chosen him or her as the 
appropriate person to carry out the function and the power or 
duty cannot be delegated in the absence of express authority to 
do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment codifies the first theme. It will 
confirm the ability of all ministers to carry out their duties 
through appropriate departmental officials. It’ll also confirm 
that ministers are responsible to insure that legislative duties are 
carried out by authorized and qualified persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will eliminate the need for 
sub-delegation provisions in other legislation and accordingly, 
express powers of delegation currently found in some Acts and 
regulations will be consequentially repealed or amended in this 
Act and its companion Act, The Interpretation Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill in some ways codifies and in other ways changes a 
long-standing parliamentary tradition. The minister, when 
carrying out the duties of the minister in relationship to the Acts 
under that minister’s control, is normally expected to perform 
those duties and has been delegating authority to the deputy 
minister and down the chain of command. 
 
But as the minister said, in some cases the courts direct that 
those duties will be carried out by the minister in some cases 
that relate directly to that portfolio. And the minister is now 
going to change that with this particular Act so that a qualified 
person, the deputy minister or so forth down the line, may carry 
out any and all of those duties. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the minister didn’t 
comment on on this particular Act was who is going to be 
responsible. In the changes that have happened in the last eight 
years, eight and a half years since this government has been in 
power, we have seen more and more of the ministers not 
accepting responsibility. The fact is the government refuses to 
accept responsibility for any of their actions for the last eight 
and a half years. 
 
Here we’re going to see in this particular Act the authority to 
delegate further responsibilities, further actions — not 
responsibilities — further actions within the departments. But in 
no place, Mr. Speaker, does it talk about responsibility — 
accepting responsibility for the actions carried out by that 
department or by that minister’s delegate. 
 
And we believe that’s a serious failing, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has practised to the nth degree — the denial of 

responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill needs to be looked at to determine exactly 
what ramifications it’s going to have on the parliamentary 
process and on the acceptance of responsibility by the ministers 
of the Crown. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I’d like leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, over on your gallery, 
Speaker’s gallery, I noticed that there’s a special visitor to the 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, that happens — and all members — 
that happens to be Chief Pelletier from Cowessess. And along 
with Chief Pelletier is the young Vice-Chief there, Joey 
Pelletier. And as well, we have Eddie Charles, a nephew. Let’s 
have all the members please welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Interpretation Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
today to move second reading of The Interpretation Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. The interpretation Act, 
2000, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve just introduced introduces 
amendments that clarify and codify the law respecting the 
ability of the minister to exercise powers and duties through his 
or her officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments eliminate the need for 
subdelegation provisions in other legislation. Accordingly, 
express powers of delegation currently found in some Acts and 
regulations will be consequentially repealed or amended by this 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
make consequential amendments arising from the enactment of 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a corollary piece of legislation with Bill No. 50, therefore 
the same comments, Mr. Speaker, apply. There is a need for the 
government to accept responsibilities for its actions. And we 
need to determine whether or not that is included as part of the 
Bill that the ministers are going to accept responsibility for 
themselves and their departments, and that somehow they’re not 
simply trying to avoid accepting the responsibilities of the 
actions they carry out on behalf of the Crown. 
 
Therefore I move adjourned debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission 
provides, as you know, legal services for criminal and 
family-run matters to people who are financially unable to 
secure those services from their own resources. 
 
The current Legal Aid Act was proclaimed in 1983 and was last 
amended in 1989. The amendments being introduced today will 
help the commission to better address the evolving challenges 
and complexities of a changing legal aid plan — a plan that is 
an integral part of the justice system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Legal Aid Act currently includes the 
provision stating that the Legal Aid Commission’s clients may 
choose any lawyer in Saskatchewan to represent them if they 
are charged with a Criminal Code offence that’s punishable by 
life imprisonment — in other words, Mr. Speaker, in murder 
cases. 
 
In the last . . . in the past, the federal government made this one 
of the conditions of their cost-sharing agreements. This 
condition has now been removed. As a result, the provision is to 
be removed from The Legal Aid Act. 
 
Members, Mr. Speaker, will be interested to know that the 
reason the federal government changed the cost-sharing 
agreement was to provide provinces more flexibility to set their 
own policies respecting the types of cases where choice of 
counsel will be provided. The provision in the Act is deleted so 
that the lower . . . the Legal Aid Commission can, by policy, 
determine when the use of outside counsel is appropriate. 
 
I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are a number of other 
serious offences where no choice is provided, and it can be 
argued that providing choice only for murder draws an artificial 
line. 
 
It should also be noted that without the proposed change, the 
costs associated with providing choice in all murder cases will 
continue to rise, resulting in less Legal Aid funding being 
available for family law matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to advise the members that defence 
counsel have agreed to work with the commission in developing 
a new policy respecting the use of outside counsel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of Legal Aid and the role of the legal 
system itself in Saskatchewan continues to evolve as the 
province grows. The commission has grown and now employs 
132 staff located in 15 offices throughout the province, and over 
22,000 clients were served last year. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, the practice of law is becoming 
increasingly complex with restorative justice issues, sense — 
excuse me — sentencing circles, video and audio tape 
disclosure, Charter of Rights and Freedoms issues, conditional 
sentences, alternative dispute resolutions procedures, and so on. 

The Legal Aid Commission must continue to evolve to meet 
these increasingly complex challenges. 
 
Last fall, Mr. Speaker, a Saskatoon-based management 
consultant prepared a strategic needs assessment for the Legal 
Aid Commission. The report stated that, I quote: 
 

In comparison to other provinces, Saskatchewan is 
generally receiving good value for the money spent on 
legal aid. 

 
The key recommendations of this report, Mr. Speaker, known 
as the Rosten report, included the following: increased staffing, 
increase in the tariff to pay private lawyers, increased use of 
technology, implementation of a control and measurement 
system, and implementation of a quality control system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report recognized that the organization has 
reached a level of complexity that requires administrative 
adjustments. To address the commission’s growth, Mr. Speaker, 
the Bill proposes to separate the offices of chairperson and chief 
executive officer, and clearly the size and administrative 
challenges of this commission justifies a separation of the 
offices which will allow the chief executive officer to 
concentrate more fully on administration. This places the roles 
more in line with other public and private organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also proposes a number of administrative 
and housekeeping changes. For example, gender neutral 
languages adopted, the pension provisions are amended to 
reflect the current pension arrangements for commission 
employees, the ability of the commission to ask a client to 
contribute to the cost of his or her legal services extended . . . is 
extended to one year after the legal matter ends. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the federal government representative on the 
commission is removed at the request of the federal government 
to ensure a continuing dialogue amongst the jurisdictions of 
permanent working group on legal aid has been established and 
meets regularly. And it’s composed of representatives from all 
legal aid plans in Canada, all departments of Justice, and, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these modifications to the Act will ensure that the 
Legal Aid system in Saskatchewan can continue to serve its 
clients efficiently and effectively, and that the people of 
Saskatchewan will continue to receive good value for the 
money spent on legal aid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Legal Aid Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is of interest to 
us and the changes that is presented in Bill No. 63 here 
regarding Legal Aid, especially since there hasn’t been any 
changes since 1989. So some of the changes I think are 
probably welcome. 
 
We do have some concerns on some of them though, however, 
when you start talking about giving choice of lawyers and 
restricting the choice of lawyers through Legal Aid for a 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

particular client depending on their financial background. And I 
think we’ve had a number of cases in our province over the near 
future . . . recent future, that has really raised concerns in that 
area where whether the proper counsel was offered to people 
that were going through the court system. And it seems to in the 
long-term, if proper counsel wasn’t offered and proper defence 
wasn’t put forward, that when things get turned around years 
down the road that it ends up costing our province just a whole 
lot more than it ever would have if we would have allowed 
proper counsel in the first place. 
 
So there are some concerns with that area. And it seems like the 
Legal Aid issue comes up really quite often down to the lack of 
funding and whether there’s enough money in there to provide 
certain clients with the legal aid that they need. 
 
I think the other area that we have some concern of is when 
they talk about separating the chairperson and the CEO (chief 
executive officer) and separating it so one is more 
administrative compared to the other side. We have some 
concerns as to does that increase the staffing requirements 
because you’re separating it? Will we have twice as many 
people employed? And what we then tend to do is take it away 
from the front-line services — that we so often seen done by the 
government; it’s taken away from the front-line services, the 
lawyers that are actually defending the clients, and put in more 
into administration to supply two offices the proper framework 
that they need to operate properly. 
 
So those issues are of concern to us on this side, and we’ll be 
checking into them more as the time goes on. So right now I’d 
like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2). The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) deals with the licensing and 
registration of motor vehicles and their operators. The first 
amendments are part of the government initiative to get tough 
on drinking and driving while also ensuring fairness for all 
Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immediate licence suspensions have proven to be 
the most effective means of deterring drinking and driving. The 
first proposed amendment will implement a mandatory 90-day 
licence suspension for those individuals charged with operating 
a vehicle with a blood alcohol level over .08 and for individuals 
who refuse to provide a breath sample. 
 
This new 90-day licence suspension will begin seven days 
following a charge. This pre-conviction suspension will ensure 
that the penalty for drinking and driving follows immediately 
upon the act. The amendment eliminates the opportunity for a 
driver charged with drinking and driving to delay a court 
proceeding, thus delaying the consequence of conviction. 
Strengthening the legislation regarding licence suspensions in 
this way provides a clear message to the public that drinking 
and driving is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation will also be fair and balanced. The 
amendment will provide an avenue of appeal to the Highway 
Traffic Board for those whose licences have been suspended 
after being charged with driving with a blood alcohol level over 
.08 or refusing to provide a breath sample. 
 
The next amendment will bring Saskatchewan into line with 
federal drinking and driving legislation. On June 17, 1999, 
Criminal Code amendments received Royal Assent. This recent 
federal legislation increased the minimum mandatory 
suspension periods for individuals convicted of drinking and 
driving offences. For first-time offenders, the minimum 
sentence was set at one year. The federal legislation however 
allows for this minimum sentence to be reduced to three months 
if the first-time offender participates in an ignition interlock 
program. 
 
An ignition interlock is a blood alcohol measuring device that 
attaches to a vehicle’s ignition. Before the vehicle will start, the 
driver must pass the blood alcohol level test by blowing into the 
device. The program has already been implemented in Quebec, 
Alberta, Ontario, and the Yukon and has proven to be an 
effective way to reduce the numbers of repeat drinking and 
driving offenders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government supports initiatives that work to reduce 
drinking and driving in the province. Adopting the ignition 
interlock program in Saskatchewan will help to meet that goal. 
 
Another initiative to reduce the incidence of impaired driving is 
to target young drivers by implementing a zero tolerance policy 
for new drivers who drink and drive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the majority of new drivers, about 80 per cent, are 
under the legal drinking age of 19. Sixteen- to twenty-year-olds 
make up a tenth of the driving population, but are involved in 
over a quarter of the drinking and driving accidents in the 
province. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that new drivers who consume even a 
small amount of alcohol are at a high risk of being involved in 
an accident. Currently a 30-day administrative suspension is 
imposed on a new driver if found operating a motor vehicle 
with a blood alcohol reading of .04 or greater and a subsequent 
offence brings a 60-day suspension. 
 
The proposed amendment would enable SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) to suspend a new driver if he or she has 
consumed any amount of alcohol before driving. This zero 
tolerance policy would mean a 30-day suspension for a first 
offence and 60 days for a subsequent offence. 
 
The second component of the young driver strategy is the 
graduated licensing program. In 1996 a probationary driver 
program was introduced to monitor the driving record of new 
drivers. This program has not been successful in reducing the 
high accident rate or the traffic conviction rate of new or young 
drivers. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, SGI is proposing a graduated 
licensing program to replace existing programs for new drivers. 
A graduated licensing program phases in on-road driving 
allowing inexperienced drivers to gain experience under 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

low-risk conditions. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, newly licensed drivers must abide 
by conditions such as zero blood alcohol content and restricted 
nighttime driving. These restrictions are lifted as experience is 
gained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, British Columbia, Ontario, Newfoundland, Nova 
Scotia, New Brunswick, and Quebec have all introduced 
graduated licensing programs. Alberta and the Yukon are 
currently developing such programs. 
 
SGI anticipates that graduated licensing would reduce accidents 
and injuries involving new drivers by 10 to 20 per cent in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment provides 
the necessary legislative authority to develop and implement a 
graduated licence program in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another issue with implications for all Saskatchewan drivers is 
photo identification. SGI has had an optional photo 
identification program in place since 1990. Approximately 55 
per cent of Saskatchewan drivers have purchased a voluntary 
photo identification card to accompany their driver’s licence. 
 
Mandatory photo licensing is in place in most Canadian and US 
(United States) jurisdictions. New Brunswick is the only 
province with a voluntary photo ID (identification) program 
like Saskatchewan’s. 
 
The proposed amendment would implement mandatory photo 
ID requiring all Saskatchewan drivers to have photo 
identification by June 1, 2003. The introduction of mandatory 
photo identification addresses concerns about fraud and 
underage drinking that have been raised by the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority as well as law enforcement agencies around 
the province. 
 
The next amendments concern driver testing and training. As 
you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, SGI is responsible for the regulation 
of driver training schools and driver instructors. These 
amendments will aid SGI in ensuring appropriate standards are 
being met. Proposed amendments will permit minimum 
standards for driver instructors to be set out in regulation, and 
allow SGI greater authority to revoke a driver school certificate 
or a driver instructor certificate. 
 
Currently SGI can only suspend or revoke a driver training 
school certificate or a driver instructor certificate in cases where 
the individual or company is in violation of the Criminal Code, 
or has committed an offence under either The Highway Traffic 
Act or this Act. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, school boards or members of the 
public hesitate to issue a complaint or initiate a criminal charge 
against a driving school or driving instructor, even when there 
is evidence of wrongdoing. This means that SGI must hold off 
on a potential problem until the certificate of the school or 
instructor is up for renewal. This is not appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, and has implications for public safety. 
 
The amendment enables SGI to revoke a driver school or driver 
instructor certificate when appropriate. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, after warnings that performance standards or safety 

requirements are not being met. 
 
Another amendment deals with a public safety issue, the 
roadworthiness of vehicles driven on Saskatchewan roads. 
Under current legislation, Mr. Speaker, SGI is obligated to 
register vehicles even if they have been declared non-repairable 
by another province. The proposed amendment will give SGI 
the right to refuse to register vehicles deemed ineligible for 
registration in another jurisdiction. 
 
The next amendments outline new licensing requirements for 
taxis and buses. The first amendment will require that bus 
operators obtain authorization from the city or municipality 
where they plan to operate before SGI will license them. 
Similarly, bus companies will have to obtain authorization from 
the city or municipality they plan to operate in before SGI will 
register them. These changes will create the same licensing 
requirements for bus companies as for taxi companies in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The next amendment will remove the requirement to file a 
certificate of good moral character before a taxi company can 
register a vehicle. SGI believes that it is the taxi company’s 
obligation to ensure that they hire safe drivers. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, that many taxi operators already use character checks 
on their drivers. 
 
The final change with respect to taxis and buses deals with 
liability coverage. Currently, taxis and buses must carry a 
liability insurance policy in the amount of $10,000 to $75,000 
in addition to their plate insurance. Mr. Speaker, this amount is 
simply out of date. The proposed amendment will require both 
taxis and buses to obtain liability insurance in the amount of $1 
million. 
 
The final amendments are concerned with driver assessment. 
Mr. Speaker, if SGI becomes aware of a possible medical or 
skill problem, drivers are requested to undergo a driver 
assessment. If the individual fails the assessment, his or her 
licence must be suspended. SGI does not have the option to 
downgrade the licence to a lower class without further testing 
that may be costly and inconvenient to the driver. This 
amendment allows SGI to issue the appropriate licence where it 
is warranted, eliminating unnecessary testing and red tape. 
 
The second proposed amendment also deals with the medical 
testing of drivers. In 1996, Mr. Speaker, legislation was passed 
that requires SGI to pay for a driver to obtain medical 
information if SGI required that the driver undergo a medical as 
a result of safety concerns. 
 
To date, however, the deficit in the Auto Fund has prevented 
SGI from paying for medicals. Mr. Speaker, the proposed 
change removes the obligation to pay for all medical reports 
and will allow SGI to target payments to those individuals most 
in need of financial assistance. 
 
The final amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with SGI’s ability to 
exempt individuals from the strict interpretation of this 
legislation, where it is determined that not doing so would 
create an undue hardship and would be contrary to the public 
interest. 
 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

SGI and the provincial government understand that there are 
instances where the strict application of legislation creates a 
hardship for Saskatchewan residents. In the past, SGI has 
encountered situations where concerns for customer service or 
undue hardship to individuals have required SGI to act contrary 
to legislation. For example, SGI will occasionally issue a farm 
plate to individuals who do not strictly meet the criteria but can 
be considered to be legitimately farming. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, SGI will review an individual case 
before denying coverage where a policy has expired, and in 
some special cases new arrangements are made. 
 
The proposed amendment will permit SGI to exempt an 
individual from meeting the strict requirements of the 
legislation if it is determined that it would create an undue 
hardship and would not be contrary to public interest to allow 
the exemption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concludes my outline of the amendments set 
out in this Act. I now move second reading of An Act to amend 
the Vehicle Administration Act (No. 2). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I rise to make some comments in second 
reading debate on Bill 54, The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the issues that the minister outlined in 
some detail are issues and proposals that we, in the official 
opposition, can be very supportive of. Certainly looking at one 
— photo ID — we’ve been talking about the necessity for a 
proper photo ID system in this province for some time. And as I 
understood the minister to say that this would be a compulsory 
system, that that is going to have implications far more ranging 
than the specific licensing for driver purposes. But also have 
implications in terms of the right or the way of substantiating 
proper age for other issues like smoking and entrance to 
licensed beverage rooms, etc. So certainly the idea of that 
proposal is something that we’ve been talking about for a great 
deal of time and we understand that the technology and the 
security systems that are now available, in order to make sure 
that these IDs can’t be forged, etc., are properly in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well it raises . . . this legislation raises other 
issues, as the minister outlined, talking about things like 
training standards and things of that nature and the ability for 
SGI to actually do proper evaluations of driver training schools 
and academies and making sure that the level of training that’s 
occurring for our new drivers in this province is of the highest 
level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well it addresses issues of the roadworthiness 
of vehicles. And I can understand why that’s an important issue 
because the condition of Saskatchewan highways make almost 
any vehicle suspect as to its roadworthiness after just very few 
trips on the highways. 
 
So I can see why you’re very, very concerned. There’s not that 
many of us that can afford Hummers in order to negotiate the 
kind of obstacles that the highway system provides. And so we 

certainly hope that the roadworthiness testing is going to be 
done in a practical way, but probably should be focusing more 
on filling the potholes than assessing the damage that they’re 
doing to our vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well they talk about taxis and buses and 
updating the legislation in that regard and putting more of the 
licensing responsibilities to the municipal jurisdictions. I would 
assume that buses that don’t operate strictly in one municipal 
jurisdiction, that indeed are interjurisdictional, interprovincial, 
and international buses, that there would be a special licensing 
system for them. And indeed the requirement of liability 
insurance to be reviewed is appropriate. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I understand that this legislation also deals 
with the issue of driver assessment. As we all well know, 
there’s a number of dimensions to this. There’s people that of 
course end up with medical conditions that require temporary 
reassessment of the appropriate licence level in regard to their 
health condition, if it’s visual or other health conditions. And 
there also are other circumstances that can play into this 
situation, and certainly for many people as they mature in age 
that their skill levels may diminish to some extent. 
 
And it really is bothersome for some people to face the prospect 
of sort of an all or nothing system, where either you have a 
licence that gives you all the privileges of driving anywhere or 
you have nothing. In many instances, a diminished or more 
restricted license may be appropriate to still allow people to 
have the flexibility of getting around their community and do it 
in a safe way, but may not be appropriate for that individual to 
move from their local community and drive in a large 
metropolis like Regina or Saskatoon or on the highways of this 
province indeed, Mr. Speaker, but they are quite capable of 
getting themselves to their place of residence, get to town to 
shop, get the mail, or seek medical attention. So I think that if 
that’s the direction that this legislation is moving in, that is well 
. . . we think there is some merit that regard. 
 
And overall I think that in terms of creating the opportunity to 
allow for SGI, under this legislation, to create exemptions 
whereby it’s demonstrated that strict interpretation of the 
legislation will result in severe hardship on an individual is 
worthwhile. However I think that it has to be used with a great 
deal of discretion because you don’t want to end up creating 
legislation that sets out a framework for appropriate comments 
and behaviour and then you create an escape clause to make the 
original legislation virtually meaningless. And so I think that 
we would see merit in having exemption but we would certainly 
caution that it’s used appropriately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty significant Bill in terms of its 
impact on SGI and on the system of licensing and driving in the 
province. And we have initiated discussion with people that 
have concerns about these issues and others, and we are 
beginning to get feedback from them, and we look forward to 
their detailed comments as they do respond to our inquiries. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time awaiting that further 
comment, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 1 — The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal 
of pleasure that I rise this afternoon to speak on Bill No. 1, The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, which unfortunately 
I find is a bit of an oxymoron from this NDP government since 
farm financial stability has never been high on their priorities 
and certainly doesn’t exist in today’s day and age. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I guess what we need to do here is try to take 
a look at a Bill that is very much not onside with the reality of 
what is happening in rural Saskatchewan. Instead what we have, 
Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that is going to expand the powers of 
government to seize farmers property, even down to such a 
minute detail as someone who doesn’t renew their membership 
in the New Democratic Party. 
 
Instead what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that again 
attacks free enterprise, again attacks those people who rise out 
of bed every day in order to create wealth in this province. 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is opportunities for primary 
producers in this province to have the initiative to . . . in order 
that new wealth can be created in this province. 
 
One of the problems of course in Saskatchewan today and 
under this government is a great fear that they have that we 
must share wealth. And with that kind of an attitude, Mr. 
Speaker, people begin to accept that if we try to share wealth, 
that must mean that wealth is a limited commodity. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that to be a falsehood. 
 
The reality of it is that every day the people who rise out of bed, 
who form the initiative to try to create new wealth in this 
province and in this country, new wealth can be created. And 
unfortunately we do not see that in any of these Bills that are 
being presented this spring, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not in 
Bill No. 1. 
 
In fact this Bill just further expands for us the initiatives of this 
government to attack the farm economy, to find new ways to 
further detract from any initiative that producers might have to 
want to create wealth and instead just form associations is what 
they’re talking about to try to just hang on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to try to find better ways of creating 
wealth in the agricultural sector rather than trying to bring 
forward legislation that allows producers just to hang on. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, here is a Bill that speaks directly to one of 
the areas of agriculture that seems to be, in spite of this NDP 
government, doing very well. 
 
Now one of the things that we need to remember as we debate 
this Bill over the next several weeks, Mr. Speaker, is that of the 
many areas of agriculture that create opportunity and create jobs 

and create wealth in this province, the one that is most least 
regulated is the livestock — cattle livestock sector, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that is the one that is doing the best in today’s economic 
situation and fortunately, in Saskatchewan, is actually bailing 
out to a large degree some of the decline in agricultural income. 
Now that’s unfortunate that we have to use one sector to offset 
all the other sectors that are really struggling along. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we need to take a look at where we’ve been 
in this province, as to how this government has decided to get to 
this point where they need to start attacking one more of the 
agricultural industries in this province. 
 
Just a little history lesson that they always like to remind us of, 
and certainly one of the great disasters of this government, was 
the breaking of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contracts that would have allowed grain producers in this 
province to participate on a level playing field with other 
jurisdictions in the world and in this country and allow them the 
opportunity to be successful as the livestock producers, cattle 
livestock producers, Mr. Speaker, are doing at this time. 
 
But instead what this government really felt was necessary in 
their drive to balance budgets was to steal back that money that 
belonged to the farmers of this province, to the grain producers 
of this province, so that they could balance the budget for one 
year in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, taking back that kind of funds from 
Saskatchewan producers just so they could balance the budget 
for one year certainly did not create the economic stability that 
this province needed at that time from this government. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, it turned out to be such a disgrace that they’re 
still trying to recover. 
 
And in fact if we look back to, just in the very near past, to 
September 16 when the voters of rural Saskatchewan passed 
judgment very clearly on this government. We’re hoping that 
some day they’ll try to understand that the things they’ve done 
in the past, that their policies of the past — such as the breaking 
of the GRIP contracts, tearing them up, throwing them out the 
window — actually is starting to catch up to them now. 
 
And in fact, we’re looking very much forward, Mr. Speaker, to 
— in the near future — to the day when the Saskatchewan Party 
will be able to form the government and get all these ills of the 
decade, of the 1990s, corrected so that we can start to move on 
into the new millennium. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, of course we can keep going back into the 
. . . even farther into the near future when at one time a previous 
Agriculture minister stood up, proudly declared that the 
agricultural crisis in Saskatchewan is over. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, that Agriculture minister is no longer able to sit in the 
government benches opposite. In fact, he’s not even allowed to 
join any of the government benches and at only . . . any given 
time is allowed to sit behind the bar, which is probably about as 
much as he ever should have done at any given time 
considering the disasters that have been heaped upon the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

Now in fact when the minister at that time said that there was 
no agriculture crisis in this province, Mr. Speaker, what there 
was was a full-blown crisis that the NDP government of the 
day, and the NDP government that still exists today under a 
somewhat significantly reduced mandate and was only able to 
achieve through backroom finaglings, is that the agriculture 
crisis existed then. It existed last fall; it exists this spring; it still 
exists in the coming summer; and it will exist next fall. And 
what are we getting from this government? More rhetoric. 
 
The fact of the matter is on many occasions the Premier of this 
province has stood up and proudly announced that the farmers 
of Saskatchewan do not pay tax in this province and therefore 
it’s just too much of a burden on Saskatchewan taxpayers to be 
able to help them out in this terrible economic downturn. 
 
Now I’m not sure where he got those figures from, Mr. 
Speaker, when it’s a well-documented fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
the fertilizer industry alone, the final price that the farmer has to 
pay at the gate so he can have the fertilizer to produce the crops, 
produce the crops, Mr. Speaker, that feed the world — and 
that’s what Saskatchewan does, Mr. Speaker, it helps to feed the 
world — that 33 per cent of the gross farm gate costs for 
fertilizer is tax. 
 
Provincial tax, Mr. Speaker, in fact. So that is a terrible state 
that it’s put farmers in. This huge tax burden on just one 
product that is a tax that farmers must pay every year and they 
pay it faithfully so that they make sure that they are carrying out 
their responsible duties to help feed the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many areas of the farm economy 
that suffer the same fate for grain farmers and their input costs. 
One of the things that we’ve been trying to propose here with 
limited success — in fact the Minister of Finance has even 
admitted that he’s not even willing to talk to his federal 
counterpart about it — was an initiative by the federal 
government to help reduce fuel costs throughout the country, 
should provinces wish to participate. 
 
In fact, what we heard from the Minister of Finance, Mr. 
Speaker, was that this province is not willing to participate to 
help lower fuel costs — whether it’s for the farmers at the farm 
gate in the putting in of crops or for any of the consumers in 
this province who are trying to feed their families on a daily 
basis, and are trying their darndest, Mr. Speaker, to create the 
wealth that is necessary to maintain our infrastructure. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the continued disrespect that this 
government continues to show for rural Saskatchewan is one of 
the most despicable acts that we’ve seen in a great long time 
here, whether it’s in Canada or Saskatchewan or even in the 
world. 
 
In fact their disrespect for rural Saskatchewan rose to such a 
level, Mr. Speaker, that last fall they called a provincial general 
election in the middle of harvest which is unheard of in the 
annals of Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker. It shows to us, 
Mr. Speaker, the level of respect, how much they actually care 
for those people who actually rise out of bed everyday just so 
that they can feed the world. 
 
We here on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, the loyal 

opposition, care about feeding the world, but the attitude of the 
provincial government, of the NDP government, is that feeding 
the world is of a low priority to them. And as we look through 
their budget, it was a very, very low priority. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because in the ’50s the 
government of the day — and we don’t need much of a history 
lesson in this province to know who was the government of the 
day at that time — commissioned a report as to the ability of 
this province to be able to produce economic wealth. 
 
And that report stated, Mr. Speaker, that this province has the 
ability to sustain life on this planet for 800 million people, Mr. 
Speaker, 800 million people. That’s a terrific amount of 
population on this earth that could be taken of by the generous 
wealth that we’ve so fortunately been given on this God’s green 
earth. 
 
But what has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the government of 
the day and the government of the ’70s and government of the 
’90s can certainly look back and say, well we know we can’t 
have that, Mr. Speaker. What we need instead is to be able to 
preserve that for a rainy day. 
 
(1515) 
 
Well that maybe sounded like a pretty good political rhetoric in 
the 1950s, Mr. Speaker, but we’re now moved into the new 
millennium. It’s almost 50 years later. It’s still raining. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a downpour in this province 
of economic depression. 
 
And this government is simply carrying on what they’ve 
normally done through the last 60 years, bury their head in the 
sand and hope it will all go away, blame it on somebody else. 
It’s always the federal government’s fault, it’s Europe’s fault, 
it’s the fault of the United States government. But it’s never 
their fault that their policies and their initiatives or lack of 
initiatives have any detrimental effect upon the people of 
Saskatchewan and on the Saskatchewan farm economy and the 
farming community. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has tried to bring 
forward many initiatives on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and the farm community. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s been clear out there, we’ve seen it in the headlines, that the 
Saskatchewan Party is driving the agenda of this province. 
 
Now it seems rather odd that never has that happened before in 
the history of this province that the opposition starts to drive the 
agenda. As an example, Mr. Speaker, for quite some time up 
until last fall, the Saskatchewan Party was calling for a special 
debate in this House to deal with the farm economy. The 
provincial government of the day, the NDP government, said 
no, no, we don’t need that; we know what we’re doing; there’s 
no crisis out there. 
 
And then when they almost lost the election, they woke up and 
thought, oh well, just a minute here, maybe we should pay 
attention to what the people of Saskatchewan are actually 
saying out there — which was kind of a bit of a new 
phenomenon for the NDP Party to actually listen to somebody. 
They kind of preferred actually to sit up on their pedestals and 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

give out their wisdom of the day, which kind of varies from day 
to day, and tell people what it is that they want rather than listen 
to what the people of Saskatchewan actually need. 
 
But fortunately for the farm community, to some small degree, 
Mr. Speaker, September 16 changed that a little bit. We called 
for a special sitting of the House, for the House to sit early last 
fall so that we could start to deal with the farm economy. 
 
The government, they hedged and hedged and hedged, but there 
was so much pressure from the Saskatchewan Party and from 
the people of Saskatchewan they finally relented, which was not 
very common if you look back in the history of Saskatchewan, 
for an NDP government to have a fall sitting. So that it was a 
historic sitting in itself. 
 
But what they did, Mr. Speaker, was even more historic, when 
we had a special debate, inviting 17 special interest groups to be 
able to come in here and expound to us very clearly and very 
enthusiastically the problems in the agricultural industry. 
 
But what it also provided, Mr. Speaker, was the opportunity for 
the NDP government in December to hear for the first time that 
yes, there is a problem in rural Saskatchewan and there is a 
problem with the farm economy in Saskatchewan; that yes, the 
provincial government does have a lot of responsibility in this 
area. 
 
So at our suggestion, and again, Mr. Speaker, to elucidate, it 
was a suggestion of the Saskatchewan Party, that we put 
together a coalition of interest groups that would be 
non-political, whose specific agenda was to go to Ottawa in 
order to attain financial assistance from the federal government 
for the Saskatchewan farm economy, who was in the doldrums 
because of the lack of attention from Ottawa — but also the 
lack of attention from the Saskatchewan government — that 
had some modest success in Ottawa. We have to give him credit 
for that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also need to remind ourselves, and we do 
here on a regular basis and we certainly hear it in our 
constituencies, Mr. Speaker, that it was the Saskatchewan Party 
that drove the agenda. These were our ideas. And they are very 
proud of us and very pleased that we were able to at least attain 
some measure of satisfaction in dealing with the federal and the 
provincial government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the plight of the Saskatchewan farmer carries 
on. In fact what we know from the help that is being doled out 
on a minute basis, Mr. Speaker, is that all we’re being able to 
do in the short term is help farmers get through the seeding 
season. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the farm economy in Saskatchewan will last 
more than the spring of the year 2000. We need to start thinking 
about spring of the year 2001, 2002, 2003. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan are enthusiastically looking 
forward to those years because they know that there’s going to 
be another provincial election and will be able to toss this 
government out on their ear and bring in a common sense 
government which we haven’t had in this province for quite 
some time. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear quite often that the members on the 
other side are always able to bring good news forward for us. 
We always look forward over on this side to good news Friday, 
and in fact they’ve even started to expand it into good news 
Thursday, which provide us with a great deal of humour, and 
certainly provide the press with a great deal of fodder in order 
to print up, where did these guys come up with all this 
ridiculous ideas and comments. 
 
But anyway, what it does, Mr. Speaker, is it highlights the fact 
that this government has so little good news going on in 
Saskatchewan and in their party that they actually have to try to 
invent some of these ideas. When they start talking about 250 
new part-time jobs in the city of Saskatoon, I’m not sure how 
this is going to help create financial stability for the families of 
Saskatoon when we’ve got part-time jobs. 
 
What is needed, Mr. Speaker, is a government with ideas to 
create 250 full-time jobs and maybe even 2,500 full-time jobs 
or maybe even 25,000 full-time jobs that will keep the kids of 
Saskatchewan in our communities. Not having to buy them with 
minute bribes such as they’ve come up with in post-secondary 
education — give them a couple of hundred bucks if they’ll stay 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Actually what is needed, Mr. Speaker, is long-term job security 
and a long-term economic plan for Saskatchewan. And we 
certainly do not see that in Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker. In fact what 
we see is an opportunity for this government to further attack 
the farm communities of Saskatchewan and attack those 
producers who are bound and determined that they’re going to 
fight their way through this NDP government. 
 
Now one of the problems . . . I was looking at the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and was looking at section 54 where the government 
of the day over here, the NDP government — I know they like 
to call themselves the coalition government but they’re 
certainly not much of a coalition, it’s strictly the NDP 
government and the NDP policies — where if a group of 
producers through some fault that could arise through any given 
situation, from no fault of their own, would lose the opportunity 
to be able to have their loan guarantees carried on for any length 
of time. 
 
In fact what this clause talks about, Mr. Speaker, that if one or 
two or three members of a producer association decide not to 
renew their membership in the NDP party, Mr. Speaker, they 
could have their loan guarantees removed. I wish, Mr. Speaker, 
that when they bring Bills like this forward that they would be 
clear that these Bills have more to do with economic stability of 
producer organizations and they have more to do with ensuring 
that government guaranteed loans were going to be secured. 
 
And no, this clause does not speak about that. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, what it talks about is the opportunity for the 
government to carry out retribution on those organizations that 
may speak out against the government or even be so bold as to 
cancel their NDP party membership. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s even . . . this piece of legislation is 
even so bold to talk about having provincial supervisors that 
would have kind of an all-consuming power over the producer 
organizations that remind me of a draconian age that ended in 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

Europe in the late 1980s, in Eastern Europe. And now instead, 
what we see that happened there, that the people were able to 
overthrow that kind of a draconian government is starting to 
show up here in Saskatchewan. It’s a tyranny that we really do 
not need in this province. In fact what we need is initiatives 
from a government that promotes economic development and 
not initiatives from a government that slow down and halt 
economic developments. 
 
In fact what this . . . there’s one clause here under section . . . 
new section 60 talks about having a provincial supervisor with 
such all-encompassing powers that he does not even need the 
authorities of courts in order to deal with delinquent loans or 
someone, heaven help us, Mr. Speaker, who should happen to 
cease and desist his membership in the NDP Party. This 
provincial supervisor can simply come onto property without 
the authority of the courts and remove the commodities that 
have been guaranteed by the provincial government. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, because of some of the problems we 
have with this Bill and the fact that we need to debate it some 
more, and the fact that we’d like to see where this Bill . . . the 
intention of this government with all of these clauses are in 
here, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — A point of order before you take the vote, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Briefly state your point of order, please. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — As I was listening to the member speak, he 
was drawing an allegation between the . . . between maintaining 
a membership in the NDP Party on the part of some individual 
who was dealing with crop insurance. 
 
I was wondering if the member would clarify it for the record, 
Mr. Speaker; otherwise I’d have to wait till I see it in Hansard. 
But if the member would clarify it at the record, because I 
believe the allegation is very not well thought of and a very 
serious allegation. 
 
The Speaker: — I would allow the hon. member to respond to 
the point of order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t talking about the crop 
insurance. In fact this Bill has nothing to do with crop 
insurance. I’m not sure what the hon. member was even 
listening to or was even being able . . . participating in this 
debate at all. We are allowed to debate enthusiastically. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I would appreciate the 
opportunity to review the record and come back to this House to 
deal with that particular point of order raised by the 
Government Whip. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 5 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in this 
Assembly to talk a bit about Bill No. 5, The Parks Amendment 
Act, 1999. 
 
And I would like to point out to all members that in the 
province of Saskatchewan we are blessed with the most 
beautiful parks anywhere in this country. And being from the 
constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, which is, I believe, 
home to the parks, the most beautiful parks in the province, the 
people around there are quite concerned as to what has come 
out of the legislation of late regarding the budget in regards to 
the parks, the increases in the park fees and whatever. 
 
I know in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the Buffalo 
Pound Provincial Park, the Good Spirit Provincial Park, and it 
only covers a few technical changes to the legal and description 
over the parks. The issue in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is concerning 
the designation of portions of land which is to do with all these 
parks, especially the Good Spirit Lake. 
 
I just got a news release today; it’s dated May 25 where it says, 
“the Saskatchewan provincial parks are expecting light to 
moderate camping activities”. Well, Mr. Speaker, the parks are 
light due to somewhat of the weather, but it’s not only the 
weather that’s causing the light activity at the parks. The 
weather causes some of the problems but also the cost going to 
these parks has caused a great deal of concern. 
 
(1530) 
 
On the weekend past, which was a long weekend for most of us, 
I had the privilege of talking to some people in the good town 
of Spiritwood where I come from. And these people had licence 
plates from Alberta and they were all coming up to the Chitek 
Lake area to go fishing. In Saskatchewan, because we have a 
great abundance of lakes and beautiful provincial parks and 
regional parks as we do, there’s a number of Albertans coming 
to this province to take in our parks. 
 
Their concerns were valid. One of the reasons that . . . or one of 
the main concerns they had was that coming from Alberta 
through Lloydminster to Spiritwood, the highways were in such 
terrible conditions that they had many problems getting here 
with their boats, their campers, and their motorhomes. 
 
Then when they get into Saskatchewan they have to deal with 
the high price of fuel, Mr. Speaker. As you know the price of 
fuel keeps going up and up and when you compare the fuel 
prices in Saskatchewan versus the fuel prices of Alberta, it is 
understandably why less and less people are going to be coming 
from areas in Manitoba and Alberta, coming to Saskatchewan 
because of the fuel costs. 
 
Then when they get to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, then they 
got to contend with the raising costs of provincial parks. All 
costs have gone up and this is going to be a debt load on all 
managers of the regional park system. They know it’s going to 
be a concern. People are not going to come to camp in 
Saskatchewan at the regional parks because of the high costs 
and therefore it’s going to be a detriment to Saskatchewan in 
that way. 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, one of our great assets that the 
province of Saskatchewan has is tourism. And in Spiritwood 
and surrounding areas, Big River areas, and Shellbrook areas, 
we have an abundance of renewable resources sitting there. But 
if we can’t get these people to these areas to take advantage of 
these areas, then it’s going to hurt us. It’s going to hurt business 
in all the communities around there and definitely will show up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had the privilege of talking to a person that 
came from Manitoba this weekend. And he came up to visit 
relatives in this area. His concerns also were as the ones from 
Alberta — the bad highways, the costs of gasoline, and the 
costs of getting into the parks is a detriment to his coming to 
Saskatchewan. And therefore he feels that he’ll only make one 
trip this year coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite there are saying that we’re 
giving him a hard time because of the extra costs. Well in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, that was put forth here some time ago, it 
was amusing to listen to the Minister of Finance talk about the 
budget and how it’s going to affect tourism and the parks in this 
area. 
 
And then the minister from SERM comes up and adds all these 
extra costs, and these extra costs that keep coming up, popping 
up. And it is our job as the opposition party to stand up and find 
out where these extra costs are and bring them forth to the 
members. 
 
The budget that was brought out some while ago, Mr. Speaker, 
was not a good budget for the parks association people — 
whether it be provincial parks or regional parks — and therefore 
it’s going to hurt them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . however, we’ve had a great deal of 
concern expressed to us from people throughout the province 
and even outside the province, about the government’s decision 
to jack up the fees on provincial parks. 
 
I also have a report on the May 25, it just came out today, that 
the northern zone, management zone, opened today for fishing. 
And I can assure the members opposite that when the zone 
opened today that there will be few people travelling up there. 
As I’ve heard the Minister of Northern Affairs talk many times, 
the highways up to the North are terrible shape; and you couple 
that with the increasing cost of the parks, and it will show that 
the tourism people up there will suffer and that the people will 
not take the time out to go north where our fishing is excellent 
and the beauty of our land is so extravagant up that area. 
 
The members opposite are saying that the parks were all full. 
I’d like to know where they get their information from because 
I was up at the parks this weekend and they were very empty. 
And it wasn’t because of the cold weather, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been surprised by the number of phone calls 
to my office in Spiritwood, my constituency office, with 
concerns surrounding the parks — the massive fee increases to 
most services and charges connected to the provincial parks. 
Well there were sometimes like 45 separate fee increases 
imposed on this budget but it was never mentioned by the 
Minister of Environment. The NDP’s policy of 
do-it-and-don’t-tell policy is proven not only with the park 

situation and SERM, it’s with everything else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say that in the northern areas of the 
province where we have all our beautiful parks and stuff, that I 
really believe that the provincial park association will hopefully 
write letters to our government to tell them that they should 
really look at our park situation and the costs that have been 
increasing and increasing. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 38 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m rising today in this Assembly to talk about Bill 
No. 38, The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his opening remarks on this piece of 
legislation, the hon. Justice minister spoke about the speed of 
which new methods of communication are being developed and 
how quickly they’re becoming an integral part of how we 
communicate. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are indeed in a brave new world; 
more people than ever before are getting on board the 
information superhighway. And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that 
road will one day have less decay and potholes than the 
highways in this province are experiencing right now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important Bill, one that still 
requires a lot of study. It needs to be put under a microscope 
because while it is a good step forward, the two main concerns 
our office is hearing about in this piece of legislation are 
privacy and security. These could be two major stumbling 
blocks and fundamental flaws with this proposal. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members on this side, and I’m sure all 
of the members in the Assembly, want to make sure that this 
Bill protects our citizens who are on-line and making 
transactions. We want to make sure beyond a shadow of a doubt 
that when someone goes onto the Internet to take care of 
business they can do it with complete confidence that no one is 
lurking in the virtual bushes waiting to steal vital, personal 
information. 
 
There has to be a way of verifying that. There has to be a way 
that when an electronic transaction is made, the transaction is 
totally, absolutely secure. We need that assurance of security 
and right now we don’t know if it’s there in this Bill and that’s 
why it needs to be studied a little farther. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this could open up all avenues for fraud if 
these electronic transactions are not in total confidence between 
two parties. How easy could it be for someone to pry in and 
steal personal information? And that just opens a whole new 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

can of worms for everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read from an article in Privacy 
Times, it’s entitled, and I quote: “Internet Privacy, the 
Oxymoron on Progress.” The document states that: 
 

A swirl of recent events only seems to confirm fears that 
consumers cannot trust their privacy to the Internet. There 
are many sources of the problem: data-hungry Internet 
firms bent on exploiting personal information, inattention 
to security and persistent technological glitches, and a 
growing number of hackers who are willing to take 
advantage of the situation. 

 
The column goes on to state that: 
 

An Internet chat room where carders buy and sell credit 
card numbers stolen from the Internet, the electronic scene 
resembles a combination of a commodity trader’s floor and 
a street corner of drug dealers. 

 
Typically a carder posts a claim that they have a fresh list of 
cards, and then to protect it, he posts a sample card, including a 
billing address, phone number, etc., into that open chat room. 
Then a feeding frenzy follows. 
 
A participant reports that a sample card is maxed out within 10 
minutes. The column also states that there is a great deal at 
stake. For VISA alone there was $487,000,000 in fraudulent 
charges reported last year. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can see there are a lot of room 
out there for people to steal information on the Internet. As I 
stated in the onset, this Bill is a good step forward, but from 
what we are hearing there are two fundamental flaws within it 
and that would be in the area of privacy and security. These are 
huge issues. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I still think that it needs to be 
studied a little farther. And I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Junor that Bill No. 30 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to take this opportunity to rise to comment briefly on the 
proposed legislation which, when you look at it, seems very 
straightforward and quite simplistic in that it would codify and 
redefine the definition of stillbirth to be in compliance or at 
least in similarity to definitions across the country. 
 
It’s important that this happens so that proper comparisons for 
statistical purposes can be maintained, and from that respect we 
certainly do not have any problem with this issue. We did, as is 
our purpose to, invite people to make comment on this and 
other legislation when it was presented to the House. And I 
have to report to the House that we did have a concern 
expressed coming from various pro-life organizations in the 

province of Saskatchewan in regard to some of the specific 
wording in the clause. 
 
Under the existing legislation or the existing definitions, there is 
a reference to a fetus as part of the definition. And in the new 
legislation that is removed and the new definition talks about a 
product of conception. 
 
And the concern that was raised by pro-life associations is one 
that this tends to further dehumanize the whole issue of unborn 
fetuses. And they expressed concern that they saw no need to 
change the definition of a fetus to a product of conception, and 
that would still comply with the gram size weight definition of 
stillbirths that are required in order to have the uniformity with 
the legislation across the country for statistical comparisons. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly have raised that as we have 
now and we will raise it as well in committee, but at this point 
we see no further reason to hold up this legislation and would 
be prepared to see it move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 28 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise 
today to speak on this Bill and to debate and to provide some 
comments on the changes to The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act, Bill No. 28. 
 
It’s interesting that this piece of legislation is coming forward 
so soon after the Child’s Advocate has presented a report 
dealing with the many inadequacies in the Social Services 
department. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it is a very scathing report, 
one that has caused great alarm throughout the province. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting also that the government would be 
bringing in amendments to the Act that allow the government to 
set salaries by order in council. This is presently not the way it 
is handled and we have grave concern about why this is 
happening. 
 
The salary now is set independently of this Assembly. It’s set in 
accordance with the salaries outlined for Provincial Court 
judges and now that it is being changed under this particular 
Act . . . this particular amendment, I should say, so that the 
salary is set by the Board of Internal Economy on which sits 
four government members and two members of the opposition. 
 
We wonder why it was necessary, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy 
Speaker, to take place at this particular point in time. And why, 
if that was the proper manner in which the salaries should be 
set, was it not done this way in the initial legislation? 
 
I guess it’s really important to question the minister as to why 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

the initial legislation set out the salary levels to be tied to 
provincial court judges which is independent of this Assembly, 
and why now they have decided, his department has decided 
that this should be changed? 
 
So we wonder why these changes are necessary and is there 
something happening that should be debated dealing with these 
particular issues in the House? 
 
We also find it interesting, I guess we would say, that the 
Child’s Advocate was being reappointed. We did not follow the 
process that was set out in The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act, and now they’re bringing in legislation to change 
that Act. When we wished to have the process followed 
according to that, it was voted down by members opposite in 
this House. 
 
Now they’re also changing the Act to allow the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council — which is really the Premier and his 
cabinet — to be able to remove the Child Advocate for various 
reasons. They can suspend or remove her from office for 
matters of incompetence. 
 
Who makes the decision on whether the Child’s Advocate or 
the Ombudsman are incompetent? Is it the Assembly or is it the 
Lieutenant Governor? Or is it the Premier? Or is it the cabinet? 
Who makes that determination? 
 
When a report comes down that is scathing of the government, 
does that mean that the officer of this Assembly is carrying out 
their duties in the proper manner with proper competence, or 
does the Premier and cabinet judge it to be otherwise? 
 
I think we are walking on very dangerous ground here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with these particular amendments, especially 
when this piece of legislation would now allow the Premier and 
cabinet to make direction in this area. 
 
We believe that these offices should be independent and be able 
to make investigations and report on whatever issues they feel 
are important and need to be investigated. There should be no 
control and no limit on this by cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen this 
government has been failing drastically in the area of protecting 
children in this province. Three thousand children, Mr. Speaker, 
in the foster care program, and we are having as many as 70 per 
cent failure to comply with the rules that the Social Services 
department has put in place. 
 
There are a number of third parties that are also very interested 
in this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
how it is going to affect the working of their offices and in 
particular the children that they are responsible for in this 
province. There are also citizens at large that are interested in 
this new legislation. They feel caught and they are looking at 
the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate to be their voice 
and they’re wondering if they still will be independent and be 
able to give them genuine help. 
 
We hope that when this Bill is in Committee of the Whole, that 
the minister will be able to explain exactly what his intentions 
are and what is the real goal of this government. 

I think these are very, very serious matters, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that need to be seriously considered before this 
particular piece of legislation moves forward. And so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 

The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I wish to remind 
committee members that this Energy and Mines was last here 
on May 5, and then before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to re-introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is Deputy Minister Ray Clayton; to my 
left is Bruce Wilson, who is the executive director of petroleum 
and natural gas; and immediately behind me is Donald Koop, 
who is the assistant deputy minister of finance and 
administration; beside him is George Patterson, who is the 
executive director of exploration and geological services; and 
just behind me as well is Lynn Jacobson, who is the director of 
corporate service. 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
departmental officials again. They were certainly a great help 
on May 5 when we last met in this forum, and I’m sure they 
will be again. 
 
If I can proceed. When we last spoke on May 5, we had a 
discussion about the expanded PST (provincial sales tax), Mr. 
Minister, and its effects on your particular portfolio and the 
industries involved. Since that discussion, Mr. Minister, have 
you had contact with any companies about the PST exemption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say that I’ve 
met with a number of oil and gas producing companies that are 
operating in the province of Saskatchewan, both here and in 
Calgary. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, our office still gets calls, letters, e-mails, faxes, about 
this PST expansion and how it will affect their industry. Many 
still don’t understand how it will affect them. 
 
What have you and your department done to alleviate this lack 
of communications that seems to be out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well firstly, Mr. Chair, I would 
certainly appreciate if the member would ask his caucus 
members to pass on inquiries to the Department of Finance, 
either to the minister’s office or to the department directly. My 
office also has some information. They’re certainly more than 
willing to pass on any inquiries that they have that they can’t 
answer to us. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

Minister, we’ll certainly do that. We assume that your 
department had received them before we had in fact. What kind 
of revenues will the expanded PST bring in from Energy and 
Mines? Or maybe the question should read, how much will the 
PST expansion affect the revenues within your portfolio? And 
has your department concluded how much more companies will 
be paying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it won’t affect the 
revenue within our portfolio. That revenue would go to the 
Department of Finance through the normal remittance process. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers states that one of the 
problems they have in Saskatchewan is dealing with the 
bureaucracy involved in your administration. When we spoke 
last on this, you stated that CAPP (Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers) is very, very satisfied with the access 
they have, and they go on to say that they wish Alberta was as 
accessible as Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is, Mr. Minister, if that is true, why do oil and 
mining company vehicles in this province choose to operate on 
Alberta licence plates? If dealing with this government is so 
easy, why can’t they negotiate some sort of a deal through you 
to make it easier to plate their vehicles in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would 
certainly hope that the member’s not arguing with CAPP’s 
impression that the Department of Energy and Mines is easy to 
access, because I believe they are. We’re a relatively small 
department. The officials within this department know the 
industry players well. They are professional people who have 
been working for this government for many decades, some of 
them for two and possibly three decades. I should have said 
many years because I certainly wouldn’t want my officials to be 
feeding me bad information here, after a comment like that. But 
they are professional people who know the industry, who know 
the players, and they do a very good job on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to licensing out-of-province vehicles, that too is 
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Finance. But I can 
say to the member that vehicles that operate in Saskatchewan, 
there is a process where they remit a portion of the licence fee 
through the Department of Finance if they are an 
out-of-province vehicle operating in the province. We don’t do 
that work; that’s not under the purview of my department. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I’m curious about how that remittance system works 
and how it’s policed. How do they keep track of the amount of 
time the vehicles operate in the province of Saskatchewan and 
how is that policed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That question would be best posed 
to the Minister of Finance under his estimates. Those are his 
issues and his initiatives. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, has this 
issue been raised to you and your department officials by 
energy, oil and gas, and mining companies? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can certainly say that in areas 
along the border where there is cross-border activity, it has . . . 
you know, when local people see out-of-province vehicles on 
job sites, certainly there’s curiosity raised by that. 
 
With respect to the oil and gas companies raising it with me, no, 
I can’t say it is. But I can say to the member opposite that we 
certainly encourage the resource sector developing companies 
to hire and employ Saskatchewan companies and Saskatchewan 
people. And I think that they do that when they can. And we do 
expect co-operation from them in that regard, and I believe for 
the most part they attempt to do that inasmuch as it’s possible 
for them to. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I also point to an article in Wednesday, May 24 
edition of The Leader-Post which makes my point. It states, 
“Government has to cut its royalties and red tape if it wants to 
see more mines . . .” This is from the president of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is being done in this regard? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can say that 
we have worked very closely with the resource sector over the 
last number of years. There are a number of initiatives that have 
taken place in the past and there will be some in the future. 
With respect to royalties, it’s an ongoing situation where we’re 
reviewing the royalty and taxation structure in the province. 
 
We made in . . . I believe the budget before last, we made some 
announcements in terms of base metals and gold royalty on new 
production that dramatically decreases the cost for those. We 
have made some changes to the potash royalty structure. We’ve 
made some changes to the heavy oil royalty structure over the 
years. And certainly our goal is to ensure that Saskatchewan is 
competitive with respect to royalties and taxation. 
 
You raised the issue of, I guess, red tape. And we too are 
working within the department to eliminate regulations 
wherever possible to bring together a process that will make it 
quicker to access information and to access licences to operate. 
 
And I think what I’d like to do today is clarify what I believe 
the president of the SMA (Saskatchewan Mining Association) 
was referring to with respect to duplication of regulations. The 
Atomic Energy Control Board of Canada is involved in the 
uranium industry in that they are part of the process that 
monitors and that approves environmental activities in the 
development of a mine. 
 
That is the only area in the mining sector in Saskatchewan 
where that happens. It doesn’t happen in potash, it doesn’t 
happen in base metals, and frankly this province . . . this 
government is of the opinion that it’s unnecessary. 
 
We have, in the Department of Energy and Mines, a group of 
men and women who are charged with the responsibility of 
ensuring that mining activities take place in an environmentally 
friendly way. And we believe that this duplication is 
unnecessary and it’s very costly to the uranium industry in 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

particular. 
 
We have been working very closely with the industry in 
approaching Minister Goodale, who’s responsible for the 
activities of the AECB (Atomic Energy Control Board), which 
is an arm’s-length body from government, to bring our case to 
the federal government in terms of duplication and overlap in 
hopes that they will agree with us that the work of that federal 
administration is unnecessary. 
 
We believe that there can be speedier environmental approval 
processes if done by the province of Saskatchewan, at the same 
time still ensuring that we are guaranteeing that we have the 
best environmental practices that are possible with respect to 
the development of that area of mining. 
 
I think that we have some movement forward. It’s been a long 
process. These discussions have been going on for a long time, 
but I do think we have the attention of the federal government 
in regards to duplication. And I’m very hopeful that we will be 
able to streamline that process, but at the same time ensuring 
that we do the appropriate environmental mitigation initiatives 
that surround the mining activity. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly hope that 
you have the attention of the federal government and I wish you 
well in streamlining approval processes. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering, does the department 
take any leadership role in coordinating with resource 
management, SERM, the approval process for oil and gas and 
mining enterprises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in answering the 
question, I would want to say that we have periodic meetings at 
a ministerial level but also at the department level. The 
Department of Energy and Mines does have certainly good 
access to environment and resource management. We have 
contact with industry on a regular basis, so we get feedback 
through that process that we pass on. 
 
And as you will know, there are responsibilities of all the 
government departments. Certainly Energy and Mines is that of 
a regulatory and a licensing body. As well, it’s our 
responsibility to ensure that we are maximizing the activity in 
the resource sector — both oil and gas, and mining. 
 
On the other hand, SERM has a responsibility to ensure that the 
activities take place in an environmentally friendly way, that 
mitigation work is done when pipelines are laid to restore the 
area that has been disturbed. Those are all important things as 
part of the operations of the resource sector. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that the resource sector has been very 
responsive in changing practices that were maybe in place in the 
1960s and the early 1970s that were not totally environmentally 
friendly and have certainly been working very close with my 
department and with SERM to improve those practices. And I 
think it’s fair to say that they have a very good track record in 
the province. 
 
There are, I think, times when companies will maybe not do 
their job. But we have . . . I think for the most part we can say 

that the activities of the oil and gas sector are done in a very 
community responsive and positive way. And I really do 
appreciate that approach that the energy sector is taking. 
 
You know, as I said, there are always areas where some 
activities will take place and the appropriate procedures are not 
done. When those are reported to my department, we ensure 
that the cleanups take place and the appropriate measures are 
taken. 
 
But I would want to say for the most part we do get very good 
co-operation from industry. And we will continue to work with 
them and to share information between my department and the 
department of SERM because it’s really important. I think good 
business in the 1990s and in this new millennium mean good 
environmental practices and I think industry fully understands 
that. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I’m wondering: has any effort been made to establish 
a sort of joint body composed of officials from your department 
and officials from SERM that could review these applications 
by the energy . . . or the oil and gas companies and the mining 
companies jointly so as to speed up the approval process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think I’d like 
to give the member a bit of a report in terms of what is taking 
place right now. 
 
The Department of Economic and Co-operative Development is 
chairing an initiative that brings together all of the different 
regulatory bodies within government — the SERM, Energy and 
Mines, Municipal Government — in terms of attempting to 
identify problems and identify areas where we can make our 
processes more user friendly. 
 
I’m told by my deputy that there will be a meeting in June with 
industry to try and bring all of this together so that we can make 
our operations more efficient than they are now. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll certainly look 
forward to that. 
 
It’s very disconcerting for those of us who are interested in the 
development of our economy, and particularly the mining and 
the oil and gas industries, to hear the president of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association making a comment like the 
one where he said, the industry is losing interest in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That newspaper report goes on to state that, “The industry is 
losing interest in development”. It seems, Mr. Minister, that 
some things have to change. What steps are you taking to 
address this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I too have read the 
article and I’ve spoken with the executive of the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association. As a matter of fact we met, I believe, it 
was yesterday afternoon. Was it yesterday afternoon . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The day before. 
 
But anyway we met with their executive and we talked about 
some of these issues. And certainly there is some concern by 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

industry with respect to the level of royalties and taxation. It’s 
an ongoing thing and it’s a natural thing, quite honestly, 
because it’s their responsibility to maximize their return for 
their shareholders. 
 
On the other hand, it’s my responsibility and the responsibility 
of my department to maximize the return to the people of 
Saskatchewan for their resources. And what the attempt is, what 
the attempt needs to be, is to find that balance; find a balance 
where the competitiveness of this province is on par with other 
jurisdictions that they have opportunity to invest in. And that’s 
always the goal that we attempt to achieve. That’s why I 
indicated earlier this afternoon that we, on a regular and on an 
ongoing basis, review royalties and taxation. 
 
But I mean there are certainly other things that are impacting on 
industry at this point, whether it’s the mining industry or 
whether it’s the oil and gas industry. As you will know in some 
of the mineral development areas, there are some very, very low 
commodity prices. Uranium is an example. It’s much lower 
than I think industry would like to see, and that’s certainly 
impacts on the profitability. Base metals are not, anyone could 
argue, are certainly not at a record high level. 
 
And the other component of this, I think, has been the activity 
within the equity markets. These initiatives whether it’s oil and 
gas or whether it’s mining development, take hundreds of 
millions of dollars and a lot of that capital has historically been 
raised through the equity markets which right now have been 
very much shying away from the resource sector as you will 
know. 
 
All one has to do is read The Globe and Mail. Certainly one 
would want to read The Globe and Mail and maybe shy away 
from the Hollinger paper, but certainly, if one reads The Globe 
and Mail it becomes very clear that the equity markets are very 
much interested in high-tech stocks and have not been putting 
the kind of money that they historically have done into the 
resource sector, which is a problem. It’s a problem for 
development of new mines; it’s a problem for investment in 
terms of developing new oil and gas resources. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Chairman, in spite of that, this year in 
our province we will be opening three new mines — McClean 
Lake, McArthur River this weekend, Konuto in the Creighton 
area was opened just a few months ago. So I guess we have 
been doing our job to a degree. 
 
It takes a long time to put these mines on stream. It takes one 
big, big, big, massive investment. So there are a number of 
things that create, I guess, investor climate. Royalties and 
taxation are just one component of that. And our commitment 
has been and will continue to be that we’re going to work with 
industry to ensure that this province is competitive. 
 
(1615) 
 
We’re the largest producer of uranium in the world and we’re 
going to continue to be. 
 
We’re the largest producer of potash in the world and we’re 
going to continue to be, but in order to do that we’ve got to be 
competitive and we’ve got to be out there having our companies 

that are operating here in Saskatchewan able to access the 
markets and be in the price range that those commodities will 
sell. 
 
So this is an ongoing process. I wouldn’t want you to be overly 
concerned. I want to assure you that we’re doing our job. This 
department has been doing its job and we will continue to make 
Saskatchewan competitive — whether it’s oil, gas, or whether 
it’s mining. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I am certainly appreciative of the new mines that are 
opening in Saskatchewan as well. I’ve had an opportunity to 
tour a couple of them and they’re very impressive facilities. It’s 
amazing the investment that’s come to this province from the 
mining industry. 
 
But while we’re speaking of the royalty regime which we 
brought up a moment ago, this newspaper article that I referred 
to, it’s a Leader-Post article on May 24 by Mr. Bruce 
Johnstone. And it goes on to state that Saskatchewan has one of 
the most onerous royalty regimes in the world. Last year you 
collected close to a billion dollars. 
 
Are you going to make any changes to this in the foreseeable 
future to make Saskatchewan a more attractive place for the 
mining and the oil and gas industry to invest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it was also in 
that same article, indicated through a comment that I made, that 
yes we will be reviewing the uranium and royalty taxation 
structure. That process is taking place. We have done, in the 
past, reviewed the potash. And that process will take place 
again in the future. 
 
What I can guarantee the member opposite is, is that we will 
maximize the return for our shareholders as well. Those are the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I must say to the member 
opposite that I certainly don’t apologize for the fact that almost 
a billion dollars in revenue from resources came into the 
provincial coffers. I would not apologize for that because that’s 
a responsibility of all of us as legislators to ensure that we 
maximize the return for our investors who are the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But in order to do that, you have to have the developmental 
activity. So as I’ve said a little earlier, there needs to be a 
balance between the requirements of the investment community 
and those who invest in these companies so that they get a 
reasonable rate of return on their investment, and that we’re 
competitive with other jurisdictions. 
 
On the other hand, the billion dollars, as you will know, goes 
into the Consolidated Fund through my department and is spent 
on initiatives like roads and like highways, health care, and 
education. Part of that resource revenue gave us the ability to 
totally eliminate, this year, the tax on farm fuel. 
 
And so, you can’t have it one way where you don’t generate the 
revenue; but on the other hand, you’re able to reduce taxes in, 
you know, in specific areas. So, the goal is to try and find the 
balance to ensure that we have that investment and on the other 
hand, to ensure that we get a reasonable rate of return for the 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

people who vote for you and vote for me because that’s why 
they send us here. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and 
Mr. Minister, the last time that we spoke in this forum on May 5 
I think, I believe you confirmed that Energy and Mines is going 
to digital mapping for mining claims for the entire province. Do 
I have that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what are 
the perceived advantages of a digital mapping system over the 
drafted sort of mapping system that we’ve had previously? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are a number 
of reasons why one would prefer digital mapping. First of all, 
the cost is less onerous than the old system. We’re able to 
deliver more detail. We’re certainly able to update the 
information quicker than we could before. 
 
And for the resource sector, whether it’s mining or whether it’s 
the oil and gas sector, information is very valuable. That is part 
of what, as well, this department does, is we store information 
whether it’s core samples or whether it’s information on . . . you 
know and through digital mapping. 
 
But it’s very much a priority of our department to ensure that 
we’re right up to date in terms of the best technology that is 
available to ensure that we can attract industry investment 
through the knowledge and the database that we’ve put together 
within the department. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, do you know yet or do you have a projection yet of 
how much money will be saved this coming year through the 
digital mapping? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials that the amount of saving is relatively small. It’s not 
really a large amount that they’ll be saving, and in this year 
probably nothing because of the production of all of the maps 
for this year. 
 
But in terms of the dollar amounts, I don’t think I can give you 
an exact amount. I mean I could throw a figure into the air of 
maybe 10 or $15,000, but we’re not talking millions is what I’m 
saying. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, how many people will be laid off in your department 
as a result of this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, none. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
what function will the drafting employees perform now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am told that the 
elimination of the drafting division would call for the reduction 
of four employees and that that was part of this budget 
initiative. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will, Mr. Chair, or, 
Mr. Minister, will going to the digital mapping make any 
difference in the actual physical staking of claims in the North 
and the employment in . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told by my officials that there 
will be no difference. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, or, Mr. 
Minister, of the four drafting employees laid off in your 
department, how many have been placed in other similar type 
jobs within the government service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am told that the 
bumping process that’s been negotiated with the collective 
agreement that they work under has not been concluded, but 
that that process is taking place. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, or, Mr. 
Minister, have early retirement packages been offered to any of 
the four? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there is no early 
retirement package between executive government at this time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, or, Mr. 
Minister, can you tell us how many new oil wells were drilled 
in Saskatchewan in 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 
in 1999 there were 1,397 oil wells drilled, and in . . . I can give 
you ’98, it was 1,064. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many gas wells 
in ’99? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in 1999 there were 
1,021 gas wells drilled, and in 1998, there were 634 gas wells 
drilled; 1999 was an all-time record year with respect to the 
number of gas wells drilled. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, can you give us a number of . . . a total number of oil 
wells in production in 1999 and 1998? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the numbers are 
18,979 for 1999, and for 1998, there were 17,319 producing 
wells. 
 
That’s for oil alone. Do you want gas as well? In 1999, the 
number of gas wells was 9,319, and in ’98, it was 8,385. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, do you have a forecast for the coming year for both oil 
and gas, new oil wells and gas wells? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, we don’t release 
forecasts, you know, in terms of the year coming. But our folks 
tell us just based on what is happening thus far this year, we 
think we can expect about 1,000 gas wells and around 2,000 oil 
wells. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2000 

Minister, can you give us an indication of how many people 
were employed in Saskatchewan in the oil and gas industries in 
1999. Excuse me, I mean in 1998. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, the numbers for both ’98 
and ’99 are fairly similar. And I’m going to give you direct and 
indirect. 
 
In 1999, it would have been about 15,900; in 1998, it would 
have been about 15,538, by these figures. So did you want the 
direct and indirect as well? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Please. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay, for 1999 the direct 
employment was 6,360; indirect at 9,540; for ’98, the direct 
employment was 6,215; and for ’98, the indirect was 9,323. 
And that gives you the aggregate totals that I gave you a little 
earlier. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I assume this projection is based on applications for 
drilling. But can you tell . . . can you give us a firm number on 
how many drilling applications you received for the coming 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to 
share with the member, and this is as of May 12, the total 
number of wells drilled cumulative to . . . I’m sorry, May 14, 
1999, totalled 266. The cumulative number May 12, 2000 — 
856. 
 
The number of licences issued to May 14, 1999 is, I believe, 
569, and to date the number of licences issued is 1,428. 
 
So I think it gives you a pretty clear indication that the amount 
of activity is somewhat related to the price of oil. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, does your department do price projection research for 
gas and oil? And if so, do you have projections based on world 
supply and demand for natural gas for the year 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in the budget 
forecasts . . . And at that time, the best knowledge that we could 
compile would suggest an oil price of about $20 WTI (West 
Texas Intermediate), and that’s what we put into our estimates 
at that time. And natural gas was at about $2.49 an mcf (million 
cubic feet). 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m tempted to say 
guess again. But in any event if we can back up a little bit, the 
previous question I asked you was how many applications for 
drilling. I wonder if you could tell us how many of those 
applications came from Saskatchewan-based oil and gas 
companies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the department 
doesn’t break them down by Saskatchewan based or Alberta 
based. But, you know, I think it’s fair to say that the majority of 
them would be Alberta based, because that certainly is where 

the vast majority of oil and gas companies in Western Canada 
are headquartered. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, would it be possible to have a breakdown prepared? 
We really believe it’s an important thing to know, to sort of 
measure the direction that this industry is going in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m told by 
my officials that . . . I mean you can compile the numbers 
depending on I guess the amount of time and effort that you 
want to put to it. I think what is important is that we are able to 
show growth in this industry year over year. 
 
I certainly understand what you are saying with respect to 
Saskatchewan-based companies and the desire to have 
businesses grow here in Saskatchewan. And we are certainly 
attempting to do that. And we certainly do encourage that. 
 
But I think really what’s important is the number of people that 
are working in this industry continues to grow here in 
Saskatchewan, the amount of production continues to grow, the 
exploration dollars are being spent, and the royalties and the 
taxation are available to Saskatchewan people for services in 
this province. So I guess anything is possible. 
 
It’s not really something we’ve focused on. I can say to you that 
we have a good working relationship with the 
Saskatchewan-based producers. They have open and very easy 
access to my department, but we don’t separate the activities in 
terms of whether it’s an Alberta-based or a Saskatchewan-based 
company. 
 
But I mean it would just stand I think to reason, the fact that the 
nucleus of the oil and gas sector in Western Canada is Calgary. 
It’s got the vast majority, that province has a vast majority of 
the reserve. They were developed certainly much sooner than 
we were here in Saskatchewan. And that’s where a lot of these 
companies tended to headquarter. And a lot of the services they 
use have grown up around them and so there’s a critical mass 
built. 
 
Now I think there are some things that we need to encourage 
and will encourage, and that’s Saskatchewan-based growth. But 
I think overall you will have to agree with me that the 
investment that has taken place in Saskatchewan, the number of 
jobs that have been created by industry, is a pretty impressive 
record. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I really do think this is an important figure to have. I 
don’t think it should be too onerous to get the address off the 
applications and thereby achieve sort of a yardstick of which 
way the industry is going in this province. 
 
I don’t know if you have any further comment on that, Mr. 
Minister, but I believe that it’s a very important thing to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I will say we’ll put 
those numbers together as best we can. I want the member to 
know this is a small department and they’re very busy because 
of the activity. And we can focus on ways to create wealth and 



May 25, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

create job opportunities for Saskatchewan people, but we will 
certainly allocate some time within the department to put those 
numbers together for the member. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, Mr. Minister, does the Saskatchewan government have 
any plans to encourage increased investment in Saskatchewan 
in the oil and gas sector in the foreseeable . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think that’s what 
we’ve been talking about for the last little while. We want to 
and we plan to maintain competitiveness in this province with 
other jurisdictions. We plan to maintain and encourage easy 
access to information so that they can develop business plans 
that will allow them to be active here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve said that we plan to continue to be the largest producer of 
potash in the world and we will have the structures in place to 
allow that to happen. We’re the largest producer of uranium in 
the world and we’re going to have the structures in place to 
allow that to happen as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What are the 
government’s latest projects as far as oil and gas reserves . . . or 
projections, I should say, as far as oil and gas reserves that we 
currently have in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the most up-to-date 
numbers that I have are as of December 31, 1998, and we have 
in reserve 1.108 billion barrels of oil and two thousand, six 
hundred trillion cubic feet of natural gas. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What were the 
revenues that the province took in in oil and gas royalties in 
’99; and projections for 2000, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, these are in the 
budget address, March 2000; they’re on page 64. We haven’t 
finalized the 1999-2000, but our forecast for natural gas are 
83.7 million; for oil, 610.5 million. 
 
So you’ve got 610.5, I guess it would be, million for oil, and 
83.7 million for gas; and we’re forecasting for 2000-2001, 
447.4 million for oil and 66.5 million for natural gas. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:47 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


