





























































Hansard: April 17, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 749 
 April 17, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today regarding enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and area concerned about the Swift 
Current hospital. 
 
The prayer can be summarized as follows, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people who sign this petition want the provincial government to 
assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital so that it can continue to serve the entire region; in 
fact, do a better job of that. 
 
And this petition has been signed by people from Swift Current 
and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition regarding enforced municipal amalgamation. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from Chaplin and 
Central Butte. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; and 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to colleagues of 
the Assembly, a number of grade 5 students in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s any doubt that we’re not a growing, 
up-and-coming constituency, the proof sits in the west gallery 
with 58 grade 5 students who are here today for a tour, to be 
present for part of question period, have already responded to 
one of the members, Mr. Speaker, in a cheer, and certainly I’ll 
be looking forward to meeting with them and answering their 
questions about the proceedings. 
 
They’re here today with teachers from Hawrylak School, Ms. 
Shirley Wolfe and Ms. Brenda Martin, and their parent helpers, 
Ms. Greenman and Dr. Radford. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome for 
the 58 grade 5 students from W.S. Hawrylak School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, Mr. Lorne Nystrom, who has joined us at the back of the 
House here, who is the Member of Parliament for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Nystrom is, as I said, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle, 
and I had the distinct opportunity and pleasure of being in his 
employment for a number of years as his constituency assistant. 
And to continue on in job employment with him and security 
with him, of course, Mr. Speaker, I had to on a daily basis treat 
him very nice. 
 
And I have to, Mr. Speaker, continue to do that because Mr. 
Nystrom is now a constituent of mine. 
 
So I’d ask all the folks here in the legislature to offer Mr. 
Nystrom a very warm welcome here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the colleague in welcoming the Hon. Lorne Nystrom 
to this House. 
 
As we all know it’s very rare for an opposition member of 
parliament to be a member of the Privy Council, but Mr. 
Nystrom was granted that honour sometime ago for his work on 
the — not only the Constitution — but his work as, I think, 
what could only be properly called a real PanCanadian member 
of parliament. He went to Ottawa representing 
Yorkton-Melville but did much more than that and represented, 
in many respects, Mr. Speaker, the whole country. 
 
So I’d like members to join with me in welcoming the Hon. 
Lorne Nystrom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tribute to Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
refrain from entering into the introduction of guests and 
acknowledging Mr. Strelioff in your gallery. 
 
And I would like to at this time speak a bit about a wonderful 
career that Mr. Strelioff has had in Saskatchewan. And certainly 
from a personal perspective is a very, very cordial relationship 
that we had. 
 
I remember very well in 1995 when I was a newly elected 
member, and had been assigned to Chair the Public Accounts 
Committee. And with all due trepidation we came to our first 
meeting for a briefing and I know many other members who are 
in the House attended at the same time wondering what this task 
was going to be. And certainly, Mr. Strelioff and his team from 
the Provincial Auditor’s office provided us with a very, very 
complete and in-depth overview of what the role that we had 
undertaken was going to be. 
 
And over the years, subsequent to that, Mr. Strelioff and his 
department have provided exceptional service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. He’s done it in a very professional and 
non-biased way. He has certainly perspectives and agendas that 
he would like to see happen. 
 
And we wish him very well. Certainly British Columbia’s gain 
is Saskatchewan’s loss. Good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we celebrate 10 
years, 10 years of Wayne Strelioff’s service to Saskatchewan as 
Provincial Auditor, and we wish him luck as he moves on to his 
new career in British Columbia. 
 
The poet Longfellow once wrote, Mr. Speaker: a good life 
consists of not just in seeing visions and dreaming dreams, but 
in acts of willing service. By these standards, Wayne Strelioff 
has indeed lived a good life during his years here in 
Saskatchewan — a life of active and willing service to all of the 
people of our province. 
 
At times I know it’s been a thankless job, but this week as he 
concludes his time as our Provincial Auditor, I know that 
Wayne will be reminded of his many accomplishments and 
successes. 
 
I got to know him during those 10 years a little bit, and I’d like 
to recognize here in the Assembly two things that stuck out 
about Wayne Strelioff. First, he genuinely cared about his job, 
and his dedication speaks well of his professionalism and of his 
character. 
 
Secondly, Wayne was persistent and always held to his 
principles. Sometimes his ideas weren’t received with open 
arms but he persevered and the people of Saskatchewan have 
benefited. 
 
So thank you very much, Wayne, for your 10 years of dedicated 

service. The people of BC (British Columbia) indeed are 
fortunate to have you as their Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of Biggar Central School 2000 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 
Biggar Central School 2000 was officially opened this past 
Friday. The school is actually a joint-use facility for the people 
in the Biggar area. It will act as both a K to 12 school, a 
regional college, and, Mr. Speaker, a teen wellness centre. 
 
The Greenhead Health District values and participates in a 
number of interdisciplinary initiatives. The wellness centre is 
another example of a partnership between the Biggar School 
Board, along with the Prairie West Regional College and the 
Greenhead District Health Board. 
 
Teen wellness centres help youth gain information and support 
to help make responsible choices about their health and 
well-being. Having a wellness centre in a school will only 
enhance its importance and will benefit both the youth and the 
community at large. It’s appropriate that this kind of program 
for young people should be housed in the school. The 
connection between good education and good health is well 
established. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to commend the Greenhead Health 
District and the Biggar School Division and the community of 
Biggar for an innovative, comprehensive K to 12 education, 
adult learning, and health services available for young people in 
that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Davidson Citizen Runs in Boston Marathon 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise today 
to talk about a constituent of mine — Mr. Bob Bender of 
Davidson — where he is . . . if you’re around there, he is a 
familiar sight where he is out running every day. Bob originally 
took up running in 1985 at the insistence of a friend. He runs 
now every single day of the week, rain or shine. 
 
Today Bob is running in the Boston Marathon. The last time he 
ran in the Boston Marathon, he finished 248 out of a field of 
thousands. This time he hopes to finish in the top 20. 
 
In order to qualify to run at Boston, Bob had to compete at a 
certified marathon in . . . had to complete a certified marathon 
in less than 3 hours and 30 minutes for his age category. Bob 
recently celebrated his 50th birthday. 
 
The marathon is a long-distance foot race of 26 miles and 385 
yards. For members, this is approximately the distance on No. 
11 Highway from the town of Bladworth to the town of Craik. 
 
So I hope with all the members here that they will wish Bob the 
very best in running today and I will report his progress 
probably tomorrow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Co-op Agro Centre 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, if there is a group in our province 
that defines us as a society, I would argue that it’s our co-ops. 
Founded on the principle of co-operation, mutual self-help, and 
economic efficiencies, our co-ops and credit unions have been 
the heart of both our cultural and economic development. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Moose Jaw Co-operative 
Association on the grand opening of their new Agro Centre. 
Local producers now have another option when shopping for 
agricultural supplies. The Moose Jaw Co-op Agro Centre will 
more than double the previous Moose Jaw Co-op’s farm supply 
retail space. 
 
The new 8,000 square foot facility will basically be a farm 
hardware store. They will stock seasonable supplies such as 
lawn and garden in spring and summer and snow equipment in 
the fall and winter. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I should also mention that the Co-op 
is also planning a $1.6 million expansion to their gas bar facility 
in downtown Moose Jaw. 
 
The Moose Jaw Co-op Association consists of over 14,000 
members. Through this centre, they are adding to their 
reputation as a leader in the Moose Jaw marketplace and as a 
builder in our community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Broncos Still in WHL Playoffs 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the elimination of 
the Saskatoon Blades this past Friday, there is now only one of 
the five Saskatchewan WHL (Western Hockey League) cities 
left in the WHL playoffs. I’m referring of course to the Swift 
Current Broncos, the 2000 east division champions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I thought it’d be interesting today to look at 
some of the reasons behind the Broncos’ success. 
 
We should probably start with the heart and grit of our players; 
we should talk about the best goalie in junior hockey in Bryce 
Wandler. Also the fact that the Broncos can boast the services 
of the finest hockey coach in all of junior hockey in the country, 
Todd McLellan, cannot be overlooked. Nor can the amazing 
community spirit of Swift Current and area; it’s the smallest 
city to host a major junior hockey franchise on the continent. It 
could even be that the colour commentator on Bronco hockey 
telecasts is my constituency assistant. 
 
But if we only acknowledge these things, Mr. Speaker, we may 
be missing a more subtle reason behind the Broncos’ success 
and the lack of success of any other Saskatchewan franchise, for 
only one WHL city sent a Saskatchewan Party MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) to this place, Mr. Speaker. Sadly 
the rest of our WHL cities are now suffering under the same 
fate as the Saskatchewan Roughriders who have never won a 
Grey Cup under NDP rule in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But there is good news for these cities, Mr. Speaker. Soon and 
very soon, they too will send Saskatchewan Party members to 
this Assembly and they might also enjoy the same level of 
success that the Broncos have enjoyed in Swift Current. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Health Care Legislation in Alberta 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are all aware of the 
perennial underfunding for health the federal government 
offers. We’re also aware of the suggestions that Canadians 
should move towards a system of combined private and public 
health care. Alberta’s Ralph Klein has, as we all know, 
proposed legislation that will allow private clinics to open in 
Alberta. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Albertans and Canadians are saying no way 
to two-tiered health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Yesterday in Edmonton nearly 6,000 people 
protested against Klein’s Bill 11. This large show of anger 
proves that Canadians do not want public money paying for 
private, for-profit health care. Mr. Speaker, any time profit is 
introduced into a social service such as health, the service 
ceases to be a service and becomes a for-profit business. 
 
Listen, please. Universal health care is part of what it means to 
be Canadian. The New Democratic Party has always been and 
will continue to be dedicated to universal health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And let me say that we will not in Saskatchewan 
— the birthplace of health care — follow the lead of Alberta 
and Ralph Klein. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Volunteer Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the opportunity to represent the government at 
volunteer recognition awards in Prince Albert. It was sponsored 
by the North Central Regional Recreation Association. And this 
awards ceremony recognized the efforts of volunteers from 
Prince Albert and area. These volunteers have given of their 
time, abilities, and dedication. 
 
And I’d like to mention the names of the recipients and the area 
in which they were honoured: Lorraine Kouznitsoff of Blaine 
Lake for special services in sports; Lois Frederick of 
Paddockwood for special services; the Rosthern Old-Timers 
Hockey Club for culture, sports, and recreation; Hildegard Ryan 
of Candle Lake for sports; Howard Smith of MacDowall for 
recreation; Annette Heisler of Christopher Lake for special 
services; Roberta Burns of Prince Albert for culture; Raymond 
and Giselle Desjardins for special services — this is in 
Marcelin, Mr. Speaker — and from Weirdale, Dalton and 
Marilyn Stacey for special services. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

I also want to thank Ron Reves, Chair of this event, and all of 
the volunteers for making Prince Albert and our community a 
good place in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Twinning of Trans-Canada Highway 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, one of the busiest stretches of 
single-lane highway in the province runs through my 
constituency. It is also one of the deadliest. And every time 
there is a serious accident, people ask how many lives are going 
to be lost before this highway is twinned? Tragically they are 
asking that question again today — after Friday’s deadly crash. 
 
And Mr. Minister, this is the question I pose for you today. 
When will your government complete the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway in the west? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, of 
course, I want to — from the ministry and behalf of the 
government — extend our sincere sympathies to the three 
commercial drivers who tragically lost their lives on Friday 
afternoon, and certainly to their families and friends who were 
affected by this tragedy. And our hearts always go out to people 
who lose their lives prematurely. 
 
I want to also give notice that under . . . I will immediately after 
question period, or I should say more appropriately, before 
orders of the day, under rule 46 be asking leave to introduce an 
emergency motion regarding this tragedy, and the anticipated 
— or hopefully anticipated — additional support from the 
federal government to accelerate the twinning. 
 
I want to say first of all as well though, Mr. Speaker, that in 
1997, we did make a commitment to twin the two Trans-Canada 
Highways — No. 1 and 16 — over a 15-year period. And we 
anticipate, based on the current planning, to have that 
completed by 19 . . . or by 2012. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as 
horrible as Friday’s accident was — no one was really surprised 
by it. There’s a sense of inevitability. As long as this stretch of 
highway remains single lane, we’re going to continue to see 
serious accidents, injuries, and deaths. 
 
Now over a 12-year period, from 1987 to 1998, there were 900 
accidents, 358 injuries, and 26 people killed. In fact, I guess 
since 1979 there have actually been 40 deaths on that stretch of 
road. And now, Mr. Minister, three more people are dead. 
 
Fifteen years is too long. Even if you do it in half that time, it’s 
too long. It’s almost certain that we will see more injuries and 
deaths. 

Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to speed up this 
timetable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we have in this year’s 
budget committed $250 million to our Department of Highways 
— the highest in our department’s history. And part of that, Mr. 
Speaker, includes one of our highest priorities which is the 
twinning of our Trans-Canada Highway, both No. 1 and 16, 
where, as well, there is a great need. 
 
For this coming year, Mr. Speaker, on Highway No. 1, from the 
Manitoba border to Indian Head, we have committed . . . there 
is . . . I should say, there will be . . . there is 168 kilometres to 
do at a cost of $83 million, Mr. Speaker; on Highway No. 1 
from Gull Lake to the Alberta border, 108 kilometres at $49 
million; and Highway 16 from North Battleford to 
Lloydminster, 103 kilometres at a cost of $57 million. As you 
can see, these are huge costs. 
 
For this year we will begin construction of . . . on the divided 
highway from the Alberta border towards Maple Creek — a 
total of 20 kilometres, all of that in the member’s constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noted with interest 
that the minister indicated that he would be introducing an 
emergency motion later on in this afternoon’s proceedings. I 
would like the House to know that that idea came to the 
forefront after we had already filed our intention to present an 
emergency motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to address this question to the 
minister. The Saskatchewan Party agrees that the federal 
government has a role to play. Ottawa should be contributing to 
the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. Unfortunately the federal 
Liberals have abandoned this responsibility. We agree with you 
on that particular point. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning I wrote the Transport minister, 
David Collenette, calling on his government to work with you 
to speed up the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. Mr. Minister, 
have you contacted the federal Minister of Transport since 
Friday’s deadly accident? Have you told your federal 
counterpart that we need money to complete the twinning of 
this highway now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think first of all let 
me say that I think the member’s been responsible in his 
concern over the tragedy that occurred on Friday and I 
commend him for that. 
 
I want to point out though, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the 
headlines in the paper on Friday, it says that the cause of the 
accident — is the headline Monday I should say, today’s paper 
— is speed, visibility factors in the crash. And if I could read 
the first paragraph. It’s says in Maple Creek a vehicle slowing 
down due to swirling snow on the Trans-Canada Highway 
sparked a chain reaction collision part of it that that killed three 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

men and injured five, say RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police). 
 
So in this particular case it doesn’t appear that the twinning 
particularly was the issue. Although we acknowledge that it is 
critical that the twinning be done as quickly as possible, and 
with federal funds, Mr. Speaker, it can be accelerated to a great 
degree. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I want 
you to know that I’m willing to work with you to lobby the 
federal government on this issue for funding to complete this 
vital work. I’m willing to travel to Ottawa with you. I’ll even 
invite the federal minister out to Maple Creek to see for 
himself. Whatever it takes. 
 
Now let’s just get it done. That’s the sentiment of the people of 
the area, and I think of individuals who have suffered injury or 
death in their family as a result of that stretch of road, would 
agree. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, right now both levels of government have a 
role to play in this particular project. Immediately after question 
period I will be moving an emergency motion calling on both 
levels of government to work together to complete the twinning 
of the No. 1 Highway within three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more with 
the member in saying that both of levels of government have a 
responsibility to contributing funds for the construction of the 
divided highways, both 1 and 16. Right now, the province 
contributes about 95 or 96 per cent and the federal government 
about 4 per cent. So I agree that both levels of government have 
a responsibility to contribute. 
 
I would say as well, Mr. Speaker, that as recently as Thursday, 
coincidentally, I met with federal Minister Collenette, and this 
was specifically one of our agenda items, that is the lack of 
federal funding from the federal government towards the 
twinning of our Trans-Canada Highway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, apparently after being hammered at the polls in 
the last election and then increasing the PST (provincial sales 
tax) by $160 million and then forcing massive amalgamation 
down the throats of municipal governments, you finally come to 
the conclusion that things aren’t going so well. 
 
Now after a weekend of watching TV with a handful of NDP 
(New Democratic Party) faithful, you’re telling the media that 
you’ve heard the rural areas’ call. Is that true, Mr. Premier? 

Have you heard the thousands of people across Saskatchewan 
calling on you to drop your plan of forced municipal 
amalgamation? And will you act upon your deathbed 
conversion by calling off your plan for forced municipal 
amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I detect a very strong 
note of wishful thinking in the question by the Leader of the 
Opposition when he refers to deathbed repentances. And may I 
remind him in politics that when you make these kind of 
allusions they have a funny way of coming back to the 
questioner; and I don’t want to see you on a death bed 
repentance when it comes to some of the divided support in 
your caucus that exists. 
 
But to answer your question specifically, Mr. Speaker, this 
government never favoured forced amalgamation as the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs has said. We favour 
reorganization which is consensual, which is mutual, and which 
is collaborative. 
 
I’ve communicated that to SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) and to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). SARM is holding a special 
convention right now; we’ll see what they decide. SUMA is 
also considering it; we’ll see what they decide. At that point 
we’ll all be the wiser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
Premier for his concern, but I want him to know that everything 
is well and fine over here. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say you’re listening to the people. How is that 
possible, Mr. Premier, when not a single member of your 
cabinet attended even one of the public hearings on municipal 
amalgamation. Why didn’t you make it a priority to go to one of 
those public meetings yourself? 
 
Mr. Premier, if you’re really interested in what people think of 
your government, why didn’t you go and listen to the 800 
people at the Yorkton meeting on municipal amalgamation? Or 
if that was too difficult, why didn’t you go and listen to the 400 
people at Outlook or the 300 people right here in Regina the 
other day? 
 
Mr. Premier, their message was simple and clear — dump your 
plan of forced municipal amalgamation. Will you prove that 
you’re listening? Will you dump your plan of forced municipal 
amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make two 
points in response to the question. First of all as the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs has indicated time and time again, when 
Professor Garcea’s committee — composed of people like Val 
Kononoff from SARM, and people like Murray Westby from 
SUMA, and other distinguished Saskatchewan people — when 
that report, interim report, was prepared, it was the clear policy 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

of the government that that committee would go out in the 
country and to hear the response of the country and would 
report on what it heard to the government, upon which the 
government would then take its decision. Those public hearings 
have been conducted; we are awaiting the report of Garcea. 
That is why the government did not go, because it was 
mandating Garcea to do that. 
 
On the second question of forced amalgamation, the only 
political party that is on record favouring forced amalgamation 
is the Reg Downs’ document — your chief of staff. You are the 
only political party favouring forced amalgamation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
government keeps mentioning this report, so I looked at this the 
other day and there isn’t a single mention in that report of 
forced amalgamation. I have no idea what the Premier is talking 
about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the president of SARM, Mr. Sinclair 
Harrison, says that your government, Mr. Premier, has betrayed 
rural municipalities. He says you made a commitment to work 
with them, and then turned around and handed them an 
ultimatum. But then last week you said legislation of forced 
municipal amalgamation was just around the corner. You said 
the clock was ticking and time was running out. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, forced amalgamation for you is a ticking 
time bomb. And if you keep pushing it down the throats of 
municipalities, it’s going to blow up right in your face. If you’re 
really listening to the people, then you’d know what they’re 
saying. They’re saying no to forced amalgamation. 
 
Will you do that, Mr. Premier? Will you stand in the House and 
say no to forced amalgamation? SARM’s meeting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve already 
given the government’s answer with respect to this matter and I 
don’t think it’s of any merit for me to keep repeating it over and 
over again. 
 
But I am going to, in response to the Leader of the Opposition’s 
question — who seems to have a highly developed sense of 
revisionism when it comes to history and facts — to remind him 
in the document called: “A Call to Action — Reforming and 
Revitalizing Urban Government in Saskatchewan” written by 
the Saskatchewan Party. The following is said, quote: 
 

It is vital that this process (referring to restructuring) begin 
immediately. Too often when important changes are 
necessary people wait for the perfect moment to begin — 
when they enough money, when everyone is in complete 
agreement, when they’re certain they have all the answers. 
All of these conditions will never exist, the perfect moment 
to begin is now. 
 

That is what Mr. Reg Downs and the Saskatchewan Party 

wrote. The perfect moment to begin is now. No consultation, do 
it now. You’re for forced amalgamation. Tell me that you’re 
against forced amalgamation. When will you abandon your 
policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier would care to read that whole report 
instead of one little paragraph, he would find that forced 
amalgamation is not in that report once. Not once in that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the Minister of Education. 
Mr. Minister, we’ve been asking you for weeks to tell us where 
you stand on forced amalgamation. The question is simple, do 
the Liberals in this coalition government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please, order. Hon. 
members I would just bring to your attention Beauchesne’s, 6th 
Edition, paragraph 409, subparagraph (6): 
 

A question must be within the administrative competence 
of the Government. 
 

And further it states as well that ministers may not be 
questioned with respect to party responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
again, Mr. Speaker, is for the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, do the Liberals in the this coalition government 
support the NDP’s plan of forced municipal amalgamation? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just remind the hon. 
member that perhaps he may wish to redirect his question. I 
remind you once again, ministers may not be questioned with 
respect to party responsibilities, only on matters with respect to 
government responsibilities and government competence. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Education 
Minister said he is opposed to forced amalgamation which has 
to do with education tax, property tax, and has to do with the 
education portfolio. But he fully intends to vote for it in the 
legislature. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. He’s against it, but he’s 
going to vote for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a little like saying that you’re against 
drinking water until you get thirsty. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve already betrayed the voters once by 
joining the NDP. Will you take at least one step towards 
restoring your demolished credibility, and will you vote against 
forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to again give 
the answer . . . I’m going to, once again, Mr. Speaker, give the 
answer on behalf of the government. 
 
This is a follow-up question from the Leader of the Opposition. 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

The position of the government, again I repeat, is that we do not 
favour forced amalgamation nor stand for forced amalgamation. 
 
But I repeat to the hon. member from Saltcoats, that is not your 
condition. Your conditions are that, quote: “these conditions for 
amalgamation will never exist; the perfect moment to act is 
now.” That’s what you said — the perfect moment is to act 
now. Not a word on consultation, not a word on how they 
oppose forced amalgamation, but the perfect time to act is now. 
 
Come clean. When will the Saskatchewan Party abandon their 
plan for forced amalgamation? We’re against it. What are you 
for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if 
that member has any credibility at all, let’s let him answer for 
himself. We’d like to hear from him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the Minister of 
Education. Mr. Minister, a lot of people say that if you look 
closely you can see Velcro straps the NDP has sewn to your 
pants. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want you to 
shed that Velcro and stop being a puppet for the NDP 
government. Your own Liberal Party president says you should 
leave the coalition government if the NDP forces 
amalgamation. 
 
Isn’t it time to start listening? Thousands of people attended 
public hearings on amalgamation and sent a simple, direct 
message — say no to forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you really opposed to forced amalgamation, 
or was that just more political rhetoric? Is your word any good 
at all? Will you stop hiding . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thought your ruling 
was, if I may say so with the greatest of respect, the correct, the 
correct . . . no, it’s the correct ruling. It is the correct ruling. 
 
We answer questions here for the government decisions taken 
as a government. We do not answer questions about the New 
Democratic Party resolutions or about the Liberal Party 
resolutions. We answer questions on government policy. 
 
And I say to the hon. member from Saltcoats, since he’s in this 
area, The Leader-Post of Saturday, April 15th says clearly that 
the Liberal leader, Jim Melenchuk, said he opposes forced 
amalgamations of rural municipalities. There it is in black and 
white. 
 
Now he talks about Velcro, he talks about Velcro. I would make 
a little suggestion to the hon. member from Saltcoats and the 
Leader of the Opposition. When he says quote, the member 
from Saltcoats, “He has no apologies for whipping up 
opposition on the issue, no apologies whatsoever.” Both the 
Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, once 
again all we’re asking is for that member to stand and tell us 
where he stands. His comment the other day, and you didn’t 
follow through on it, was he is against forced amalgamation, 
but if it came and was introduced, he would vote in favour of it. 
Let that member stand and tell us. 
 
Mr. Minister, all we’re asking you to do is stand in this House 
today and tell us where you stand. Tell the public of 
Saskatchewan. Tell the thousands that they’re against forced 
amalgamation where you stand on this issue. Will you just do 
that once, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You see, Mr. Speaker, this is typical 
of the approach taken by the member from Saltcoats and the 
Leader of the Opposition. They make no apologies for 
whipping up the opposition. And they make no apologies, Mr. 
Speaker, in not following the rules of this House. It is clear — 
and I invite you, sir, to take a look at Beauchesne’s — that the 
government speaks on government issues, and we defend on 
government issues. 
 
If there’s any Velcro and it’s to be placed anywhere, the Velcro 
should be placed on the Leader of the Opposition and the 
member from Saltcoats for ripping up people falsely, and tell us 
the truth that you’re going to withdraw from your plan of forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Stand up and tell us your approach to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — This question is directed at a minister that I 
will, will hope . . . I hope will answer the question that’s 
directed at him, so the Minister of Municipal Affairs — not that 
easy. 
 
In all the talk about amalgamation, Mr. Speaker, there is always 
a suggestion that municipalities aren’t doing it on their own. 
Some of government needs to get involved and push it to make 
it happen. But that’s a false idea because due to legislation, 
RMs (rural municipalities) cannot amalgamate — they cannot 
— urban and rural — amalgamate. 
 
Municipal councillors are being criticized on some fronts for 
not being open-minded, not being willing to give up the status 
quo, for turf protection. But municipalities are co-operating — 
they’re sharing services already. They can’t go further, any 
further due to the urban municipal Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, instead of forcing 
Saskatchewan municipalities into your work model of 
amalgamation, will you commit to removing the legislative 
barrier preventing voluntary amalgamation? 
 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is what the 
Saskatchewan Party says about what they think about this issue 
of amalgamation. They say, “Too often when important 
changes are necessary, people wait for the so-called ‘perfect 
moment to begin,’ when they have enough money, when 
everyone is completely in agreement, when they are certain they 
have all the answers.” And then the Saskatchewan Party says 
this, “All these conditions will never exist. The perfect moment 
to begin is now.” 
 
These aren’t my words. That’s the word of the official 
opposition, and that’s what they would do. 
 
Now the member opposite gets up and he says would we 
support legislation with respect to voluntary amalgamation? 
Our position has always been for voluntary amalgamation and 
for an organized, collaborative way. 
 
It’s you people over there who are for the forced amalgamation, 
and here’s your paper to prove it. Disown it. Get out there and 
tell the public that you are opposed to forced amalgamation. 
You’ve never done it because you support forced amalgamation 
and we don’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really find it 
interesting that the Premier of this province will quote from a 
1992 SUMA document to defend his government’s position. 
There’s something wrong with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strong feelings around amalgamation are for 
one reason — because of scepticism of this government. And 
why wouldn’t people be sceptical of this government. When the 
health districts services Act was brought forward in 1993, the 
government said it would bring better services, lower costs, and 
higher local autonomy. The exact words of this NDP 
government. 
 
That hasn’t happened, Mr. Speaker. There’s been hospital 
closures, service reduction, higher health district debt, and 
district boards that are under the thumb of this government. You 
question why people are sceptical about rural amalgamation, 
about this government’s amalgamation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member to 
please go to his question. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. Will you commit to establishing voluntary pilot 
projects over a short term where amalgamation can be studied 
so it does make some economic sense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, to hear the hon. member 
talk about Saskatchewan’s health care system and contrast those 
words with what actually is happening in their model province 
of Alberta — their model province of Bill 11. Two-tier, bi-level 

speakers like the member from Weyburn — I gave you the 
quotation — she’s in favour of privatization, private for-profit 
hospitals under Bill 11, to stand up by their model and to say 
that that is better than Saskatchewan’s, defies any sense of 
reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll stack up this province’s delivery of health care 
to any province in Canada. We have reformed it and we’ve 
reformed it not without some mistakes, but we’ve reformed it in 
the principles of medicare and we’re committed to it. You’re 
not. You are for two-tier, you’re for private, for-profit health 
care; you will destroy it and the people of Saskatchewan know 
it just like you destroyed local government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I would 
ask leave to introduce a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under Rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before I acknowledge your 
request, I would ask your indulgence. Before orders of the day, 
I would just like to make a statement to the House. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question Period and Decorum 
 
The Speaker: — Over the past week there has been several 
developments during question period that have given me cause 
for concern. These concerns may stem from an unfamiliarity 
with the traditions of this Assembly or perhaps oversight by 
more veteran members. Nevertheless, regardless of the origins, 
I do wish to take this opportunity to remind all members of our 
practices, and seek your co-operation in respecting the 
traditions and practices of this Assembly. 
 
Firstly, there have been repeated instances when questions have 
been addressed to the Leader of the Liberal Party in regards to 
that party’s political platform. Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, in 
paragraph 409(6) states, and I quote: 
 

A question must be within the administrative competence 
of the Government. 

 
And further — order — and further in paragraph 410(17) that, 
and I quote: 
 

Ministers may not be questioned with respect to (their) 
party responsibilities. 

 
Comments regarding the political responsibilities of a minister 
or the Leader of the Opposition or of any other member are 
properly matters of debate. As such, they may be raised during 
debate on relevant topics in bills, estimates, and motions. 
During question period however, only questions touching upon 
the collective administrative responsibility of the government or 
the current individual responsibilities of a minister are properly 
the subject of oral questions. 
 
Secondly, members will be aware of the prohibition of 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

attempting to do indirectly what they are not permitted to do 
directly. In recent days there have been instances when 
members have quoted from documents and used inappropriate 
language. Unparliamentary language contained in a quotation 
delivered by a member is out of order on the same basis as if 
the language had originated from that member. The member 
must put their quote in their own terms, in language that is 
acceptable to this Assembly. 
 
Finally, just a general comment on the general decorum of this 
Assembly. The development of parliamentary procedure has 
seen the adoption of a number of practices intended to raise the 
level of debate in the eyes of both members and the general 
public. These range from not commenting upon the presence or 
absence of members in recognition that the work of elected 
representatives continues outside this Chamber to not attacking 
civil servants and other private individuals who are not able to 
respond publicly. 
 
It has also never been acceptable to characterize a colleague in 
demeaning terms. Despite this, there have been instances in 
recent days where the choice of words has come dangerously 
close to impugning the character or motives of a private citizen 
or to levelling a personal charge against a colleague. 
 
I caution all members to be temperate in their comments and to 
respect the parliamentary practices governing debates. It is a 
well-established tradition that all interventions are to be 
addressed through the Speaker and that members are to be 
referred to in the third person. The purpose of this tradition was 
noted in Marleau and Montpetit’s House of Commons 
Procedure and Practice at page 513, where it was stated that, 
and I quote: 
 

Since one of the basic principles of procedure in the House 
is that proceedings be conducted (in the course) in terms 
(pardon me) of a free and civil discourse, Members are less 
apt to engage in direct heated exchanges and personal 
attacks when their comments are directed to the Chair 
rather than to another Member. 
 

The result, if this practice is not followed, is for the debate to 
become more direct, more personal, and inevitably, hurtful and 
offensive. Allowing this to escalate will not reflect positively 
upon us, as members of this Assembly. In the words of one of 
my predecessors as Speaker, and I quote: 
 

I have full confidence in the ability of members to engage 
in forceful and spirited debate without having to resort to 
such avenues. I ask all Members to show due respect to 
their colleagues and their institution. 

 
This is a quote from Journals, March 29, 1996. 
 
I invite — I invite — and encourage all members to consider 
these comments as we start this new week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. member, you’ve requested to move a 
motion under rule 46. Would you briefly state the contents. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Joint Resolution for Twinning of No. 1 Highway 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday last the 
committee of the House was interrupted in its business by the 
news of another tragedy on the No. 1 Highway in the vicinity of 
Tompkins and Maple Creek. And we shut the business down at 
that time and I left the city and proceeded west. I was unable to 
visit the actual site of the accident, but in travelling there it 
occurred to me that far too much loss of life has happened on 
that stretch of road. 
 
There’s been tragedy after tragedy and in many cases we think 
only of the people who are killed in those unfortunate incidents, 
but the loss of life and limb or maybe capability to work is just 
as much a factor. 
 
So what I propose to do today is to urge the provincial 
government and the federal government to work together so that 
we can expedite the twinning of that very deadly stretch of road 
in a period of three years. And that is the purpose of my motion 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — You have heard the request for leave to move 
a motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Last Friday when we adjourned in 
the spirit of co-operation so the member for Maple Creek could 
go to his constituency as he did . . . And I listened to him 
carefully on the radio and I think he was very careful not to 
make this a political issue. 
 
I wonder if we couldn’t, because of the two resolutions that are 
being talked about, take a 10-minute adjournment and see if we 
couldn’t get a motion that could be moved from the member 
from Maple Creek or by our Minister of Highways, seconded 
by the other side, so that we could have a joint resolution in the 
spirit of co-operation, if he would consider that. 
 
The Speaker: — You have heard the comments of the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the light of 
the seriousness of this particular issue and in its timeliness and 
necessity, we would agree to take a 10-minute recess to 
negotiate with the government on the wording and presentation 
of such a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands recessed for 10 minutes. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — This House will now resume. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is an important 
issue that is before the House this afternoon and I’m gratified 
that there is emergent consensus and co-operation on this 
particular subject . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would seek the 
leave of the House. 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. I have in 
my hand the motion that we will be moving. I’d like to just read 
it quickly before I begin speaking to it, if I may, sir. 
 

That this Assembly, in light of yet another tragedy on the 
untwinned portion of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan, urges the provincial government and 
federal government to immediately develop a plan to 
complete the twinning of Highway No. 1 within three 
years; and that the transcripts of this debate this afternoon 
be sent to the Prime Minister, the federal Minister of 
Transportation, all Saskatchewan Members of Parliament, 
and all federal party leaders in the House of Commons. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an issue of partisan politics; this is an 
issue of continuing human tragedy. This is not an issue of 
simply constituency politics; it’s an issue of province-wide 
concern. It’s not an issue of simple parochial or even provincial 
concern; it’s growing to be an issue with national implications. 
 
This is an issue that cannot wait for another eight years before 
final resolution. Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that must be 
addressed sooner than later for the sake of lives of the hundreds 
of thousands of people who drive the stretch of road now 
commonly referred to as suicide alley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m quite familiar with that stretch of road. I’ve 
lived in the southwest part of Saskatchewan since 1982. And 
while there have been improvements made to the road, they 
haven’t been substantive to the point where we can save the 
lives of many people. 
 
I know the conditions on that stretch of road yesterday were not 
. . . I’m sorry, on Friday, were not good. I know there were 
weather-related concerns. But the reality is that twinning that 
stretch of road would possibly save some lives. It certainly 
would have precluded some injuries and we wouldn’t be in this 
position today, discussing that section of road once again, for 
the tragedy it has brought to bear on people. 
 
Having driven that road many times, Mr. Speaker, having lived 
in the southwest as I said from 1982, I’ve had the opportunity to 
experience all kinds of conditions on that road. There are very 
narrow and winding sections. There are areas of very poor 
visibility. There are areas where it looks like there’s a long, flat 
plain in which to pass, and yet, all of a sudden over the rise that 
has been lost in the horizon, a couple of vehicles will appear 
unexpectedly. 
 
Not only have I had the experience of driving that road in all 
conditions, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also experienced the loss of 
friends and acquaintances on that road. And the tragedy that 
that brings to bear on the communities of the southwest is 
substantial. 
 
And as the tally mounts, the loss becomes excruciating. And the 
question then becomes, how many more people have to give 
their lives on this stretch of road? How many more injuries will 
there be? How many more debilitating effects will result out of 
these incidents? 
 

And even though we ask those questions, we’ve almost learned 
to live with the consequences. We’ve almost learned to tolerate 
it in a macabre sort of way. We can’t avoid using the highway if 
we want to go west to Medicine Hat or other points, if we want 
to go east from the communities of Maple Creek, or the points 
north of the No. 1, for instance Leader or Burstall or Golden 
Prairie. You have to drive that road in order to go to Swift 
Current and points beyond to the east. 
 
So every time we get in our vehicles and head out on that 
stretch of road, we know we are putting our lives are risk. And 
there’s a certain danger that we’ve been asked to live with, and 
we have lived with it. 
 
But I believe the people of southwest Saskatchewan have 
reached a point where they say, enough is enough. We just 
cannot tolerate this situation any longer. But not only has that 
attitude been exhibited by the people of the southwest, we’re 
finding now that there are people throughout this province who 
are beginning to say the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember, I think it was 1997, when there was a 
mother and daughter killed in a tragic accident just a little 
further east from this particular accident site. And the mother 
and grandmother of the two ladies or two people that were 
killed took it upon herself to initiate a province-wide petition 
campaign. 
 
And if I remember correct, at that time she was able to generate 
30,000 signatures of Saskatchewan citizens on the petitions that 
she had out in the public at that time, encouraging action on the 
twinning of the No. 1 Highway. Thirty thousand people 
throughout Saskatchewan agree in petition form that that 
particular highway needs to be twinned . . . that for safety 
purposes and also to accommodate the much greater level of 
commercial traffic. 
 
Thirty thousand people — we’ve rarely seen those kinds of 
numbers on any petition in this province. And I think that it 
behooves the government to look at those signatures and say, 
this is a serious issue. 
 
I’m not holding the provincial government entirely to blame in 
this respect. You have to understand that. 
 
Building highways in Saskatchewan, fortunately, is a lot less 
expensive than in BC; but it’s still incredibly expensive. And it 
can’t be accomplished in the time frame that’s necessary, by the 
province alone. And that’s why this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
addresses the responsibility of the federal government in this 
particular situation. 
 
We have not had federal government support for highway 
programs, of any significance, for several years now. And 
according to the last, or more recent budget that the federal 
government provided, we’re not likely to get any for another 
four years. It’s unconscionable in my estimation that a 
government that prides itself in being a national government 
would so clearly abdicate it responsibilities in an area that is 
clearly their prerogative. 
 
The national highway project or the national highway system is 
absolutely their prerogative. And with the understanding that 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

the provincial government plays a role in setting up a timetable 
and where to funnel the funds most exactly and specifically, 
those two levels of government together can accomplish what 
we’re asking for today. 
 
We believe that if the federal government even put a portion of 
the money they raise in terms of fuel taxes into this project — a 
small portion — we could complete this. We could see it done, 
and many of these types of accidents prevented in a very short 
time frame. And that’s why my motion today asks for a specific 
three-year time frame. It is doable. The only thing that is 
missing here is the will to accomplish what has to be done. 
 
And sometimes I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the federal 
government doesn’t feel they can ignore our needs out here, 
because it’s been a long time since we’ve elected a federal 
Liberal member. And I don’t want to press that area too much, 
but it seems like governments tend to funnel the money to the 
areas which are most supportive of their agendas. And in this 
case, the federal Liberals know that there has not been much 
support for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Maple Creek volunteered in a 
tremendous way, in a very quick manner, to attend to the 
accident scene. They’ve been called to do that many times in 
the past as have other communities in that vicinity. I’m thinking 
specifically of the community of Gull Lake. 
 
But volunteer fire departments, emergency services personnel, 
medical people have attended to these types of tragedies time 
and time again, and even though they have become, I don’t 
want to say hardened but used to attending these types of things 
because they happen so frequently, this last episode took a 
maybe a greater toll on the people of those communities than 
some of the previous accidents may have because it was such a 
huge mass of tangled wreckage. 
 
The destruction was so complete. If you saw the pictures on 
TV, the coverage that arose as a result of the accident site, there 
was nothing left of the buses but a steel frame. I have never 
seen that kind of consequence in a bus accident before. The 
livestock tractor-trailer unit was ripped wide open and the 
tractor burned and the trailer just a mangled mess. 
 
The other unspoken tragedy of this, I suppose, is the complete 
annihilation of some of the victims in this accident. And when 
volunteers, who live a daily life that is protected from that kind 
of disaster ordinarily, encounter these kinds of scenes it can be 
very devastating for them and can have a lifelong impact. 
 
It’s the kind of stuff that nightmares are made of. And I 
understand that some of the people of the community of Maple 
Creek are going to undergo, or are going to require some 
additional counselling to help support them get through this 
time of difficulty as a result of their attendance at this accident. 
 
(1445) 
 
I can’t understand the agony and the shock it might be to the 
psyche of people who rush to volunteer in these kinds of 
tragedies, because I personally have never been involved in 
that. But I do know that it is becoming far too common, Mr. 
Speaker, for the people of my constituency, for the people of 

the communities along what is known as suicide alley, to be 
involved in those kinds of situations. 
 
I want to applaud them today because without their quick 
response, without the dedicated action of many volunteers, we 
may have seen more loss of life as a result of this accident. And 
I’d like to congratulate those people for doing their duty as a 
minimum and going beyond their duty to help the people of that 
particular scene. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, the people of southwest Saskatchewan 
are most immediately and directly affected. There have been 
petitions in the past, trying to involve the people of the 
province. 
 
I think that that may be paying some dividends now, because I 
know Mr. Doug Archer, the mayor of the city of Regina and 
also the chairman of the Trans-Canada Highway association, 
spoke clearly on the radio on Friday afternoon indicating that 
this particular portion of highway was not only a concern to 
their association from a safety standpoint, but also very clearly 
an inhibitor in terms of the economic activities of our province. 
 
And as our province has played host to many of the commercial 
truckers that traverse the country, tremendous amounts of traffic 
are narrowed down to a very confined 16-foot surface going 
either way — eight feet of it paved; in some places several feet 
of it gravel. You can’t funnel that much activity into that 
narrow a space and not expect at some point or other, unless 
conditions are absolutely ideal, to have anything but these kind 
of incidents from time to time. 
 
I might stand to be corrected on this, but I was visiting with I 
believe it was the former deputy minister of Highways. And if 
my recollection is right, he told me that 80 per cent of the 
traffic, the heavy commercial truck traffic that comes into this 
province uses Saskatchewan as a transit or a conduit to move 
goods back and forth from the northeastern United States over 
to Alberta and British Columbia and points beyond. 
 
So that means we’re not only playing host to our own 
commercial traffic, much of our commercial traffic — in fact 
probably the vast majority of it — is coming from out of 
province and out of state. And it’s all funnelled into that narrow 
stretch of road. 
 
And we’re grateful for the four-lane project that was opened 
from Gull Lake to just west of Tompkins last spring. But there 
is a stretch from there to the Alberta border that is in serious 
need of twinning. And I would say that from a national 
perspective we’ve got about 60 miles there of single-lane 
highway where all of that traffic is concentrated. 
 
And as I have lived there over the last 18 years, I’ve noticed a 
significant increase in the number of trucks. The reason I know 
that the truck traffic is so significantly higher than it once was, 
was plainly obvious when I was driving home on Friday 
afternoon. Because of the accident, they were stopping all 
traffic through the accident zone, at Redcliff or near the Alberta 
border, and also at the weigh scales just outside of Swift 
Current. Regular traffic was allowed to proceed uninterrupted 
until you got close to the accident site and then you had to take 
a detour. 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

But the use of that road, the traffic on that road, from the weigh 
scale west to Gull Lake was almost nil. Having removed all of 
the truck traffic on that particular stretch of road, there was very 
little vehicular traffic — there was very little traffic other than 
the trucks that normally traverse that particular road. 
 
So having said that, I guess the point I’m trying to make is that 
this is no longer something that is just unique to the southwest 
and the residents of the southwest part of this province, 
although we are the ones that live with the tragedies and the 
clean-up and the consequences, often. 
 
It’s no longer just a provincial issue. It has become a national, 
and in some respects, an international issue. Without making 
too much of that, I’m just trying to say that the concentration of 
traffic in that area, from across our country, from across the 
northeast part of the United States and the central part of the 
States that comes up all concentrating on that very narrow, 
lengthy strip of road, creates a ticking time bomb every day. 
 
And I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that this issue cannot be 
addressed in a partisan way. It’s going to require the good 
graces of this House on both sides and it’s going to require the 
goodwill and the determination of the federal government to 
address this problem. 
 
And through that motion . . . or through my motion today, Mr. 
Speaker, I am hoping to achieve that. 
 
One of the things that I have done as the member for that 
constituency to initiate some action over and above the motion 
that we have presented in the House today, or will be presenting 
again, is to offer my support to the government of the day, to 
the Minister of Highways, to work co-operatively with them to 
achieve the goals that we have set out here. 
 
I have offered to fly to Ottawa, if it’s necessary, to lobby the 
federal minister. I have offered to host the federal minister and 
the provincial minister, if he’d like to come, into the 
constituency of Cypress Hills, to drive the road in question, to 
point out just how serious the potential for mishaps are on that 
stretch of road. And I’ve already spoken with some federal 
members of parliament offering my request for funds, offering 
the urgency of the situation to them. And I’m gratified with the 
response we’ve had. Now I just need about 300-and-some-odd 
more members to see the urgency of the matter as well. 
 
But I think we have to start somewhere. This is an issue that 
may take some time to convince the powers that be of its 
urgency, but we have to start and I believe that this motion 
today is the first step in that direction. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would like to read my motion again 
and put it to the House. I am moving it on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party, and my understanding is that this will be 
seconded by the Hon. Minister of Highways, Mr. Maynard 
Sonntag, from the constituency of . . . I’m sorry. Did I spell it 
right? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion again, reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly in light of yet another tragedy on the 
untwinned portion of the Trans-Canada Highway in 

Saskatchewan, urges the provincial government and the 
federal government to immediately develop a plan to 
complete the twinning of Highway No. 1 within three 
years; and that the transcripts of this debate be sent to the 
Prime Minister, the federal Minister of Transportation, all 
Saskatchewan members of parliament, and all federal party 
leaders in the House of Commons. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, let 
me say I’m pleased to rise and second the motion and just say 
that with very few exceptions, I agree essentially with the 
motion, but certainly with the intent of the motion. And it’s my 
understanding that the member from North Battleford will be 
moving following my words just a very few, minor, agreed-to 
amendments. 
 
It is, first of all let me say, a truly unfortunate set of 
circumstances that causes us to be here today making this 
motion. I’d first like to again offer my condolences to the 
families and friends of the three commercial drivers who 
tragically lost their lives near Maple Creek just last Friday. 
There’s nothing so tragic as the premature loss of life, Mr. 
Speaker. Traffic collisions involving fatalities are devastating to 
families and touch, I think, all of us very deeply. So our hearts 
truly go out to all of those involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s especially appropriate to 
accommodate and recognize the prompt response and actions of 
many people during this tragic collision. We would like to 
sincerely thank and recognize Mr. Marlin Heidrick who was 
first on the scene and helped pull one of the vehicles away from 
being engulfed in flames; certainly the local RCMP and the 
emergency fire and rescue teams from Maple Creek, Piapot, and 
Gull Lake who were at the accident site within minutes; the 
local ground and air ambulance crews who played a pivotal 
role; and the many passing motorists who helped with the 
injured. 
 
And of course, the Department of Highways and Transportation 
crews who assisted with traffic control and reopening the 
highway to the public. Mr. Speaker, we thank all those involved 
for their assistance and their caring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also as a result of Friday’s tragic collision, five 
people remain in hospital and we wish them a speedy and early 
recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government understands and fully appreciates 
the need for twinning Saskatchewan national highways. And as 
I said in question period, Mr. Speaker, coincidentally as 
recently as just this past Thursday, I met with Minister 
Collenette, and one of our agenda items was specifically this 
issue of the need for the federal government to assist the 
province in — financially, I should say — assist the province in 
the many projects that we have in Saskatchewan with respect to 
transportation, and most specifically the issue of twinning. And 
we spent some considerable time talking about that. 
 
I also want to say to individuals from that area, I’ve met with 
the area transportation planning committee on several 
occasions. They’ve indicated to me the importance of the 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

twinning, and certainly I personally have been through that area 
on many occasions, as recently as about three weeks ago. So I 
am not unfamiliar with that area and that stretch of road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognized this fact — the importance of 
twinning — several years ago. And that’s why in 1997 this 
government announced that we would twin Highway No. 1 
from border to border. At that same time, we also committed to 
twinning Highway No. 16 between North Battleford and 
Lloydminster within 15 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, our government made the 
commitment to twin our two national highways without any 
federal assistance. After more than a decade of discussions and 
negotiations with the federal government, we decided that we 
had to go it alone and get the job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truly unfortunate the federal government 
would not join the provinces in a cost-shared program to rebuild 
our national highways. It’s truly also unfortunate that Canada is 
one of the few countries in the world that does not have a 
federal or at least a federally assisted national highway 
program. 
 
In Britain, as an example, 100 per cent of the highways are paid 
for by the federal government. In France, it’s 68 per cent; in 
Spain, it’s 64 per cent; and in Australia, it’s 51 per cent. In 
Italy, it’s 44 per cent, and in Germany, it’s 36 per cent. And, 
Mr. Speaker, south of our border, it’s 31 per cent. In fact, not so 
very long ago their government announced it was spending 27 
billion to upgrade their interstate system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Canada the federal contribution to highways 
right now is only about 5 per cent, with slightly less than that 
actually coming to Saskatchewan. The federal government must 
come to the table, and that’s why . . . Mr. Speaker, as well, I 
would note that in our plan, if we were to go it alone, we have 
scheduled to finish off the stretch that has brought this motion 
before us today, to have that completed by the year 2008. 
 
With even 50-cent dollars, Mr. Speaker, from the federal 
government, we could certainly reduce that time considerably. 
In fact, we could cut it in half, which would get us having 
completed that section of road by the year 2004. So in four 
years, with 50-cent dollars, Mr. Speaker, we could certainly 
have that stretch completed. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government has had to go it alone, 
we’ve made progress though on our commitment to twinning. 
We now are on track to complete twinning Highway No. 1 west 
by 2008, I say — as I just said, I should say — without federal 
contributions, and Highway 16 by 2010, and Highway No. 1 
East by 2012. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are on track. And with federal funding in a 
cost-shared program, we could reduce the number of years 
required substantially, as I’ve just said. 
 
We have taken a balanced approach to twinning. We are 
balancing highway and transportation needs throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker. We are balancing the needs between 

high volume provincial highways, our rural highway system, 
and our northern highways, along with our need to twin. 
 
Twinning is very expensive, and it can cost up to half a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, to twin one kilometre of highway. And 
this year we are spending more than $13 million to the twinning 
of our national highway system. This year we have already 
announced that we will building 19 kilometres of Highway 1 
beginning at the Alberta border and moving eastward from the 
Alberta border. And this year we will also complete grading of 
33 kilometres on Highway No. 1 East, just east of Indian Head. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will be grading 16 kilometres of 
Highway No. 1 West . . . 16 kilometres on the highway west of 
Maidstone to just east of Lashburn, and paving also an 
additional 11 kilometres from west of Lashburn to east of 
Marshall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are twinning our national . . . Mr. Speaker, we 
are twinning on our national highways and we have taken a 
balanced approach with the resources available. I cannot say 
enough times, Mr. Speaker, that to accelerate twinning we need 
the federal government to come to the plate. 
 
The bottom line is, though, is that twinning is extremely 
expensive. To twin from Gull Lake to the Alberta border, as an 
example, it would cost us $50 million; from Indian Head to the 
Manitoba border, the cost will be in excess, Mr. Speaker, of $83 
million; and to twin from North Battleford to Lloydminster it 
will cost us approximately $57 million. This is a tremendous 
amount of highway funding . . . there is a tremendous amount of 
highway funding and we need the federal government to assist 
us in that regard. 
 
National highways are very important to the economy of this 
country and they are the link that holds Canada together from 
east to west. The federal government has responsibility to 
become more involved than they are now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m calling on all parties in the House to help the 
government lobby the federal government to come to the table 
to help Saskatchewan accelerate its twinning program through 
an effective federal/provincial cost-shared program. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in support 
of the motion which has been very ably put to us by the hon. 
member for Cypress Hills and seconded by the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
However, as I think it’s already been alluded to by the Minister 
of Highways, I think we would be remiss in our duties to the 
province as a whole if we moved a motion on the one 
Trans-Canada route and ignored the second Trans-Canada route 
which is also in the process of being twinned. 
 
So while we all feel very deeply the most recent tragedy in our 
province which was on the No. 1, we also know that the need of 
the No. 16 or Yellowhead is just as pressing, and we also know 
that the accident and unfortunately the fatality statistics for the 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

Yellowhead are just as distressing. 
 
So I respectfully submit to the mover and seconder but to all 
members of this House, that our concern should be for the 
twinning program generally for both national routes, and I also 
submit that we have a strong case to take to the federal 
government that from sea to sea includes a national highway 
system to bind this country together. 
 
That was done in the 1950s. That was done in the 1950s, 
completed in 1959. Unfortunately there are many who would 
say that our national highway system in many cases, is in a 
1950s mode to this day, so it needs to be brought now into the 
21st century. 
 
And this is not a case of the provincial government trying to 
avoid its responsibility or, you know, shove the blame over onto 
somewhere else. It is a simple case that we do not have the 
fiscal resources to do everything that needs to be done in this 
area. And, if we are going to have a highway system deserved 
by this great country, it requires the assistance and participation 
of the federal government. 
 
Well, in that regard too, I know that the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills has made a concerted effort not to be partisan or 
political in his comments and I appreciate that. But it does have 
to be said that the twinning of our two national highways across 
Saskatchewan is a $189 million project. And of course 
Saskatchewan to do that in three years is simply, unfortunately, 
beyond the fiscal resources of our province, particularly if you 
throw into that mix continual demands for massive slashing of 
taxes. 
 
The breakdown as I understand it as follows. In order to 
complete the twinning of No. 1 Trans-Canada east requires 83 
million; No. 1 Trans-Canada west is 49 million; and No. 16, 
Battlefords to Lloydminster, is 57 million. That’s the total, Mr. 
Speaker, of $189 million for 379 kilometres of highway. 
 
Well, if we look at the statistics for the road sections, and I 
know statistics seem rather cold and hard compared to real lives 
that are ruined by the tragedy of motor vehicle accidents. But 
what we see in the case of the Yellowhead, Mr. Speaker, is that 
from 1993 to 1997, a total of 13 fatalities, and we see total 
accidents involving injuries of 52, and total accidents of 151. 
From 1994 to 1998, total accidents were 153; those resulting in 
personal injury were 55; and the fatalities were 11. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I certainly don’t wish to set up a 
competition in who kills the most people, the Yellowhead or the 
Trans-Canada, but I would say that those figures are 
comparable for the Trans-Canada west. And so I say it would 
be a . . . it would be crass in the extreme to set up a competition 
between the two, but I do want to dramatize that we can’t be 
interested in the one without being concerned about the other. 
 
And it is for that reason that I would ask that all hon. members 
would support me in bringing an amendment to this motion 
which would provide that we would support the twinning of 
both the national highways, and that this be completed in four 
years. 
 
Now the motion by the hon. member from Cypress Hills was 

that we complete the twinning of the one in three. I think if we 
complete the twinning of both within four years that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Major accomplishment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, that that would indeed be a major 
accomplishment and far, far better than the 15 years which has 
already been committed to by the province of Saskatchewan on 
its own. And I would hope that we would press on the federal 
government the need, for a country as great as ours, to have a 
highway system in keeping with the needs of this country. 
 
So in that . . . with those few remarks I would like to move, and 
I believe it is seconded by the hon. member for Swift Current, 
that the motion be amended as follows. 
 

That the words “and No. 16” be added after the word 
Highway No. 1. 

 
And further: 
 

That the word three be substituted with the four. 
 
I so move this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a sombre but a 
welcomed opportunity to enter this very important debate today 
on the emergency resolution put forward by my colleague, the 
member for Cypress Hills, and on the amendments proposed by 
the member for North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I participate in this debate today, and when I do so 
I’m conflicted by several different perspectives on this issue. 
One, of course, as a representative of the people of Swift 
Current and area in this legislature. Two, as a former member of 
the Trans-Canada No. 1 West board of directors. And three, as a 
motorist and as someone who travels the highway often, 
generally with my family — with my wife and three kids. And 
we often make trips to Cypress Hills. And so there are different 
perspectives from which I can view today’s debate. Each of 
them, I think, each of them fairly compelling. 
 
I think it’s also significant, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment 
that has been proposed by the member for North Battleford 
would receive some bipartisan support because clearly the 
changes in it not only impact on the length of time that twinning 
will take; but also, they add the Yellowhead Highway to the 
motion. 
 
And I think it’s important for all of us, when it comes to 
holding the federal government accountable for federal/national 
highways in our province, that members on all sides of the 
House work together. Those of us who live close to the 
Trans-Canada may not like the fact, Mr. Speaker, but the fact 
exists nonetheless that Highway 16 — the Yellowhead — has 
been designated a national highway. And so, it too — as any 
national highway in any nation — should receive some funding 
for its maintenance and improvement from the national 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just first off from the perspective that I have into 
this issue as a member of the legislature for Swift Current and 
area; I can tell you that this issue received a lot of discussion 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

during the election. It was of great interest to people on the 
doorsteps. It remains a big issue. People talk about it on coffee 
row. They do so prior to the terrible news such as we heard on 
Friday. It’s just a matter of discussion. 
 
Especially during the wintertime when road conditions can 
always be a little bit questionable, people generally talk about 
that stretch of highway, as the hon. member from Cypress Hills 
has referred to it — suicide alley — as a very dangerous part. 
It’s a part of everyday discussion, especially when the weather 
turns bad. And then when a tragedy strikes of the proportions of 
Friday’s, we of course hear about it a lot more as MLAs. 
 
I can tell you as well that the people in my constituency, and I 
think it’s fair to say the people in, certainly in Cypress Hills 
constituency and in Wood River and in the ridings around the 
southwest part of our province, I can tell you that people there 
would gladly take the challenge of setting priorities. And I 
know that the challenge must be daunting. There are a lot of 
demands out there for highway improvements and maintenance 
that I know must be on the department and the minister. 
 
But I’m sure they would take the challenge. I’m sure they 
would even delete a few of their own pet projects, and every 
area has their own small, little road changes that they would 
like to make — all groups of people do. I’m sure that they 
would trade a lot of those off to accomplish what we speak 
about in this particular motion today — to accomplish the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway to the Alberta border, 
and also from Indian Head to the Manitoba border, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And while I can’t speak from personal knowledge, I don’t doubt 
that people feel exactly the same way in the North Battleford 
area — the people who live along the Yellowhead Route from 
North Battleford to Lloydminster. 
 
(1515) 
 
The second perspective that I have when I consider the motion, 
Mr. Speaker, is that of a former member of the board of 
directors of a group called the Trans-Canada No. 1 West 
Association. Many people, many members here will have heard 
the chairman of that organization commenting on the accident 
and commenting on the emergent need for twinning of that 
particular highway. 
 
He is Mayor Doug Archer, and he actually was the founding 
Chair of our organization of the Trans-Canada No. 1 West 
Association. And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I think Mayor Archer 
has done an excellent job as Chair of that particular association. 
 
The goals of our association from the outset — and I as the 
member for Swift Current wholeheartedly supported them — 
were twofold: one being marketing the Trans-Canada Highway 
as a preferred route for both commercial and tourism traffic; 
and two, twinning, to lobby for twinning, to lobby for the 
continued capital improvement and maintenance of the 
Trans-Canada Highway. And I think it’s on the latter that the 
association has had some positive impact, and I think our 
chairman, Mayor Archer, has done a good job in that regard. 
 
I should also congratulate, Mr. Speaker, those other members of 

the board, past and present, who’ve made the twinning a 
priority. Mayor Ray Boughen of Moose Jaw has served that 
association very well in making the case for twinning. The 
mayor of Medicine Hat very graciously came onto that 
association’s board when perhaps he didn’t have to because, of 
course, when you get to Walsh, it’s twinned already. There is 
very little lobbying he needs to do as a city mayor in terms of 
twinning the No. 1 Highway; theirs has been twinned for some 
time. 
 
But Mayor Ted Grimm, I believe is his name came on as an 
original board member to join the mayor of Regina, myself 
from Swift Current and the mayor of Moose Jaw. And the 
founding member for Brandon was the then mayor, Rick 
Borotsik, who’s now a Member of Parliament in Canada. 
 
And the association has made a lot of progress, I think, in terms 
of drawing the attention of federal politicians to this issue. And 
let’s make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, there is precious few 
people in our province, and frankly in western Canada, that 
need to be convinced of the arguments that we’re making here 
today. But there is a good number of federal politicians, federal 
Members of Parliament, who need that convincing; who need to 
understand the urgency of this matter; who need to be appalled 
by the fact that Canada is the only OECD (Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) nation without a 
national highway plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Federal politicians need to be aware that this clearly is their 
responsibility. When people send their taxes to Ottawa, when 
they pay their GST (goods and services tax), and when they file 
their income tax in a couple of weeks, they have certain 
expectations, Mr. Speaker, frankly that are meet and right, and 
one of them is infrastructure — is basic, national infrastructure; 
basic national safety on the highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so now with this motion we see that the government side 
agrees that the twinning needs to happen a lot sooner than it 
has, Mr. Speaker. And we welcome that awareness. We also 
welcome the fact that they also agree with us that the federal 
government needs to accept its responsibility in this regard. 
 
I guess, the . . . and I know that there’ll be support from the 
Trans-Canada No. 1 West Association for the efforts of this 
Assembly here today. Mayor Archer and the association are on 
record as of Friday speaking to these very same issues and I 
know they would support the efforts of this legislature here 
today with regards to both the provincial and federal 
government coming to the table for the Trans-Canada Highway 
and for Highway 16. 
 
I guess a third perspective that I come to this debate with, Mr. 
Speaker, is that of a motorist and someone who drives that 
highway quite a bit. We have the absolute finest provincial park 
in the province located in the southwest. It’s the Cypress Hills 
Provincial Park. And the member for Cannington is agreeing 
wholeheartedly, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome his endorsements. 
 
And like anyone else in Swift Current, we like to take 
advantage of that beautiful park. We go there quite a bit during 
the summertime. There’s various events and festivals over the 
past that we’ve also attended in the Maple Creek area. And of 
course just generally whenever we travel west, we obviously 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

find ourselves travelling down this very same stretch of 
highway that has spawned this resolution today and this debate 
that we’re having. 
 
And I would be less than truthful, Mr. Speaker, if I told you that 
I was not concerned every single time I took myself and my 
wife and my three young children down that highway to go to 
the park, either going to it or coming back home. Because the 
truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a scary situation, 
that particular stretch of highway, especially when you’re 
driving on a weekend; especially when there are campers on the 
highway, the commercial traffic’s on the highway, there’s local 
traffic, clearly, on the highway; and all of these people are using 
this particular stretch of road. 
 
The traffic numbers on the road skyrocket in the summer, 
especially on weekends. And I’m just so very thankful when I 
get to the twin portion, Mr. Speaker, because I know that the 
rest of the way will be, you know, relatively safe in terms of 
travelling. 
 
So those are the three perspectives that I bring to this debate on 
behalf of my constituents, on behalf of my former colleagues on 
the Trans-Canada No. 1 Association board and the members of 
that association, as well as on behalf of all of my friends and 
neighbours who are simply motorists and have to travel that 
highway very, very frequently. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate to you that I 
will be supporting both the motion, Mr. Speaker — the spirit of 
the motion was that the provincial and federal governments join 
together to speed up the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway, and the amendment added the Yellowhead Highway 
as well as substituted the word “three” with the word “four.” 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to second the 
motion by the member of North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:23 p.m. until 3:33 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas — 51 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble McPherson Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Hermanson Elhard Julé 
Draude Boyd Gantefoer 
Toth Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 

McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
 

Nays — Nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington, and by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with Hansard and 
transcript, be communicated to the bereaved families of the 
accident victims, on behalf of the Assembly, by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an 
accountable, forthwith government, I would like to table the 
answer to question 128. And as usual, we’re always pleased to 
do it. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 128 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Department of Agriculture 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to speak to the amendment of the financial 
assistance section of The Department of Agriculture Act. And 
these amendments will allow the department to enter into a 
variety of repayment agreements where the Saskatchewan 
Department of Agriculture and Food provides funding for 
development of new agriculture food products and 
technologies. 
 
We want to amend The Department of Agriculture Act to 
include the word food, to reflect the current mandate of our 
department. The department’s mandate is to add value to 
agriculture by fostering a commercially viable, self-sufficient, 
and sustainable agriculture, here in the province, and food 
industry in partnership with the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this mandate addresses the need of individual 
farmers, and encourages and develops a higher-value 
production in processing and promotes institutional changes 
required to meet the challenges and opportunities of the global 
economy. In addition, of the food and, in some instances, 
agri-food throughout the Act, we will reflect and it will reflect, 
the overall mandate of the department. 
 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

Mr. Speaker, it is desirable that some of Saskatchewan’s 
Agriculture and Food financial assistance agreements develop 
new products or technologies to provide for the repayment 
terms in the event of successful commercialization of products 
or technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the financial assistance section is being amended 
to include the taking of security and to allow for unique 
repayment arrangements to be entered into such as share 
options or royalties from sales. As well, conditions for financial 
assistance may include the production or manufacture of 
technology in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will enable the department to 
better the particular funding needs of the businesses which we 
work with and with which we deal while ensuring that the 
benefits of the funding flow to the people of Saskatchewan in 
the form of returns and business development and many new 
jobs. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, this amendment supports the 
commercialization and the development for new technologies in 
a responsible and I believe a strategic manner. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to support 
these amendments, and I ask and will move second reading of 
Bill No. 24, An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a good Bill in that it does provide for some 
research grants to people, to farmers, to research companies. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is also some concerns that have arisen 
dealing with this particular piece of legislation. And I would 
like to quote one small section. It says that: 
 

the minister may, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

(a) acquire, by purchase or otherwise, personal property, 
including securities; 

 
And I just wonder, Mr. Speaker, what “otherwise” means in 
legal terms. Does that mean that you can use government 
legislation to take away contracts, as has happened in the past, 
by this government in the agricultural field? I think the word 
otherwise certainly does leave a lot of room for interpretation 
when it comes to this particular government and some of their 
actions. 
 
You know, they . . . One of the other words that they 
particularly like when dealing with agriculture is the word, 
deemed. We deemed it have happened, or we deemed it not to 
have happened. In this particular case it’s this government has a 
tradition of deeming contracts not to have existed even though 
they have been duly signed and notarized and been enforced on 
the other participant in the contract. So in this particular case 
the minister is going to have to explain what he means by the 
word otherwise, what kind of actions he interprets being taken 
that can be taken, and when those kind of actions happen, who 
bears the responsibility for the results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also one other item of concern, Mr. Speaker. Clearly 
what is being changed here is simply the name within the 

department and the paperwork that they utilize, changing it 
from Department of Agriculture to Department of Agriculture 
and Food. 
 
I will hope that the minister, when this takes place, should this 
Bill pass the House, that they simply don’t throw out all of the 
paper that they have accumulated because the word “and Food” 
is not included on it. I would like to recommend to the minister 
that this Bill not be used as a means to completely revamp the 
entire paper stock within his department, but that they utilize 
the paper they already have on hand and only add the words 
“and Food” whenever they’re reordering supplies after the old 
supplies have run out. 
 
Well the fact is if the minister is interested, perhaps he can go 
down to the rubber stamp company downtown Regina and get a 
little stamp that says “and Food” and stamp it behind his 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of groups that are very 
interested in how this Bill is going to impact on their lives for 
financial assistance provided for research, various research 
groups, the universities, farmers that are involved in research. 
 
Therefore I think they need an opportunity to digest this Bill to 
determine how it’s going to impact them, their lives, and the 
research that they do in agriculture for the benefit of all the 
people of Saskatchewan — not just that individual farmer or 
that individual university or research company, but indeed all of 
our society. Therefore I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 4 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to speak to 
the Bill before us this afternoon with regard to the pension plan. 
As I was saying the other day when I spoke to the piece of 
legislation, the importance of the pension plan to Saskatchewan 
residents and indeed to the constituency of Kindersley is 
extremely important. 
 
First of all, the pension plan is housed at the headquarters in the 
town of Kindersley, and it’s very welcome there as a strong 
contributor to the economy of that town. But more importantly 
the legislation that’s in place, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 
and how it plays in its importance with respect to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are thousands and thousands of people that are involved 
in the pension plan in this province and they have invested well 
over a hundred million dollars into that pension plan. The whole 
purpose and design of the pension plan was to provide for 
people who don’t otherwise have access to a pension. 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

And it may surprise some people to know that that happens in 
many cases. If you’re not, for example, sponsored in a 
government pension plan or sponsored in a pension plan at your 
workplace, as many people are, this is the only avenue that you 
have available to you for a pension in Saskatchewan. 
 
And there are many, many people that fall into that category 
you can think of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that provides them 
with the stability of building towards . . . and financial freedom 
of building towards a pension for themselves into the future. 
And I think we all know the critical importance of that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going through a time right now of 
very tumultuous stock market shifts, and people who have 
invested in that area of the economy find it somewhat difficult 
perhaps when you see that kind of range of shifting that is 
happening. But it also, I think, when people contribute to 
pension plans, I think it provides them with a degree of security 
and peace of mind, knowing that they are building towards the 
future for themselves and their families with respect to the 
growth of their plan. 
 
(1545) 
 
And you only have to look at the information that financial 
planners put out to find out the importance and how quickly a 
pension plan can build for an individual. And you’ve all seen 
the tables, and I have as well, where if you start contributing at 
something like 40 years of age and contribute on a monthly 
basis, you can expect to have a fairly good pension. If you 
actually started when you were 20 years of age, it’s two or three 
times what it might have been if you started at a latter time in 
your life. 
 
So certainly the encouragement that we as a province and as a 
society towards convincing people to start early and contribute 
as much as they possibly can to pension plans, I think is very 
important as a societal change that we can make for people here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The plan has been in existence for a number of years. It was 
brought in by the previous administration to recognize the fact 
that there are many people that don’t have opportunities to 
contribute to a pension plan. And I think at the time it was very 
well received by people in Saskatchewan, and I think it still 
remains very well received by people in this province. It has 
grown dramatically over the years. 
 
Unfortunately the government opposite has decided to withdraw 
the matching contribution to the pension plan. I’m not sure 
why, and perhaps one of the members on the other side of the 
House in debate here will be interested in providing their 
perspective as to the reasons why they removed the matching 
contribution. And I’d sure be interested in knowing the reasons. 
 
Perhaps you just simply didn’t support the plan at the time or 
you don’t support people’s ability and the importance of their 
ability to invest into these types of plans. Or you just simply, 
because it was introduced by a government previous to you, just 
don’t want to have anything to have to do with something of 
that nature. 
 
It’s interesting. I can’t help but note in the last few weeks in the 

legislature here, we have debated . . . and there’s another Bill on 
the order paper before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, dealing with 
government pension plans and the importance of portability in 
those plans. 
 
Well I would say to government members opposite that while 
that is an important piece of legislation and it will likely gain 
the support of the House in the end, I think it is just as 
important that people in Saskatchewan have the ability to 
contribute to a pension plan here in this province. And as a 
province, we should be recognizing that, and perhaps even in a 
modest fashion helping to support that plan now and well into 
the future. 
 
One of the parts of the legislation that is a little bit disturbing 
and we will want to be . . . we will certainly be asking the 
minister responsible for this legislation in the future about it, is 
the whole area of fees that are contained within the legislation. 
 
Currently people pay a very, very modest . . . in fact, I’m not 
even . . . nominal, if anything, fee for the administration of the 
. . . I don’t believe, and I stand corrected, but I don’t believe 
they pay any fee associated with the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan right now. And bringing in this change in legislation 
allows the government to put a fee and attach a fee to the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan holders. 
 
And as we have witnessed in the House in the last number of 
days and weeks from this government, they have a . . . I 
certainly have a strong feeling that every time there’s a fee, they 
want to increase that fee. And we’ve seen that in many areas in 
this current budget that we will be, and are, debating in the 
House these days. So I think that that is going to be an area that 
we will have concerns with and we’ll want to question the 
minister in Committee of Whole with respect to this legislation. 
 
We are getting a number of inquiries from people across the 
province with respect to the legislation, certainly wanting to 
know what the government’s plans are — long-term and 
short-term plans for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. Do you 
have, on the government side, a commitment to maintaining this 
plan? Or is it something that you’re looking at winding down? 
 
Or as is happening in other areas, are you looking at . . . We’ve 
seen this in many financial service industries in recent days — 
mergers and all kinds of acquisitions. And is it something that 
you’re looking at in terms of selling out this plan to a private 
plan holder? Or is this an area that the plan, pension plan 
holders should be concerned about? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had a great discussion over the 
last couple of days about it. But given the number of inquiries 
we are receiving from people about the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan, and many of them are just receiving . . . I noticed that I 
received and my wife received just the other day our annual 
statement on the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the growth 
that it has had and acquired over the last number of years. 
 
So I think it is an important piece of legislation that we are 
looking at. But in order to bring in as much debate as we 
possibly can and as much number of questions and certainly 
issues surrounding this whole pension plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on this item. 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

The Deputy Speaker: — The hon. member for Kindersley has 
moved adjournment of the debate. But I wish to remind the hon. 
member that you previously adjourned the debate, and under 
the rules of the Assembly are not entitled to adjourn the debate. 
The debate continues. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to stand today to address the amendment 
to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And I must add to the 
comments of other members who have stood to speak to this 
amendment that it is a very, very important pension plan for the 
people in this province who are stay-at-home parents for 
instance, or people who have not the ability to access another 
pension plan. 
 
And so I would hope that the government of the day and 
successive governments would continue with this plan, because 
it is most important for the retirement years for many citizens in 
our province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
only tax deferred pension plan available to Saskatchewan 
residents who are not eligible for other RRSPs (Registered 
Retirement Savings Plan). And living in Saskatchewan it is . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to introduce 
a special guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
members, I would like to recognize the mayor from Buffalo 
Narrows, Ray Laliberte. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Laliberte was 
elected in the last term, but he’s part of the New North 
development and we’re seeing changes in many areas, from 
forestry and other areas of work. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, please say hello to our guest, 
Mr. Ray Laliberte. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 1999 

(continued) 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s very important for people living in Saskatchewan, 
especially important for them, that people have somewhere to 
invest their money and save on their taxes; because as we well 
know, the taxes in our province are burdensome, very 
burdensome for most people. Especially when one considers the 
very meagre tax break that the government is talking about this 
year. 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has about 30,000 members, 
which is quite significant. And there’s currently about $173 
million in that plan. 
 
I have some concerns about why there are going to be 
administrative fees for people that belong to this plan when in 
fact in the past there was no necessity for that. It seems to me 
like it’s just another way of government’s habit of sticking it to 
the people of Saskatchewan through hidden fees. And that is a 
concern, considering the numbers of hidden fees that we have 
heard about in this year’s budget. 
 
We are concerned about it and so we will continue to do more 
. . . a conversation talk with people that are members of this 
plan in Saskatchewan to see what they think. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan continues to be really a popular 
savings tool for the people, and one of only such plans available 
to people ineligible, as I’ve mentioned, for RRSPs. 
 
The changes, as I’ve mentioned to the administrative . . . 
administrative changes, rather, that have been mentioned, seem 
to be very nominal. And we hope that they won’t be . . . this 
sort of fee or the opportunity to charge this fee is not going to 
be something the government takes advantage of to increase 
that fee in years to come, so that eventually the people that are 
needing the service actually have a number of monies deleted 
from their pension plan due to that. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, Mr. Deputy Chair, the plan is a retirement 
fund for people in this province. And we are quite concerned 
that the NDP are now charging a fee on people’s retirement 
fund. And we would really, certainly, ask the government to 
think twice before they do that kind of thing or they up the fee 
for any services. We ask them to be very prudent and 
conscientious of the people of this province who in fact are 
paying a great deal of taxes already and certainly do not have to 
look at yet another exorbitant fee. 
 
If the government sees this as another cash grab they must 
remember that this time they are putting it on the backs of those 
who are putting their money away in an attempt to avoid the 
provincial government taxman in the first place. And this will 
be the case with every bit of government legislation from now 
on that comes before us. We will be examining all legislation to 
see what kind of fees are attached in order to protect the people 
of the province. 
 
If the government is going to be looking to collect a fee, we’re 
going to be asking for details on that in depth. So we have had 
enough and so have the people of Saskatchewan had enough of 
basically getting nickelled-and-dimed to death by the members 
opposite every time we turn around. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair, I would move to adjourn debate on this 
and to resume debate in the future. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — The 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to speak on Bill No. 10, the Act to amend The 
Department of Health Act. And I would just like to say at this 
time that it is critical that the principles of health care as 
outlined in the Canada Health Act remain intact. One of those 
principles — accessibility — is what I will be addressing here. 
 
Accessibility to quality health care is paramount for all 
Canadians. For those of us here in Saskatchewan, residents have 
come to expect that they would be able to access medical 
treatment wherever they may be. Whether it is here at home or 
in another province, or regardless of where they live in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, demographics should not be a 
factor when you are considering health care. 
 
And that brings to mind a problem I’m having right now in my 
constituency of Estevan with kidney dialysis. Since I’ve been 
elected, I have come across several people that are travelling to 
Regina up to three times a week to have kidney dialysis. And it 
is just a tremendous stress put on the families, on their 
pocketbooks, and it makes it virtually impossible for them to 
hold any kind of a job at all. 
 
(1600) 
 
We are talking about trying to get a dialysis unit in Estevan, and 
one person involved in health care down there has said that it’s 
too expensive — that it costs thousands of dollars. And every 
time that the person has completed their dialysis treatment, they 
have to . . . all the hoses or stuff like that, has to be changed on 
the machines. 
 
Now I’m not familiar with that stuff, Mr. Speaker, but my 
question begs: does it not have to be done if they are in Regina? 
Don’t they change them? 
 
I will be also speaking on the reciprocity agreement that exists 
between the provinces. If someone is visiting from another 
province and needs treatment here in Saskatchewan, that 
treatment will be provided to the person. 
 
People also have come to expect that certain things will be there 
for them. Quality health care being one of them. 
 
In addition to the many issues facing health care in the 
province, we are very concerned with the increasing number of 
residents who have been transferred to other provinces to 
receive medical treatment. 
 
There is also a large number of residents who, frustrated with 
the extremely long waiting lists and lack of front-line services, 
have on their own decided to seek treatment elsewhere. What 
happens to reciprocity for these people? It seems that when they 
take health care into their own hands, the health system turns its 
back on these people. 
 
And I know that in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, several 
people have gone to other areas, whether it be the United States 
or other provinces, because they could not stand to wait any 
longer, and in some cases these same people have paid between 

50 and $100,000 to have their health care. 
 
The waiting lists for standard medical procedures have 
progressed to the point where we wonder about the medical 
validity of them. So much time has elapsed. Why are people 
waiting two months for a biopsy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the waiting lists for specialists are often six 
months or more. And we remember a case just this winter, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where there was a waiting list and a 
misdiagnosis that went on for a couple of years, and the woman 
finally went to the United States to learn that she had terminal 
cancer. Cases like this are inexcusable. 
 
Even the simplest diagnostic assessments are now a year or 
more away. The equipment is there but the staff isn’t. In this 
age of technology, medical advancement, and accessibility to 
information, it’s difficult for everyone to fully comprehend why 
Saskatchewan has the health care problems it does. And again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remind the citizens of this province that 
we are all paying $1,900 a year for our health care — that’s 
$1,900 for every man, woman, and child in this province. 
 
The dictionary’s definition of reciprocity is mutual action, a 
principle or practice of give and take. Now let’s take a look at 
some of the government’s own ideas of reciprocity here in the 
province. 
 
Seven years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP introduced us 
to a wellness model and the health districts. They said these 
health districts were a better option for the province’s residents. 
We’d have better local administration, better services, better 
facilities, and better health care all around. Seven years later, 
nearly two-thirds of the 32 health districts in the province have 
deficits totally more than $50 million this year. That doesn’t 
even count the accumulated debt these health districts have run 
up trying to operate within the wellness model. 
 
And we all know that health care for the residents of those 
health districts is in terrible shape. And this also reminds me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the things this government is trying to 
shove down our throat at this time regarding rural 
amalgamation. We’ve seen what they’ve done to health care 
and now they’re trying to do it to rural amalgamation, so I say 
to the people of this province, don’t be fooled. 
 
The front-line services are suffering, the waiting lists are 
growing, doctors and nurses are leaving the province in droves. 
And in my constituency in the city of Estevan, there are four 
doctors leaving in the very near future. Beds are closing, 
operating rooms are closing, special care units are closing, 
hospitals are closing, 55 of them and counting. One of those 
hospitals went $50 million over budget. 
 
Rural residents have seen many of their hospitals converted into 
health care facilities. This may come as a surprise to the 
government, but many of those areas already had health 
facilities; they’re called medical centres and they’ve been 
around for decades. All in all, rural areas are being treated very 
shabbily and residents of the province are paying the price of 
the NDP’s version of so-called health care. Where’s the 
reciprocity for Saskatchewan residents? What do they get out of 
this give-and-take principle? 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

When the NDP closed the Plains hospital, they laid off 600 
nurses. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about the Plains 
hospital, there was thousands and thousands of names on 
petitions that were circulated throughout the province to keep 
this hospital open. And this hospital was built for the residents 
of southeast Saskatchewan, and yet they never had a voice 
when its fate was decided. In fact the present Minister of 
Education was going to chain himself to the doors, but I didn’t 
see that happening. 
 
But as I stated before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they did lay off 600 
nurses. And they were told a number of years ago that a nursing 
shortage was imminent, but true to form, they pretended not to 
notice and thought that these little things would just go away on 
their own. 
 
Last spring’s nurses’ strike saw the province’s contingent of 
exhausted nurses protest working conditions here in the 
province. What was the NDP’s version of reciprocity for our 
nurses? The NDP legislated them back to work and, to add 
insult to injury, declared the strike illegal and forced them to 
pay a fine. Nursing recruitment and retention issues have now 
reached a critical point. We’re still waiting for some positive 
action in this area from the NDP. 
 
What we’ve seen so far has proven to be highly ineffective. 
Every day there are stories coming out about people who have 
seen and experienced first-hand the horrendous and deplorable 
state of health care in this province. There have been reports, 
reviews, investigations, and recommendations. Serious issues 
with serious implications necessitate serious action. Yet with all 
these reports and investigations and so on into health care in 
Saskatchewan, nothing has changed. 
 
Where is the reciprocity for people who have paid the price for 
the state of health care in Saskatchewan? When will the NDP 
start listening to its own words? Remember in reciprocity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if you take, you must also give back. The 
people of Saskatchewan are still waiting. 
 
We are all aware of the current reciprocity agreement that 
allows residents from other provinces to access treatment here 
in Saskatchewan, and it also ensures that Saskatchewan 
residents can access treatment in other provinces. But truthfully, 
up until now, we are not aware that there were concerns with 
the current reciprocity agreement. Given that, why the need for 
amending the current legislation? 
 
Shouldn’t the government be more concerned with taking care 
of other more pressing issues first? It would seem that if the 
government were to address these very critical issues, then 
wouldn’t reciprocity take care of itself. 
 
In fact we’re wondering if the government by amending 
legislation isn’t preparing for the reality that more and more 
residents will have to be treated in other provinces and even in 
the United States, simply because the health care system here 
cannot accommodate the increasing numbers. 
 
Reciprocity is something that’s in place so that residents 
everywhere can access medical treatment wherever they may be 
in Canada. The Minister of Health has referred to this as a 
housekeeping duty. If that’s so, then why isn’t she taking care 

of the other items on her list first. 
 
The lack of front-line services, for example, would seem to be 
more urgent than amending an Act that by all accounts still 
works and won’t speed or change how residents of the province 
access health care. Once again it’s the government making sure 
that they’re getting paid for services rendered, and they are 
forgetting about the people who need those services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 5 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill does appear 
to be fairly run of the mill for the most part. It only covers a few 
technical changes with the legal land descriptions over parks. 
 
Perhaps the members opposite should consult with the members 
on this side if they have such difficulty reading and understanding 
land descriptions before they make errors like this in the future. 
 
The issue in the Bill that needs to be questioned a little bit and 
perhaps looked into a little more closely is the clause concerning 
designating a portion of the land near Good Spirit as protected. 
 
Whenever something of this nature is put into effect, it 
undoubtedly affects the people surrounding it. I believe this 
government has a habit of making decisions without giving any 
thought to the negative repercussions it may have later on down 
the road to the people of our province. We only need to look at 
the difficulties that certain businesses, such as auctioneers, are 
having administering the poorly thought-out expanded PST 
policy, that was imposed upon them through the recent budget, 
to get some proof of this, where it wasn’t well thought out in 
advance. 
 
Therefore, although this Bill may not appear to be controversial, 
we feel we should make sure that everyone is in agreement with 
it over the next few weeks, especially the people in the Good 
Spirit area that this Bill will affect the most. 
 
In addition, although the Bill itself appears relatively 
non-controversial, the same cannot be said about other issues 
surrounding our parks. I have — and so have the rest of my 
colleagues — been quite surprised with the number of phone 
calls our offices have received surrounding the parks, and in 
particular the decision of the government to impose massive fee 
increases on most services and charges connected to our 
provincial parks. 
 
Some examples of these is our three-day park entry fees that 
will increase 42 per cent from $12 to $17. And the weekly park 
entry fees were increased 39 per cent, from $18 to $25. Annual 
transferable fees were increased 40 per cent, from $40 to 42, 
$42. And it just goes on and on and on. 
 
Most coach daily rates have gone up 33 per cent. Motor coach 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

annual rates are up 43 per cent. Full-service site per night is up 
9 per cent. Electrical site per night is up 11 per cent. 
Non-electrical sites per night are up 15 per cent. Non-electrical 
sites, spring-fall discount, is up 22 per cent. Electrical group per 
site is up 11 per cent. And a full-service site seasonal permit is 
up 20 per cent. Non-electrical site seasonal permit is up 20 per 
cent. Electrical sites, monthly rate is up 16 per cent. 
Non-electrical sites, the monthly rate is up 17 per cent. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we could just go on and on and on 
all day, and I know the members opposite are encouraging me 
to go on and on all day. And that’s not to begin to mention the 
increases in the fishing licences, the hunting licence, and so on 
and so forth. 
 
Amazingly on budget day not one word was mentioned about 
the dozens and dozens of fee increases that were about to be 
imposed on the Saskatchewan people. Although there were 
somewhere around 45 separate fee increases imposed by the 
new NDP budget, they were never mentioned by the either the 
Finance minister or the Minister of Environment. You can 
imagine our surprise, Mr. Speaker, when only a few days after 
the Finance minister introduced his budget, that our phones 
started ringing off the hook. The people connected to our 
provincial parks were both shocked and devastated by the fee 
increases. And when we asked the Minister of Environment 
why his department had not forewarned the parks officials and 
why his department, through the presentation made by the 
Minister of Finance, had not announced these fee hikes 
publicly, his response was, no one asked. 
 
Incredible, Mr. Speaker! Another NDP if they don’t ask, don’t 
tell policy. 
 
And then when the Minister of Finance was asked about these 
hidden fee increases, he told reporters that it wasn’t his job to 
tell people about the hidden tax increases included in the 
budget, that’s the job of the official opposition. 
 
(1615) 
 
And if that’s our job, Mr. Speaker, may I suggest to our 
Minister of Finance that we would be quite happy to just help 
him write the whole budget as well as to find all the problems in 
it. And so keep that in mind for next year when he’s doing up a 
budget. 
 
Meanwhile, for this year’s budget we have to be just content 
with uncovering the hidden facts that the NDP seems so 
reluctant to let the people of this province know. So much, Mr. 
Speaker, for the open and accountable government we’ve heard 
so much about. 
 
But to get back to the theme of our Saskatchewan parks, I was 
very disappointed to hear about the bizarre phone conversation 
that took place between the executive director of the Regional 
Parks Association and the Minister of Finance. 
 
The minister, I was told, was extremely rude to Mr. Gardiner 
because he had dared to send the government a letter thanking 
them very much for the $75,000 in funding that the regional 
parks received in the budget but suggesting that it probably 
wouldn’t be enough. 

This was apparently enough to send our Minister of Finance 
into a tirade on the phone, and then a refusal on his part after to 
apologize for his uncalled comments to Mr. Gardiner. 
 
The hypocrisy of this whole incident, Mr. Speaker, is rather 
ironic. It wasn’t that many days ago when their own Minister of 
Health criticized the federal budget for under-funding health 
care — and rightfully so. And yet I never heard a mention of 
the federal Finance minister, Paul Martin, phoning and blasting 
her for her statements. 
 
This phone conversation by our Finance minister is just another 
sign of a government drunk on its own arrogance. 
 
This Bill may not seem all that controversial, Mr. Speaker, but 
given all the areas that this government has been trying to hide 
information from the public over the last few weeks, I think it 
would be best to adjourn debate to make sure that nothing is 
hidden in this case too. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 13 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to be able to add some comments with regards 
to this particular amendment because in my earlier life I spent 
some time in the education system, both as a teacher and on the 
school unit board in the Lloydminster area. 
 
So there’s some things that I wanted to commend the minister 
on for trying to put into the amendment, and there’s also some 
concerns that I felt needed to be addressed in this particular 
series of amendments. 
 
Some of the things that I feel that really need to be looked at are 
pertaining to some of the areas of the post-secondary education. 
That’s mentioned in the amendments. They want to try to 
separate all of those decisions regarding post-secondary 
education, move them out of The Education Act, 1995, and 
move them over toward the separate Act for post-secondary 
education. 
 
Maybe there’s some good reasoning for that; I’m not sure. But I 
know that there seems to be a lack of confidence — certainly on 
my part. And from what I’ve read so far in the amendments, a 
lack of confidence that moving the sections from 
post-secondary education out of the present Act to its own 
separate Act, if it will actually help the situation in terms of 
accessibility for students that want to attend post-secondary 
education and maybe, more importantly, is it going to improve 
the ability to save money and allocate money to the right 
sources for the right reasons in a timely manner? 
 
I think the timeliness of the money being spent is just as 
important as the amount of money that may be saved in these 
kinds of amendments. And again, I'm not sure in these 
amendments that is specifically addressed. 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

Nor is there going to be benefits, particularly for these students, 
by moving it into a separate Bill under post-secondary 
education. That, in my view, is still questionable. I’m going to 
have to do a little more work to see if in fact those concerns are 
addressed. Because, after all, if they don’t provide benefits to 
the students, if they don’t allow more accessibility for the 
students, and if they don’t save money for the students, I feel 
that it would just be a waste of time to put it into its own Act. 
 
As you know, when you have a separate ministry administering 
its own Act that’s even expanded, I think you’re going to find 
that the minister in charge of that particular Act will 
increasingly expand the budget and the numbers of people that 
are involved in that ministry. And I’m not sure that that is a 
desirable effect, particularly now when a lot of money is being 
cut back, very needed funding is cut back to the school system 
as we know it. 
 
If we move some of these things into a post-secondary 
education format, my suspicion would be that things like 
administration of the department would increase. And I wonder 
if that’s the reason when I noticed in the Estimates for 
2000-2001 that the administrative costs for post-secondary 
education, in fact, is projected to be increased by 4.4 per cent, 
which is a bit disconcerting when we understand that the 
amount of funding going to post-secondary education, as well 
as education, is going to be at a premium in a lot of the 
programs, student programs, and also the operations of the 
schools might be placed in jeopardy. 
 
So that’s certainly a concern I need to spend a little more time 
researching and a little more time in our debate. 
 
There’s some issues here that I would also like to look at in 
these amendments that really have to be addressed on an 
individual basis. When I looked at the amendments, it covered a 
whole range of amendments and applied to many, many aspects 
of the Act. And because we have such little time, I have a 
concern that we don’t get full understanding of these issues and 
some of the things that we want to ensure will be included, will 
be in fact debated. So I want to spend some additional time with 
that. 
 
Specifically, I noticed that there is some clarification in setting 
up the separate school divisions and also the school divisions 
based on minority faith. And I think the rules and regulations 
surrounding those are addressed in these amendments, and I’m 
very pleased to see those. I think those are areas that have to be 
clarified. 
 
It’s based on some of the things that occurred in the past: for 
instance, the size of the school division and the numbers of 
students in those particular school divisions; who is going to be 
allowed to vote on whether there is in fact a minority 
established so that a separate school can be developed in that 
area. And I think those are commendable amendments, if in fact 
that will clarify that. 
 
I guess when I looked through the amendments, I couldn’t find 
anything in there that really addressed such things as private 
schools. There’s an increasing interest in private schools in this 
province, as there is across other provinces. And I think that 
that is an area that should be clarified, and I see that that is not 

mentioned in these amendments, at least from what I’ve been 
able to determine. So that’s an area that I think also needs some 
debate and clarification. 
 
Also, increasing in popularity in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the home-schooling, and parents are taking the 
responsibility of teaching at home in a home-schooling 
scenario. 
 
I think some of those things, again, were lacking from what I’ve 
seen in the amendments. This might be an opportunity to 
expand on the standards needed for home schooling. As parents 
become more and more interested in taking on the responsibility 
of education, I think those concerns need to be addressed, and 
now would be a timely opportunity to put those amendments in 
place if they’re not already there. 
 
Such things as other kinds of specialized school and instructions 
— whether it is community college at a high school or a post 
high school level — I think is very important. I know in certain 
areas around the province there is a lot of request for things like 
community college, focusing on agriculture particularly. 
 
I’ve noticed in Saskatchewan the availability of post-secondary 
training for our young farmers is lacking compared to some of 
the other jurisdictions in other parts of Canada. Ontario has a 
much broader base of agricultural schools. Here in 
Saskatchewan we have one main school at the University of 
Saskatchewan and a diploma course, but other provinces 
certainly have accessibility for students for that kind of training. 
 
Apparently Saskatchewan accepts the notion that agricultural 
training is handled by on-the-job training primarily. And I think 
in today’s sophisticated world of business, and farming business 
particularly, that kind of training should be made much more 
available using, for instance, some European models where 
almost all towns in a farming area has accessibility for that kind 
of training. 
 
There is another area that I saw in here that I should commend 
the minister for including in the amendments and that is making 
sure that we’re providing education for students with 
disabilities. 
 
There has been a very focused thrust of directing children with 
disabilities into not only specialized training but integration into 
the normal classroom, and I think that is a very positive 
approach. It has worked very well. It has shown that students 
can adapt and are adapting, both the students with disabilities, 
but also other people and other students in those classes are 
accepting people with those disabilities. And I think that’s very 
positive. 
 
One of the things I’ve noticed in these amendments is the 
number of consultations that the minister has indicated that he’s 
made. He’s had consultations with the school trustees’ 
association, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and even 
associations like the LEADS it’s called — that’s the League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents — 
and also with the Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials. 
 
I think those were consultations, very timely, and I think with 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

the appropriate people, and I would certainly encourage the 
minister to include in these amendments the things that he heard 
in those discussions. 
 
Listening to people, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very 
important. The people are the ones that are going to be affected 
by these regulations, and in fact through them, the students of 
this province. And the students of course become the asset that 
we are counting on in this province to sustain the way of life 
and also to sustain the culture of our Saskatchewan province. So 
I’m pleased to see that that was included. 
 
I just wanted to make sure that these people, because they’re 
working first-hand both in teaching and in the administration, 
are listened to and everything possible was put into those 
regulations and the amendments. 
 
I think I have to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk a little bit about the 
status as I see it of the province today. And of course that can 
be included . . . or at least it should affect our ability to be able 
to have confidence in these amendments. 
 
We have to be able to see that these amendments are achieving 
some of the vision and some of the directions that, I think, are 
absolutely necessary when we pass these because these 
amendments are going to direct how the students are going to 
fare in our schools; also, if the schools are going to be 
sustainable and whether they are achieving any particular 
objective that we in the province feel they have to address. 
 
(1630) 
 
The immediate concern of course is the amount of money that is 
available for education generally. And although these 
amendments do in fact talk about a lot about the issues and 
some of the concerns that need to be addressed, I guess the 
confidence of the taxpayers is certainly in question when the 
amount of money that has been put toward education in the past 
has been a declining value over the past number of years. 
 
And even this year in the budget, although there is a number 
that is being used — I think it’s around 25 to $29 million — I 
think in actuality, when you take everything into consideration, 
that’s only about an $18 million. My calculations would be that 
that is going to be hardly enough to actually cover whatever the 
projected negotiated raise is in teachers’ salaries that, in fact, is 
still pending. And my understanding is that that is far from 
being settled. That’s just another element, in my view, that 
creates a non-confidence feeling or a lack of vision from this 
particular department. 
 
There is several severely restricted things that because of this 
lack of funding some of the severe restrictions are going to have 
to be applied. And we’ve heard time and time again from the 
people of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) that they’re going to have to reduce areas of 
special programming, areas of some of the services, and even 
some of the operational activities in their schools. 
 
One of the problems that the schools are having, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is an expansion of the amount of interdiscipline 
activity that is downloaded onto the schools. I’m talking about 
the amount of time that is spent — time and energy and 

therefore cost — that is involved by the school administration 
in trying to accommodate special needs children, some of the 
Social Service cases that are being directed to the school, and in 
trying to implement those people into the curriculum. 
 
One of the realities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about education today 
is that although things remain relatively constant in the cities, 
the difference between the cities and the rural areas is becoming 
more and more pronounced all the time. There is becoming, like 
in other areas of our province, almost a two-tier system, and the 
farmers are moving and the population is decreasing. There is 
an ability . . . a non-ability for schools to compensate 
adequately, and they’re going to increase expenses such as 
bussing and decreased populations. And therefore that funding 
is particularly important to these school divisions in the rural 
areas. 
 
This increased funding for the special programs and services, I 
don’t see any inclusion in this particular Bill. And so I would 
certainly ask the minister to look into those situations 
particularly. 
 
I did notice too that there was some capital funding budgeted 
under the Centenary Capital Fund. I think the number that was 
included is about $5 million going into that fund. That’s 
certainly going to be a benefit, but I’m not sure just where that 
will go and under what conditions. That too has to be clarified 
before these amendments can be voted on. 
 
A lot of the schools in my constituency have run up against a 
real serious problem of having not the money to be able to do 
the improvements, make the normal repairs. Certainly the 
additions to schools have been postponed and postponed again. 
 
And in fact, even the schools that are holding their own in terms 
of population or increasing are not being able to get any funding 
for them because the priority of the . . . the small amount of 
funding that is available, the priority goes to things like safety 
of the students. And there’s a lot of schools that need that kind 
of work. 
 
So because of that grant money that has dropped pretty 
substantially over the past while, it certainly doesn’t add to the 
confidence or the vision that people have with regards to their 
schools. 
 
So I guess what that means to the taxpayers of the province . . . 
and that is a very important issue, in my view, because again 
there you have a real discrepancy between the rural areas and 
the urban areas. And in more and more cases the so-called 
topping up to the necessary funding has been allocated back to 
the particular taxpayers of that school division. The school 
division’s given the authority to be able to set assessments . . . 
mill rates, rather, on assessments have to take on more and 
more of that responsibility. 
 
That is a particular problem in the area where I come from, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The rural assessments, very fortunately, are 
pretty substantial. And with the granting of . . . the grant 
formulas of this particular government, it shows that the rural 
areas, the school divisions in my area, and the rural divisions 
are not getting the average of the 40 per cent operational grants 
from the provincial government. In fact, it’s nowhere near the 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

60 per cent that it used to be when I was on the school board or 
the 60 per cent that I know has entered the conversation in the 
campaigns over the years. 
 
In my constituency most of the school divisions are, in fact, 
contributing 100 per cent of the operational funding not 40 per 
cent — 100 per cent; with the school, with the department, 
supplying zero per cent to the operation. 
 
Now that is very critical because in comparison to a city school 
the traditional funding for operations come at 40 per cent which 
seems to be close to the provincial average. And I think that that 
is, that is a very serious problem, and certainly a problem from 
my area where tax revolts are, in fact, occurring on a pretty 
regular basis as they are right across the province. 
 
When I read things in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, for instance, 
where they talk about a rate hike, a meagre . . . and this is a 
quotation from the teachers. The teachers are the ones that are 
going to have to work into this as well. For instance, they are 
saying and I quote, “Why aren’t the concerns of kids coming 
ahead of the mill rate?” And I think that’s a very good question. 
 
The concerns of students seem to be secondary. Or if they are a 
concern, that whole concern is pushed back to the taxpayers of 
the community. For instance, the public board trustee Bill 
Altman, who lamented his board’s low increase last week 
saying it is detrimental to the children — that I think is a very 
serious condemnation of the particular system. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about some of the things that I’ve seen 
in terms of program cuts; in fact there’s some warnings and 
some red flags being presented to us by the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association about having to actually close 
schools, having to relieve teachers or they will actually be 
leaving the profession and in fact the province altogether. 
 
Those are major concerns that I don’t see . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members, order. Members on 
both sides are engaging in some good debate back and forth, but 
for the moment the hon. member for Lloydminster has the floor 
and I’d encourage all members . . . and I would encourage all 
members to honour the hon. member for Lloydminster’s right to 
be heard. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
referring to some of the problems that I could see in terms of 
confidence and vision in the education system, none of which 
from the amendments I can see contribute to that. 
 
I think the confidence of the taxpayers and therefore the parents 
and therefore through them to the students is really reflected in 
a lot of the conditions that are happening in the school, and I’m 
not sure that in the amendments they are being addressed 
adequately. 
 
The teacher student ratio has been increased significantly, and 
that’s a real problem in terms of morale of the teacher, and also 
the ability of the teacher to get through the necessary 
information to that student. And it’s their . . . Although when 
you’re sitting in school it might appear a long time, when we 
look at it from my age, that time goes by very quickly. There is 

a very definitive time that . . . with a lot of information. 
 
And fortunately students these days are much more clever than 
I was at that age and they’re accommodating, but it’s certainly 
not because of the help that’s coming from increased 
operational grants or programming. 
 
So I guess I would ask the Minister of Education to bear in 
mind that some of these classroom ratios of 1:25, 1:30, or even 
sometimes higher is not the right way to administer our schools, 
and it looks to me like that that might continue. 
 
There are many extras that are cut in the schools as well. And 
again I wanted to talk a little bit about some of the problems I 
have between a city school and a rural school. Not only is the 
teacher ratio different, actually the curriculum is different. The 
programs that are being offered are much more, much more 
enriched and enhanced when it comes to the city schools. And I 
think that’s rather unfair. It’s an unfair way to treat our students 
that their parents choose to live in the rural areas. 
 
But students still I believe have the right, and the school boards 
and the government has a responsibility to try to keep that as 
equal as possible. And cutting extras is not going to help that 
situation at all. I’ve heard that some teachers take this so 
seriously that they’re actually buying some of the books 
themselves to present to the students. Because they feel these 
books, or videos or learning aids, are so critical that it’s 
important that the student have exposure to them. And I 
certainly commend the teachers for trying to do the very best 
they can in a situation where the funding is short and the 
teacher/pupil ratio is increasing as we go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I wanted to talk a little bit as well about 
some of the things that I think are new; that are certainly around 
the corner and should be looked at. Again, I don’t see them in 
the amendments but I wanted to draw this to the minister’s 
attention. 
 
The debate, very recently, about advertising in the school, I 
think is a very critical issue. I know a lot of the schools have 
banned this Youth News Network because in fact that they were 
including commercials in some of their broadcasts. I guess, 
personally, I don’t have a particular problem with that because I 
remember when I was in school, I saw maps unfold and there 
was things like Neilson chocolate bars across the bottom of 
those maps. And I don’t think that I turned out to be a chocolate 
junky because of that. And I’m not sure that that influenced our 
students unduly. And I’m not sure the little bit of 
commercialism that’s involved in that Youth News Network 
has anything near the content of television that most students 
look at when they’re at home. 
 
(1645) 
 
But I guess the point that I was trying to make is the fact that 
those new techniques of trying to acquire some extra funding, 
whether it’s in partnerships with the industry or any innovative 
way at all, must be looked at. And I think those kinds of things 
have to be addressed in the amendments because now is the 
ideal opportunity to put those in while the amendments are, in 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2000 

fact, before us. 
 
Another issue that I think is really critical is the choice that the 
schools are left with. The choice is really no choice, just 
because of the funding problems that they’re experiencing, the 
increasing cost. I know that there’s a demand for budget dollars 
in lots of different disciplines and departments and all equally 
important, I’m sure. But the students and the program that 
they’re achieving does in fact affect our future as well as their 
future and I think it has to be looked at very, very seriously. 
 
One of the problems that I have again in the confidence issue, is 
that when the boards of education and the SSTA are 
complaining to the minister and stating the problems that 
they’re going to have, the minister just dismisses them 
arbitrarily and says, all you have to do is raise the mill rate to 
compensate. 
 
Well again, that is not the appropriate solution for education in 
the short or the long run. And I think that, again, downloading 
the cost of education that way is irresponsible. And I believe 
that there has to be a better way in order to achieve that kind of 
funding sustainability and education generally. 
 
One of the things that I noticed, and I mentioned earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, was the sections dealing with setting up separate 
school divisions based on the . . . on minority faith. And I think 
that where the minister is going in that particular issue, I think 
is appropriate. And certainly I would support that aspect of it. 
 
It clarifies some of the restrictions, some of the conditions 
needed to establish what a minority is, where the minority is, 
who can be . . . participate in that kind of discussion, and in fact 
allow these minorities to set up a school division at their 
particular request. That aspect I believe is quite good. 
 
The boundaries involved with school divisions is a concern that 
I think spills over from this whole municipal realignment debate 
that is currently going on in the problem. I think that has 
peripheral implications here. And I’m very concerned that the 
educational . . . the school divisions don’t arbitrarily get set by a 
top-down government directive, but in fact focuses particularly 
on the trading areas, particularly where the students want their 
. . . where the parents want their children to go. 
 
And in fact in a minority separate school situation, the boundary 
should be set by the numbers of people in that division, as 
outlined in the amendments. And so I feel that that has some 
positive aspects. 
 
All in all, the direction of these amendments, if they are 
housekeeping only, I think that has some . . . has a lot of merit. 
But I think it’s an opportunity missed when some of the things 
that I’ve mentioned, some of the concerns are not considered 
because after all it is the vision of education. A vision that the 
taxpayers have, the people generally, and the vision that creates 
the confidence in our education system that needs to be brought 
forward. 
 
And I wish these amendments gave me more comfort that that 
was happening. And I think with further debate that we may 
just be able to help the minister in that regard. 
 

Again the final section that I’d like to discuss is really dealing 
with the school divisions and the tendering process that the 
school divisions must go into. These are addressed in fact in 
these amendments, and again I think they are going in the 
correct way. I think I could support them for at least what I’ve 
read in the amendment so far. 
 
I know the tendering process is quite important, but I would 
caution the minister to realize that tendering in different school 
divisions is not the same as it is in all of them. The tendering in 
a city school division for services or materials is one thing; 
tendering in a rural school division is certainly another. And 
I’m not sure that that is as talked about in these amendments 
and I really think it should be. 
 
It’s very important in a small community that I came from to 
have the ability to supply a service or a material. And the school 
division administration should have some particular leeway in 
those cases to make sure that the economy flows through to the 
small towns as the materials or the services are supplied. 
Otherwise all we’re doing is reinforcing and complementing the 
businesses of the larger centres surrounding these small 
communities. And we certainly know that these communities 
are in jeopardy in terms of sustainability and commercial 
viability and that has to be addressed. And so I would like to 
see some further flexibility in these amendments to address that 
particular issue. 
 
When we talk about these local suppliers, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to make sure that the amendments are really quite clear, and 
these amendments are showing not only the flexibility for the 
rural communities in tendering, but shows some flexibility for 
the rural school divisions as well because that whole idea of 
different services, different programs, and different teacher 
ratios, is a real concern that has to be addressed before too long 
in this province. And I was hoping to see some of that in these 
amendments and we’ll certainly be debating that to make sure 
these amendments are expanded to include just those things. 
 
So there’s other issues that I want to explore and talk about, but 
I need a little more time to go through these amendments. And I 
think there are some recommendations that I possibly could 
give to the minister as we debate these issues further. 
 
If there was some evidence that the minister in fact was 
listening to the people that he did meet with, and all of their 
concerns had been considered and tried to be put into the . . . 
into this, I feel that that would be of great value. 
 
The more and more stress that comes onto our schools, the 
more and more, first of all, costly it is in terms of dollars and 
also in terms of our teacher ratios. I mentioned earlier some of 
the things that these schools have to contend with nowadays, 
and that is they have to add a social services aspect to students 
that are placed into the schools rather than being dealt, dealt 
with and addressed outside of the school divisions. I think 
that’s, that’s certainly an important aspect. 
 
I think there’s psychological services that need to be presented 
to some of these schools as they adapt. Certainly in my 
hometown of Lloydminster there’s a lot of those kind of 
students that are being attracted into the schools. And also I 
think some of the non-functional home atmospheres are cause 



April 17, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

for those kinds of things because in an area that is attracting a 
lot of itinerant workers, often the students and the home 
environment isn’t healthy as it should have been normally. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, those are the comments I had to 
say. And I look at the opportunity to maybe address some of 
these further, but at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 


