





























































Hansard: June 09, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1675 
 June 9, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today in the Legislative Assembly to present petitions to retain 
the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Allan, 
Clavet, and Lanigan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the serious health effects in this province. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Lanigan and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about health care. And the petition . . . the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present on behalf of people from Saskatoon, Bruno, and 

Lanigan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also like to present 
a petition concerning hospital closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by people from Lanigan and Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Buena Vista. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with a 
petition of citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The concerned citizens are from the communities of Lanigan 
and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this morning in regards to the sad state of roads in this 
province. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood Access Road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people throughout 
the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

closure of Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals will remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Lanigan, Jansen, 
and a couple from Meadow Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible closures 
of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Lanigan, Bruno, Guernsey, Regina, Semans, Watrous, St. 
Gregor, and Leroy. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Lanigan, Semans, 
and Nokomis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here that I’m 
presenting on behalf of some young people in Saskatchewan. 
And they urge that smoking be banned in public places. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Reduction of fuel taxes; 
 
Cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, Cudworth, 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea; 
 

The maintenance of the hospitals in Lanigan and Watrous; 
 
And a total ban on smoking in public places and 
workplaces. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 62 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how much money has the province of 
Saskatchewan given to the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan 
in the last fiscal year; and please provide a breakdown as to 
what agencies and/or persons this money was distributed. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall on 
day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: the last 
fiscal year, how much revenue did your department receive 
from the sale of road-building equipment, either through 
private sale or public auction; and please provide detailed 
information on each item sold and the price. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to introduce to you 
and through you to this House, guests visiting us from Malaysia 
who are in your gallery with Dale Flavel, former member of 
this legislature. 
 
They are Bryan Cheeng — and I’d ask them to stand, please — 
Bryan Cheeng and Ruth Onn. And they are here with the 
Anglican Church Mission Exchange, visiting Plains and 
Valley’s parish which includes both Lumsden and Pense. So 
we’re glad to have you here and I’d ask all to join in welcoming 
them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m on my 
feet, I would also like to introduce 26 students from Winston 
Knoll, grade 9 students. Winston Knoll is in my constituency. 
And they are sitting in the west gallery, accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Olena Lozowchuk. 
 
And I would look forward to meeting with them following this 
session. And I would ask all to join in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
today to stand and introduce to you and through you to the rest 
of the members in the Assembly, two people who have come 
here from the country of Germany. They are sitting in your 
gallery — Maria and Josef Fleming, if you could rise. 
Accompanying them is my husband Larry; my three daughters 
Crystal, Shannon, and Lindsay; and my mother-in-law Beth. 
 
Could you please help me welcome them here today. 
 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you, people. And today when the hon. 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley introduced two guests 
moments ago, I did not hear him mention the former deputy 
speaker — who I see nodding saying, yes he was — but Dale 
Flavel. Anyway I guess that means you get introduced twice 
today. 
 
It’s really a treat to have you back in the legislature, Dale. I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
this House, two people sitting in your gallery. Mr. Vern Hoyte 
and his son, Adam Hoyte, are residents of Regina Wascana 
Plains. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been great supporters and 
friends of the Saskatchewan Party. So I ask you to join us in 
welcoming them to the House this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of the House, I’d like to introduce to you, 26 Grade 8 
students from the beautiful town of Porcupine Plain, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today with them is teachers Doug King and Debra Zeleny. I 
look forward to meeting with them later on along with one of 
my other constituents, the member from Carrot River Valley. 
So I’ll see you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, two young gentlemen from Duck 
Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Today in our gallery are Mr. Daniel Gigon and Mr. Travis 
Rothenberger. As well, Mr. Speaker, Travis has brought his 
mother along with him, Rose. Rose has been my constituency 
assistant for a number of years. I think, as a matter of fact, since 
just about 1986; does a great job for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I would like them all to stand and be 
acknowledged. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Kelvington Wadena in welcoming the 26 
grade 8 students from my hometown of Porcupine Plain. Extend 
a welcome to Debra Zeleny and Doug King. And I’d like to 
extend a special welcome to one of my favourite nephews in the 

whole wide world, Denver Kwiatkowski and I also have a 
cousin in the group as well, Jeff Kwiatkowski. 
 
So I’d ask everyone to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Hon. members, I also have the pleasure of 
introducing students who are here seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery, who are visiting from the Balcarres School. There are 
eight grade 12 students. They’ll be leaving for lunch shortly, 
but then coming back to the building and enjoying a tour of the 
building. 
 
Some of the members will also recognize Mr. Stynsky, the 
teacher who’s accompanying them, and he’s accompanied by 
Barry Chorneyka. Mr. Stynsky recently attended the 
Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy which my office hosted. 
 
I will have the pleasure and the opportunity to meet with the 
students later in the Assembly to visit some more about the 
process and procedures that they’ll witness here this morning. 
 
I’d like to ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming them 
here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

May Job Statistics 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, thanks 
to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, we learned that the 
Leader of the Opposition is not good with numbers. Today I 
regret to inform the Assembly the Sask Party leader is no better 
at predicting the future. 
 
On Wednesday he spoke on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio and said, quote: 
 

On Friday the latest job statistics will be released and they 
are going to show that Saskatchewan has one of the worst 
job creation records in the country. 
 

What can I say other than well, well, well, well. Perhaps I 
should say wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong. The stats were 
released today and guess what? Saskatchewan is the best in the 
West and is tied with Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, 496,100 people are working in 
Saskatchewan today; 18,000 more jobs than last month, 14,000 
more than a year ago, 7,800 more young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Ninety-seven hundred fewer people are on 
unemployment, and yes, once again Regina has the lowest 
unemployment rate in the nation. 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that the member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, should polish up the crystal ball because I think it’s 
a little foggy. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Diabetes Coalition Formed 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening I attended a presentation at the Sturgeon Lake First 
Nations which was preceded by a sumptuous banquet which I 
was very grateful for. Mr. Speaker, several First Nations in 
Saskatchewan have formed the First Nations Diabetes Coalition 
to combat the rapid increase of diabetes amongst Indians. 
 
Indians have the highest rate of diabetes in North America. The 
average age of non-Indian diabetics is 61 years of age, Mr. 
Speaker, while the average age of Indian diabetics is 48 years of 
age. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, diabetes has reached 
epidemic proportions amongst Indians in our province. 
 
Fortunately though, First Nations Diabetes . . . the First Nations 
Diabetes Coalition with help from Dr. Kam Vay Ung, of Sioux 
City, Iowa, are going to lead the charge in tackling this huge 
problem. 
 
Dr. Ung has developed a world renowned process in 
establishing significant reductions of diabetes amongst North 
American Indians involving diet and exercise. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there is still a large number of 
Indians losing limbs due to diabetic complications. Dr. Ung has 
also developed surgical techniques to save these limbs for all 
diabetics. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s one very large obstacle — 
Saskatchewan Health — whose bureaucratic health system 
discourages new, successful surgical techniques. So instead, 
Mr. Speaker, patients are going to Dr. Ung at their own expense 
— a shameful reminder of our so-called health care system. 
 
Let’s all hope that all diabetics will soon receive the dignified 
care here in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, the member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Awareness Week Events 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned on 
Wednesday that this week is Saskatchewan Tourism Awareness 
Week and that we would be hearing stories and events taking 
place in constituencies throughout the province. Since we 
haven’t heard anything from the opposition about tourism 
events in their ridings, I’d like to inform the Assembly that 
some of the events taking place around the province. 
 
Throughout this week in Churchbridge, the constituency of 
Saltcoats, people will be celebrating the Churchbridge June 
Daze Homecoming. In Cannington, the community of Wawota, 
will be having its Fairmede Agricultural Fair. In Kindersley, 
Exhibitat “14” will be taking place. In Spiritwood, in the 

constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, The Great Canadian 
Show and Sale will take place today through tomorrow. 
 
In Vibank, in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, the 
people of Vibank will be will be putting on their 10th annual 
Polkafest and Homecoming. In Warman, in the Rosthern 
constituency, the Diamond Rodeo and Family Days is taking 
place. In Hawarden, in the constituency of our friend from Arm 
River represents, the sports day will be taking place tomorrow. 
In Watrous constituency, the people of Lanigan will also be 
putting on a sports day tomorrow and Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more events taking place across 
this province this week to mention . . . and not enough time to 
mention them. I encourage all members of the opposition to 
share the good news taking place in their riding over the months 
to come. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tugaske Community Spirit 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I proudly stand in the House today 
to talk about a community in my constituency, which recently 
showed that their community spirit is alive and well in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The town of Tugaske, will have the grand opening of its new 
general store by late June or early July of this year. 
 
What makes this event so special is the fact that earlier this 
spring the original store had suddenly burnt to the ground, 
leaving Tugaske’s residents without a food store. Thankfully no 
one was hurt in the fire, but Shane and Doris Oram had lost 
their business. That’s when the strong community spirit of this 
little town was suddenly put to the test. 
 
Four days following the fire of April 4, community gathered on 
Saturday, April 8, and in 13 hours they had cleared the entire 
site, including the cement foundation. On April 14 a community 
benefit was held to assist the Orams in their rebuilding plans. 
The event raised 17,000 and on April 24 the cement was poured 
with new walls being erected May 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Tugaske and surrounding area came 
together, volunteers, equipment, and large amount of good will 
and co-operative spirit as essence of rural Saskatchewan. Along 
with the townspeople, many area farmers shut down their 
outfits to help out in this rebuilding process. 
 
For Doris and Shane Oram, this whole process has been a 
miracle of community good will, Mr. Speaker. This is a fine 
example of rural towns willing to pull together to stay viable. 
 
I congratulate everyone involved in Tugaske and the area, and I 
wish them all the best in the future. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would add that now that this new 
store is in place in Tugaske, I would hope that the government 
would at least prepare the highways leading to it to ensure that 
its customers arrive safely. After . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Awareness Week 
 

Ms. Lorje: — During Tourism Awareness Week, I want to 
remind all members of one of the many excellent attractions in 
my city of Saskatoon this summer. I particularly encourage the 
member from Cannington to make the journey to the banks of 
the Saskatchewan River to take part in Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan since he has demonstrated to this Assembly his 
love and appreciation of Shakespeare. His enthusiasm for the 
dramatic arts is laudable, and we are happy to provide an outlet 
for his passion. 
 
This summer artistic director, Henry Woolf, and his fine cast 
and crew will be presenting two excellent, but seldom 
produced, Shakespearean plays. First up is the comedy, A 
Winter’s Tale, which contains the line from which the 
Saskatchewan Party took its motto for this session, quote: “I am 
a feather for each wind that blows.” 
 
Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan’s other production is the 
tragedy of Richard III. A play about a devious politician who 
abandons both his leader and his principles, and leads a 
rebellion against the rightly constituted political order of the 
day. The Saskatchewan Party should really enjoy this one. 
 
So I invite everyone to Saskatoon’s riverbanks this summer. 
The plays are world class, the setting is refreshingly beautiful, 
the acting is first rate, and the ambience is superb. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week our 
province’s tourism industry have held a number of special 
events across Saskatchewan to celebrate Tourism Awareness 
Week. And rightfully so the men and women involved in our 
tourism sector — be they volunteers, employees, or employers 
— consistently demonstrate year in, year out that our province 
can compete with any in terms of this particular competitive 
industry. 
 
Congratulations to the entire sector for continuing to promote 
our province to our own citizens, Canada, and the world, and 
for the thousands of jobs they created and the wealth they’ve 
generated. 
 
And congratulations to the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government for their innovative ideas for the tourism industry, 
Mr. Speaker. Due to the NDP’s unique new approach to 
highway maintenance, enterprising Saskatchewan businesses 
are now marketing new tourism products. The businesses along 
the important tourism route of Highway 35 to Tobin Lake are 
promoting 35 as the highway of a thousand lakes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the industry is also developing a new golf 
product; it’s called portage golf. It’s been developed at Harbour 
golf and country club which is surrounded by two of the most 
renowned NDP adventure trails — Highway 19 and 42. And 
yes, Mr. Deputy Premier, at Harbour you have to fix your own 
divots. 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the government’s grand plan for 
highways has given us our newest tourism treasure. Soon Lake 
Diefenbaker will be Canada’s largest fly-in fishing camp. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Project Near Completion 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the House today with the good news that final 
construction work on the Pasqua Street and Highway 11 
interchange in my constituency begins this week. This is an 
incredibly busy intersection with over 14,500 vehicles passing 
per day. Therefore this project is important for safety and for 
the free flow of vehicles. 
 
This will be the final stage of grading and surfacing 
construction on this project, with completion set for late 
September. I look forward to attending an official opening at 
that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project will employ approximately 81 
full-time workers. The total cost of this investment will be close 
to $7 million. Stage one of the roadway construction began in 
June 1999 with the twinning of Pasqua Street and the relocation 
of the off-ramp grid road and the IPSCO pond. 
 
When finished, Pasqua Street will pass over Highway 11 with 
three open lanes across the bridge, two northbound, one 
southbound. A second southbound lane will begin from the 
Highway 11 off-ramp to Pasqua Street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we are improving the traffic 
operation and safety on our high volume highways through this 
initiative. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Patients Receive Health Care 
Outside the Province 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, a couple of 
weeks ago the Premier was at a conference, yipping at the 
Premier of Alberta about how to run a health care system. 
 
Turns out that the NDP here must actually think Alberta’s 
running their health system quite well because, Madam 
Minister, you keep sending Saskatchewan people to Alberta for 
medical treatment. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, over 40,000 Saskatchewan residents 
were sent west to Alberta for treatment. That’s fully, fully 4 per 
cent of our entire population. Just 17,000, just 17,000 Alberta 
patients came to Saskatchewan. That’s about a half a per cent of 
their population. 
 
To the Minister of Health: Madam Minister, where do you and 
the Premier come off criticizing Alberta health care when you 
rely on them so heavily to treat people here in Saskatchewan? 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When the federal government and the provinces entered into a 
national health care agreement in this country in the late 1960s, 
there was an arrangement made that regardless of where a 
person lived in this country they were entitled to health 
services. And we had what’s called reciprocal agreements, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As we know, the members asked for this information through 
written questions. We’ve provided them with that information. 
The Canada health system does have portability in this country, 
and that means that people in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
province of Manitoba, Alberta, and BC (British Columbia) and 
so on, are able to have their citizens treated in each other’s 
provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we can’t 
argue with the premise that people can leave the province for 
health care. But the imbalance states how terrible our health 
care is. 
 
The NDP health system here in Saskatchewan is failing. And if 
you dare say Alberta’s is bad, then what you’ve given us in 
Saskatchewan is an absolute disaster. Thousands of people, Mr. 
Speaker, on waiting lists here in this province. Thousands have 
to be sent to Alberta and other provinces every year. And even 
more people now are choosing to avoid the waiting lists 
altogether by going to the United States for their treatment. 
 
And yet what does the Premier like to do? Instead of taking 
responsibility for his own failing system, he likes — like the 
NDP always do — point the finger at everybody else. He likes 
to point the finger at Alberta or the United States. 
 
Madam Minister, how many patients are you going to send to 
Alberta this year? How much worse is it going to be here before 
. . . or after you choose to close more hospitals and hospital 
beds. What’s the prognosis for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member may not 
know, all provinces in the country have similar problems and 
the problems are this, that in 1993 the federal government 
began to reduce the Canada Health and Social Transfer, which 
meant that for all provinces in this country $4.2 billion was 
taken way from the provinces. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Every province and every 
territory in this county back-filled that money with provincial 
dollars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, including the Minister of Health from 
Alberta and the Minister of Health from Ontario, all Health 
ministers have been lobbying for the full restoration of the 
CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer) and an escalator. 
 
And what does that Leader of the Opposition do when we’re 
there trying to convince the federal government? You say no 

more money for the provinces. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that member has no idea what’s happening 
in health care in this country and that member has no credibility 
when it comes to health care in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
raises her voice to try to cover up the despicable shape of health 
care in Saskatchewan. The Premier likes to . . . to accuse 
everyone else of destroying medicare and the minister is trying 
to blame the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s that government, that Premier, and that 
minister who are destroying health care in Saskatchewan. They 
are violating the Canada Health Act. One of the fundamental 
pillars of the Canada Health Act is accessibility, and the NDP 
violates that principle every day in Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP have closed dozens of hospitals in rural Saskatchewan 
so rural people don’t have access to 24-hour emergency service. 
And the NDP then closed Plains hospital and removed hundreds 
of hospitals beds in our major cities. 
 
My question to the minister: Madam Minister, why are you 
violating the Canada Health Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously there is 
inconsistency in the member’s argument. And here is the 
inconsistency. That party is opposed to the Canada Health Act. 
He calls the five principles of the Canada Health Act mindless 
slogans. 
 
One of the principles is portability, Mr. Member. And in fact 
that member is supporting Preston Manning as the new leader 
of the Canadian Alliance. And what does Preston Manning of 
the Canadian Alliance have to say about health care? 
 
They say that they want to grant the provinces the widest 
latitude to pursue independent experiments on health care 
reform, which is code for permitting private health care in this 
country. And that’s what that member stands for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the fact. That 
minister can claim that she supports the Canada Health Act, but 
she and her government are violating the Canada Health Act. 
 
The NDP say they oppose two-tier health care, yet they’ve 
created a two-tier health care system right here in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s getting worse and worse 
every day. How much worse is it going to have to get before 
there’s another round of hospital closures and more bed 
closures in Saskatchewan? 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t you stand up and give us the bad 
news today? How many more beds are you going to close? How 
many more hospitals are you going to close? How much more 
two-tier health care are we going to get? How much more 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

damage are you going to do to our health system here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this member 
who wants to be premier of this province, if you can believe it, 
does . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask all hon. members on both sides 
of the House to kindly come to order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This member who wants to be the 
leader and the premier of this province doesn’t understand the 
fundamentals of the Canada Health Act, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, his party calls the five principles which are agreed 
to by Canadians from coast to coast to coast as mindless 
slogans. 
 
And what do they say about health care? They say let’s allow 
private health care, which means that the people who have 
money have access and the people that don’t are subject to the 
private system . . . or the public system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the US (United States). The 
costs of health care in the US are tremendously higher than the 
costs in this country. And a cost-driver study will be released 
next week that shows that Canada has a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance Problems 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
brought you example of . . . or example after example of how 
poor road conditions affect people in this province and we'd like 
to highlight another concern, this one relating to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday on CBC Radio, Denise Levorson, spoke 
candidly about how treacherous road conditions affect her job 
as an EMT (emergency medical technician). She related how 
precious time is wasted when ambulances are forced to slow 
down due to potholes or crumbling pavement. Even then rough 
rides affect patient care and the stress a patient may already be 
under is increased. The EMTs are not only faced with caring for 
the patient, but also worrying about the road. 
 
Mr. Minister, your neglect of our provincial highways is also 
affecting health care. At what point are you going to realize you 
have to do more? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you for the question. Obviously we are concerned about 
individuals as they travel back and forth on our Saskatchewan 
roads. Mr. Speaker, that’s why this year we’ve increased our 
Highways budget up to $250 million — the highest in 
Saskatchewan’s history — an increase of 6.6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Highways budget at $250 million represents 

roughly less than half, almost barely a third, of the amount of 
interest that we pay annually on the provincial debt that they 
created. Mr. Speaker, I’ve done a calculation overnight. Mr. 
Speaker, at roughly $2 million a day interest we could increase 
the amount of twinned roads at eight kilometres per day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just so the public understands, we could build eight kilometres 
of structural pavement per day based on the amount of interest 
that we pay on the debt each and every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope we don’t have to 
wait 800 days to have the roads fixed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, EMTs are often dealing with life and death 
situations. When time is critical to the outcome EMTs say that 
they’re losing time, and in many of these communities, which 
are hours away from the nearest emergency room, that time can 
mean the difference between life and death. 
 
They’re saying that putting in an IV (intravenous) or taking 
blood pressure, let alone conducting a more serious procedure, 
is extremely difficult when you and the patient are bouncing 
around in the back of an ambulance. Patients suffering severe 
injuries, especially back injuries, have a very difficult time 
during trips over these roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, our highways are literally a lifeline for every 
community in this province. Excuses aren’t what people want to 
hear right now. So when can the people expect to hear solutions 
and see some action from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I agree with 
the logic of the question in that our highways are a lifeline. 
There’s absolutely no doubt about it. But what I don’t 
understand, Mr. Speaker, then is why do they come in here each 
and every day asking for us to reduce the gas tax, money that 
goes towards building our roads, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I 
don’t understand. 
 
I don’t understand why the opposition spoke in favour years 
ago of getting rid of the Crow rate which brought into this 
province $320 million. We’ve got branch line abandonment 
now, Mr. Speaker, which causes many of the goods and 
services to now be forced to travel over the roads, creating 
rough roads. So I don’t understand their logic. 
 
You can’t ask, Mr. Speaker, for increased services, improved 
roads, and yet reduce taxes. Those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, 
simply do not add up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been in 
charge of rural roads for the last nine years. It didn’t take a 
crystal ball to perceive that we would have problems like we 
have today. 
 
For several days now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been asking this 
NDP-Liberal coalition government why they let the highways 
in this province deteriorate to the state they have. Why on earth, 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

when people pay the level of taxes they do in this province, are 
they also expected to go out and patch their own roads? 
 
We’ve talked about how bad roads are affecting economic 
development in this province and the negative effect that the 
lack of commit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. colleagues, the question will be 
heard. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked about 
how bad roads are affecting economic development in this 
province and the negative effect that the lack of commitment to 
highways in having on the road construction industry in this 
province. But all we’ve heard are empty excuses from an 
out-of-touch Highways minister and a little bit of California 
dreaming from the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Minister, will your government commit more money to the 
budget to the maintenance and construction areas in highways 
in the province of Saskatchewan this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely our provincial 
taxpayers’ dollars should go to the right places as he described. 
It’s just unfortunate that 13 cents on every dollar that our 
taxpayers pay here in Saskatchewan has to go towards paying 
the debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that he was talking about 
tourism. Mr. Speaker, I want to describe for you some 
interesting statistics. Mr. Speaker, they claim and it’s true that 
certainly our roads have impact on tourism. But, Mr. Speaker, 
just in this first quarter of the year 2000, we’ve had an increase, 
Mr. Speaker, of 100 per cent in the inquiries from Tourism 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. An increase of 100 per cent. 
 
So I think people are interested in coming to Saskatchewan. It’s 
just unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that these folks opposite preach 
so much doom and gloom, because there is lots of interest in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s lots of interest 
in Saskatchewan by tourists — once. They never come back 
after they’ve driven our roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier answered our 
questions on highways the other day. And he explained to the 
media that turning some of the highway system into this 
province . . . in this province over to the community volunteers 
was really an idea worth considering. He talked about how 
common it is in the United States for local people to fix their 
roads. And he even went so far as to mention the Boy Scouts 
and the Girl Guides getting involved in our problems here. 
 
But this morning the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Saskatoon Southeast said volunteers should 
certainly not be expected to take over road maintenance. 

To the Minister of Highways, do you accept your responsibility 
to maintain our highways in this province, or are you planning a 
community adopt-a-highway program? Mr. Minister, which is 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to correct a fact on 
tourism, Mr. Speaker. Tourism, Mr. Speaker, happens to be the 
fastest growing industry in Saskatchewan, generating, last year, 
Mr. Speaker, $1.14 billion in annual revenue and providing 
almost 42,000 jobs. 
 
It just happens, Mr. Speaker, in that member’s constituency 
there was an increase last year of 36 per cent, an increase in 
tourism of 36 per cent, most of them from Alberta. And I’ll tell 
you what’s happening as a result of tourism into Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at May 2000 over May of 1999, there 
was an increase of 14,600 new jobs. If you look at May 2000 
versus April 2000, there was an increase of 18,100 new jobs. 
And all of these, Mr. Speaker, are full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at 5.2 per cent unemployment, we’re some of the 
lowest in Canada here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that Saskatchewan is doing a very good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the number one concern of 
tourism officials in southwest Saskatchewan is not the inquiries 
and not the guests when they get there, but how to handle the 
fall-out from the roads they have to travel over on their way to 
the tourist sites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Southeast this 
morning also promoted the NDP plan to revert Saskatchewan 
highways back to gravel. She said some of our rural roads have 
less traffic on them than the back alley behind her Saskatoon 
home. That is appalling. She suggested that her back alley is 
more important to maintain than our rural roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the minister and the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast to drive down some of the roads our 
members have highlighted throughout this week. I invite her to 
talk to rural people and listen to how they have to use those 
roads to get to work, to pick up their groceries, to pick up their 
mail, to get their kids to school and to hockey games. 
 
I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that if we started talking about 
converting pavement in the cities back to gravel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 
Highways, is that your government’s policy on roads and 
highways? That good roads and highways aren’t important in 
rural Saskatchewan, but good back alleys are in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the truth is it’s obvious 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

that our roads and our infrastructure are critical to tourism and 
economic development in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the simple fact is, and I want the public of 
Saskatchewan to understand this, that tourism across the 
province in all of our parks, is up 36 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast said, and I’d like to quote her: 
 

Some of the roads the Saskatchewan Party is talking about 
that they want to have instantly paved and patched and all 
that, probably have less traffic on them than my back alley 
in Saskatoon. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been talking about Highway 18. Kids used to 
ride their school buses on that road. They don’t any longer. 
People hauled grain to the elevator down that road. Ambulances 
carry patients down that road. Honey Bee Manufacturing 
imports supplies and exports their products down that road. 
We’re not talking about a back alley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that what you think? Do you and your NDP 
colleagues believe Highway 18 is no more important than some 
back alley some place? Is that why you’re reverting it to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, for the public of 
Saskatchewan more than anyone, I want to clarify some of the 
facts. First of all we have seen a huge shift, Mr. Speaker, in the 
way we transport our goods and services back and forth across 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in the constituency that the 
member describes, many of those roads are thin-membrane 
surfaces that were constructed 30 and 40 years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. Most of those roads were constructed for use of small 
vehicles, light trucks, and cars, Mr. Speaker. With the change in 
transportation, Mr. Speaker, from rail to road, and a logic that 
most of those folks over there supported, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
now seeing large trucks travelling over roads that were never 
designed for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to work with the people and we need to 
work with the opposition and we need the federal government 
to help us put more money into roads, Mr. Speaker, so that we 
can design an infrastructure and a system that will help us put 
together a road system that will allow for this sort of traffic to 
move forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming abundantly clear by 
the answers we’re hearing that rural residents are first-class 
taxpayers but second-class citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in this province don’t drive to the 
hospitals down the member’s back alley. They don’t drive to 
school and to work down her back alley. They don’t go to town 

to get groceries down her back alley. The members across the 
way are saying that rural roads and highways aren’t a big deal 
because nobody’s out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are sick and tired of 
this out-of-touch, arrogant government. I’ve said it before and 
I’ll say it again: roads are the lifeline of this province for 
economic development, for tourism, and for the future — the 
very future — of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you explain to the people of this province 
how back alleys are more important than the roads serving rural 
communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as a rural resident myself, 
I would disagree with the member opposite when he describes 
rural residents as second-class citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just say the following as well, just with 
respect to the facts, Mr. Speaker. A study that was published in 
October 1999 by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) indicates that the total grain haul in 
Saskatchewan has increased an amazing 860 per cent over 1984 
levels, Mr. Speaker — 860 per cent. 
 
That’s something that our government — and I would ask the 
opposition members to work with us — that’s something that 
we all need to work together to try and resolve, Mr. Speaker. 
We need to design an infrastructure. We need the federal 
government at the table with dollars to help us resolve that huge 
dilemma, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Upgrading of Highways to Support Economic Development 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve all heard the member 
opposite, the Minister of Highways, rant at our member from 
Cypress Hills on highways being critical to economic 
development. 
 
Well Mr. Larry Eggleton is the president of No. 279 Beef 
Producers. He called my office to ask if the government plans 
to upgrade Highway 20 to a primary standard and also if they 
have plans to make Highway 15 from Semans to Highway 20 a 
primary shipping road. 
 
He is making those inquiries because his organization is 
planning on building a feedlot in the area, but good roads for 
large cattle trucks are essential. After many calls to the 
minister’s office we were informed that there’s no likelihood of 
either road being upgraded in the near future. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is more proof that economic development is 
being stifled by poor road conditions in this province. What are 
business ventures like the beef producers supposed to do if the 
transportation system will not accommodate their business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, our job 
numbers show and prove that we’re interested in economic 
development and they prove that we are successful, Mr. 
Speaker, as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, but I want to say to the 
member opposite who says that we should design roads that 
will support the traffic. Mr. Speaker, at $250,000 per kilometre 
to design structural pavement, Mr. Speaker, the member needs 
to understand what the cost is. But at $2 million a day of 
interest on the public debt, Mr. Speaker, we could build 8 
kilometres a day of structural pavement, Mr. Speaker, 8 
kilometres a day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this is a time when the 
agriculture economy is struggling. Government is hindering 
agriculture economic development because it is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It is not maintaining the basic infrastructure 
of the transportation system in this province. We have a group 
of investors here who are interested in beef production. They’re 
searching for a suitable location in their area for a feedlot and 
the roads cannot accommodate this business. 
 
How is our rural economy supposed to expand and diversify 
when the main method of moving product in and out is by 
roads? The roads are virtually impassable. Our road system 
should be a high priority for economic strength if we’re to 
encourage more businesses in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, where are the highways and our road system on 
your priority list? If your binder boy, the deputy minister, 
would take a look, I don’t think this highway is in there. When 
are you going to fix Highway No. 15? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the concern that the 
member raises is valid. And we also agree that we need roads in 
place to create economic development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is that day after day 
the members opposite bring in these problems and concerns that 
are legitimate but they don’t provide solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
They ask us to reduce the gas tax, Mr. Speaker, money that goes 
into our general revenue for the construction of roads and 
infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, when he was in the 
House of Commons, spoke in favour of the abolition of the 
Crow rate which caused great branch line abandonment, Mr. 
Speaker, which therefore, as a result of that allowed . . . and 
caused, I should say, huge amounts of goods and services to be 
transferred onto roads that, as I described earlier, were built 30 
or 40 years ago and not designed for this heavy traffic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is we need to work together 
with the opposition and with the federal government to try and 

design an infrastructure in Western Canada, in Saskatchewan, 
that serves the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just want to . . . Order. Order. 
I just want to thank all hon. members for the applause this 
morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Income Tax Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 81, The 
Income Tax Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 82, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Income Tax 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 83, The 
Income Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84, The 
Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 85 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 85, The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46  The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the hon. Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials before I call clause 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With me 
today is Mr. Len Rog, sitting to my immediate left, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of the revenue division of the 
Department of Finance. And also sitting to my right, is Ms. 
Cindy Ogilvie, who is the manager of the financial management 
branch of the Provincial Comptroller’s office, which is an office 
of the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I have a couple 
of questions if I could. Mr. Minister, this particular Act 
regarding the tobacco tax, what is the primary focus of this 
particular tax? Is it for social reasons, is it for health reasons, is 
it for revenue reasons? What is the main focus, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think to this tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there are all of those aspects. All of the tax revenue is paid into 
the General Revenue Fund which is consistent with the 
principles set out by the Gass Commission on government 
financing. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
when I was reading through some of the existing, and the 
explanation of the expanded tax, I notice that there is a different 
rate on the different kinds of tobacco. A different rate for 
cigarettes, and a different rate for cigars, and a different rate for 
tobacco that is bulk. 
 
And I just wondered what the difference was and why there’s a 
different rate applied to each of those different forms of 
tobacco. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the 
differential tax treatment of different types of tobacco products 
has been really somewhat anomalous, to answer the member’s 
question. I’m not sure that there has been that much rationality 
to it. 
 
And I will say to the member, as I think the member is aware, 
in fact the intent of the legislation is to remove the anomaly by 
having a more or less similar treatment for all kinds of tobacco. 
That it doesn’t matter if the tobacco is in a cigarette or a cigar or 
uncut, that the rate of tax would be roughly the same on all 
kinds of tobacco. And that is consistent with the 
recommendations and urgings of both the Canadian Cancer 
Society and other people who are trying to reduce the rate of 
smoking in society. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I noticed that 
the rate of increase on a cigar for instance can be 95 per cent of 
the estimated retail price. Is this a rate that is an increase 
significantly on cigars or is that a very significant increase 
because of these amendments? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 95 per cent or 
up to 95 per cent tax has actually been in effect for many years. 
This is not changing. The only change in this legislation is that 
there is a minimum tax of 35 cents per cigar. So that the 
minimum tax moves up but the rest of it is the same as it has 
been for many years. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see where that 
has been a maximum for some time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the question I have is this. Have you had an 
opportunity to do some consulting with vendors and with the 
speciality tobacco shops with regards to these amendments? 
I’ve had several calls from vendors of tobaccos, particularly 
speciality tobaccos and cigars, who were quite frustrated in 
their inability to get some answers because of this impending 
legislation. How extensively did you do consulting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m advised that there 
have been ongoing consultations with representatives of 
retailers, grocers. I’m not sure that there have been extensive 
consultations specifically with tobacconists, but the department 
tries on an ongoing basis to consult with vendors. 
 
I would agree with the member that there undoubtedly is some 
frustration and unhappiness by retailers of tobacco products, 
especially specialists in that kind of sale, when any tax increase 
comes in, because of course that’s seen as a negative aspect to 
their business. The other side of that though is society’s interest 
in trying to do what we can to reduce the use of tobacco. 
 
And this . . . the member in his first question was asking about 
the various aspects of this taxation policy. As I indicated, the 
member’s correct, there’s a revenue aspect to it to be sure. 
There also is the desire to respond to the health aspects of it and 
to respond to the cancer society’s urging that all tobacco 
products be charged a tax at the same rate, and essentially this is 
what we’re doing. 
 
That change will cause some frustration and unhappiness in 
some quarters, I can’t deny that and it’s there. But that is the 
rationale for the change and that is what we’ve responded to. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Did you have an 
opportunity to put a submission in to the all-party special 
committee on taxation that has been circulating around the 
province, has been getting submissions and meetings, and are 
preparing to put forward a draft response. Did you have a 
chance for any input into that committee based on your 
previous response about both revenue and the social 
implications of tobacco taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I’m advised that one of the officials of 
the Department of Finance, revenue division, did in fact appear 
at the anti-tobacco committee in late February. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the two can 
generally go hand in hand. I’m sure your objectives are similar 
to what the committee’s objectives are as well. 
 
I’ve been hearing rumours, Mr. Minister, that the federal tax on 
tobacco is going to be reviewed and adjusted. I suspect because, 
as you remember, there was a reduction of the federal tax on 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

tobacco a few years ago with the idea of trying to stop the 
smuggling of tobacco across the Canadian border, particularly 
into Quebec and Ontario. 
 
If the federal tax increases significantly to compensate for some 
of that loss, how is that going to affect the tax here in 
Saskatchewan? Will it have any affect at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, there would be an effect, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, specifically that if the federal government increases 
the tax on tobacco then the tax that we charge, being basically 6 
per cent of the retail price, would be 6 per cent of the price 
including the federal tax. So that if the federal tax went up by a 
certain amount, we would pick up 6 per cent of that amount. 
They would pick up a hundred per cent of their increased tax; 
we would pick up 6 per cent of that amount which would be 
increased revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And generally speaking, we’ve taken the position over the years 
when tobacco taxes have been lowered across the country to 
respond to the smuggling problems in the East, we have not 
been reducing the provincial taxes out of concern, certainly for 
revenue, but also primarily with respect to the health issue. And 
we’ve been supported by the anti-tobacco people — there are 
various groups like the lung association, the cancer society — 
with respect to that position. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
really only have one more question. And the question would be: 
are you planning in the near future any significant across the 
board tobacco tax increase other than what we’re discussing 
here in these amendments? Is there a plan to escalate the overall 
tobacco tax assessed by your department in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — At the present time there is no plan to 
increase tobacco taxes. But I should say to the member that the 
all-party committee of the legislature on tobacco has 
recommended I believe a 10 per cent . . . or a 10 cent per 
package, increase in tobacco and to use that revenue . . . to 
target that revenue at measures to discourage tobacco use, 
especially by young people. 
 
And so while there is no plan immediately at the present time to 
do that, we certainly will be giving consideration to the 
recommendations of the committee, which is, after all, a 
committee comprised of both sides of the legislature. 
 
And so I can’t say . . . I can’t rule that out. I mean we want to 
certainly consider it, but beyond that there’s no plan at the 
present time. And that would be something for the budget of 
next year, the budget introduced in 2001, I believe. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I have no further questions. And I would 
like to thank you for your responses and for the assistance of 
your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Hon. Minister of Finance to move 
the committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’d like to, before I do that, thank the hon. member and 
the opposition for their assistance in getting the Bill to this stage 
in the House, and I’d also like to thank the officials from the 
Department of Finance for their assistance. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Certified Management Accountants Act 

 
The Chair: — Are you using the same officials, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I have the assistance of the same officials, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, on 
this particular amendments on this Act, I’ve had an opportunity 
to ask questions before, and we’ve had an opportunity to 
exchange on some of the questions that were of concern. 
 
I guess one of the things that I had mentioned earlier was the 
fact that I had the opportunity, during the debate and as the time 
that I had, I was able to contact several people in the industry 
and get a feedback from them and — during these adjourned 
debates — and I was able to report to you, I think, Mr. Minister, 
that there seemed to be consensus that this particular Act or the 
amendments could go through. 
 
Just if I could, I’ll take a moment or two to follow up on one or 
two of the questions that were still outstanding in my mind. I 
just wondered if you’d had the opportunity as well, Mr. 
Minister, or your officials, to be able to consult regarding these 
amendments with people in the industry, the professional 
associations, and so on. And which ones did you consult with? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can report to the 
member in the House that we’ve had in fact extensive 
consultations with the certified management accountants, but 
also discussions with their sister organizations like the chartered 
accountants and the certified general accountants as well. And 
the consultation has been quite extensive and there seems to be 
a strong consensus that the legislation is very appropriate. 
 
I might just add that one of the things that we’ve been doing as 
government throughout the 1990s is to try to reform quite a 
number of professional statutes, some in the area of accounting 
and finance like this one; many in the area of health, where I 
had some experience earlier, first of all when I was a private 
member on the Legislative Review Committee for four years, 
but then as minister of Health, where we did statutes relating to, 
for example, the physical therapists and so on. 
 
And you might ask, what’s that got to do with this statute. What 
it has to do with this is we’ve been trying to put all of these 
professional statutes into a sort of a common pattern and this is 
what this statute would conform to, if I can put it this way, a 
modern-day view of professional legislation generally. 
 
And they incorporate things like: trying to make the powers of 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

the profession consistent with other professions; trying to make 
the discipline provisions where they discipline a member 
consistent, build in the concept of fair treatment and the right to 
be heard, that sort of due process; and also to improve the 
protection of the public, to involve the public actually on the 
professional body and to give the public some eyes at the table, 
what are they doing in terms of their fees and is this in the 
interests of the consumer. And have they got appropriate 
safeguards in place to make sure that the profession is giving 
good service to the public at a reasonable rate? 
 
So in any event, there seems to be a very wide consensus — not 
just with the accounting professions, but across the piece, the 
professional bodies — that legislation like this legislation is the 
way to go. 
 
And so this is what we’re doing and I think there’s a strong 
support for the direction that we’re taking. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I’m happy to hear that because my next question was in fact in 
that particular area. I know that other professions have had 
legislation passed on their behalf, and I assume that this would 
— not having experience with those — I assume that this would 
somewhat mirror the different . . . those conditions from other 
Bills. 
 
Am I correct in saying that this mirrors the kind of objectives in 
direction as you earlier stated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s entirely 
correct. We have some officials in the Department of Justice 
who are in fact lawyers who work in government, and they look 
at this legislation, along with the other professional legislation, 
to ensure that the legislation falls into a consistent pattern as I 
described before. And that certainly has been done with respect 
to this legislation. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, is there anything in these 
amendments that would protect the public in a way that if 
complaints are coming forth from the public, is there anything 
in there that will address that? Or does it have to be addressed 
through the professional association itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. There are provisions with respect to 
the protection of the public, as I said, and I’ll give the member a 
few examples. 
 
One is that the legislation would provide the council of the 
certified management accountants with the opportunity to have 
procedures like practice inspections so that they will have 
people that will inspect the practice of the certified management 
accountants to ensure that the proper procedures are being 
followed, first of all. 
 
Secondly, the . . . included in the Bill is a provision for 
representatives of the public at large to be included on the 
institute’s council and disciplinary committee. And those 
appointees will represent the interests of the general public to 
make sure that there are procedures in place: first of all to 
inspect the practices that are going on — to make sure they’re 
in the public interest; and to make sure that if there’s any 
activity which is detrimental to a particular client or the public 

interest, that the member who’s doing something detrimental 
will be disciplined under the Act. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That leads me 
then to the question as to the members that will be appointed to 
the council. These members are — correct me if I’m wrong — 
appointed from the public, and I wondered if there’s 
consultation. What kind of consultation will be in place before 
those members are appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What is generally done is that we consult 
with the council of the professional body with respect to, you 
know, some names that we may have, to see if those names 
seem to be acceptable to them. Sometimes the professional 
body — I don’t know about this particular one — but 
sometimes they will want someone with a particular expertise 
or professional background. 
 
I can think of one professional body that has requested that the 
public representative be a legally trained person because they 
want assistance with respect to procedures when they’re 
disciplining members. And they’re not a large body and they 
don’t have the resources necessarily to hire a lawyer, so they 
think that having a lawyer on their body would be helpful. 
 
It is not the case that we ask the profession to select the person 
to go on their body, because that would in fact be detrimental to 
the idea of public representation in the sense that it becomes 
kind of a closed shop. 
 
But yes, we would like to consult with them I think about any 
wishes they may have, any views they may have with respect to 
prospective members. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have just one 
more question, and it’s somewhat related to that. 
 
In the amendments, it says that the minister has the ability to 
have influence over the bylaws that are passed by this 
association. 
 
I just wonder under what circumstances that you might envision 
minister involvement in reviewing or having bylaws altered or 
amended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should say that this is a standard 
provision across the professional legislation — nothing unusual 
about this Act. But one of the long-standing traditions with 
respect to professional legislation is that they are self-governing 
bodies and they are monopolies if you will. 
 
For example, to use the law society as an example, you can’t 
practise law unless you are a member of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s because they have been given sort of 
quasi-legislative powers by the legislature to make certain rules 
that may impact on the public, because . . . well naturally, the 
law society, as an example, will have an impact with respect to 
the cost of legal services. I mean I think it’s justified. I think 
that you have to protect the public from people that aren’t 
properly qualified. 
 
But my point is this, that when you give a group of individuals 
that kind of power, a sort of quasi-legislative power, we have a 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

duty to look at the bylaws that they pass and to determine that 
those are in the public interest. And if they’re not in the public 
interest — for example, if a bylaw said that there shall be no 
competition in prices, every member of this profession will 
charge a minimum of $100 per hour for whatever service and 
would not ever give any pro bono or free service to somebody 
that needed it — we would say no, that bylaw is not 
appropriate. 
 
Now having said that, although I think you need that power, it’s 
a very unusual situation where the government overturns a 
bylaw of a professional association. I don’t know even if it’s 
happened in the recent past — it may have and I don’t recall. 
But it’s not something that happens, and yet we receive bylaws 
from the professional associations on a regular ongoing basis. 
 
The people that run the professional bodies, including this one, 
I think do so with the public interest in mind, and I don’t expect 
that they’re going to do anything that the government would 
disallow. 
 
But at the same time, it’s a long-standing tradition that the 
government does have the authority to disallow a bylaw 
because we, the legislators, are in effect granting to these 
professions quasi-legislative powers. They can make rules that 
impact on the public and we have a responsibility to retain the 
ability to make sure that those bylaws, that we’re delegating the 
power to them to make, in fact are made in the public interest. 
And if they do something that will hurt the public, we have to 
reserve the authority to say no, you can’t do that. Having said 
that, it’s not something we have to do very often if at all. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have 
any further questions other than to again thank the minister for 
his response and to thank your officials for their assistance in 
this. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Hon. Minister of Finance to move 
that the committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I 
do that, I’d like to thank the hon. member from Lloydminster 
for his questions and assistance, and also the members of the 
opposition for their assistance in moving the legislation through 
the House. And I’d also like to thank Mr. Rog and Ms. Ogilvie 
for their assistance today. 
 
And with that I will move that this Bill be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1130) 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the Hon. Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left, 
Susan Amrud, who is the director of legislative services in the 
Department of Justice, and on my right, Cindy Ogilvie, who is 
the manager of the financial management branch of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of committees, and 
thank you, Minister, and hello to your officials here today. We 
want to welcome you here to the legislature. 
 
I just wanted a . . . on this particular clause, I wonder, Minister, 
if you could provide — even having gone through the 
explanatory notes — I wonder if you could just provide a very 
brief rationale for the need for the changes represented in this 
particular section. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well actually, Mr. Speaker, there’s, 
Mr. Chairman, there’s nothing of substance changed here. It’s 
just an improvement to the drafting. So there’s nothing of 
substance in the change to clause 2(b). 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I guess this is the 
substantive part of this particular Bill. And to the extent that it 
would improve the accountability of this particular government, 
I think there’s a lot of . . . I personally think there’s a lot of 
merit in it. And having discussed it with many of my colleagues 
in detail, I think they believe there’s a lot of merit in it too, 
Minister. Because openness and accountability, frankly, have 
not always been the hallmark of this government. And we only 
have to look to a couple of things, I think, to underscore that 
fact. I think if you mention the word Channel Lake, that might 
fall into that category. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if you mention the word SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), I think 
that might fall into that category as well in terms of maybe a bit 
of a lack of accountability and certainly not a lot of openness on 
the part of this government. 
 
And recently in this session my colleague, the member for 
Rosthern, has asked some very interesting questions about a 
pipeline debacle undertaken by SaskEnergy wherein over . . . I 
mean hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent on a 
pipeline that apparently SaskEnergy has no use for. 
 
And you know there was not a word of it, not a single word of 
it, in the official documents tabled by that Crown corporation 
which is owned by the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so that’s a concern with this Bill I think that we have. And 
certainly you’ve addressed a timeline for tabling of documents, 
but it seems to leave to the government, and in particular this 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

government is what we’re dealing with right now, to be honest 
with what indeed it is that they’re tabling. 
 
But I guess the question that I would have on this particular 
section, Minister, relates to the fact that the time period that 
we’re speeding up this process by is phased in. Why? Why is it 
phased in? Why did you choose a period . . . you’ve chosen and 
why would we need to wait for this phase-in period to get the, 
frankly, the benefits of this Bill in place for the taxpayers’ of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the commitment 
exhibited under this Act is a commitment to be more open and 
more accountable and to speed up that openness and 
accountability process. 
 
And there are two reasons for the phase-in process. One is that 
it enables those who will in fact prepare the reports to 
acclimatize themselves to a speedier process. And the second, 
and perhaps more important, is that it enables the Provincial 
Auditor to adjust his or her workload in order to address these 
concerns too. It is not something that . . . the work is not 
something that can be switched immediately. So the phase-in 
period is to enable the accommodation both within the work of 
the preparers and the work of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, and Mr. Chairman of 
committees. Interesting. In your answer you mentioned that 
officials wanted the phase-in period so they can become . . . so 
they can be climatized to the new, more demanding timelines in 
terms of tabling documents in the legislature. And my guess 
would be that for the most part the preparers of the document 
are officials of either Crowns or line departments of 
government or Treasury Board Crowns. 
 
And I guess that would sort of lead to my next question, is that 
the group — I mean I know when you’re looking at legislation, 
you consult with a number of groups — did you consult with 
the people that prepare these documents when you came up 
with a phase-in, or was this something that simply your senior 
officials in the department assumed that the preparers needed? 
 
Because I think the question goes to the heart of whether or not 
the government really is indeed the government, and whether it 
requires of its officials what is fair. And in this case we’re 
talking about the prompt reporting and tabling of documents 
that should fit in to the people’s time frame not the time frame 
of public servants. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Wadena on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
To you and through you to the members of the Assembly I have 
the great honour for the second time today to introduce a school 
group from my constituency. 
 

With you in the east gallery is 21 students from Pleasantdale 
School, grades 7 to 9. With them is Mrs. Graham, Mr. Perkins, 
and their bus driver, Don Kager. 
 
I’d like the members to know that this school has a 
higher-than-normal average of students on the honour roll in 
grade 12. And I think that we’re very proud of this school, as 
we are of many of the . . . all of the rural schools. 
 
Thank you very much for coming to the legislature, and have a 
great day in the city. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 

Clause 5 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The experience of officials — this is in 
response to the question of consultation — is that it would in 
fact take some time to make the shift to a speedier reporting 
time period, and discussions within departments confirm that. 
And it’s certainly the case that the Provincial Auditor, who has 
been advocating a speedier process, is of the view that it would 
take some time within his office to ensure that this work can be 
done in a timely fashion. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair of committees, just one final question 
as it relates to this section. And I notice in there a good portion 
of the section, Minister, deals with the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly receiving the documents and then distributing them 
to whom they need to be distributed. 
 
And I wonder as a matter of course, I don’t think it’s 
specifically laid out here, but just as a matter of course if you’re 
aware or if your officials are aware of how long it will be before 
these documents are also posted to the Internet? And is that an 
option — that they’re looked at? It’s not called for directly in 
the Bill, but certainly more and more of Saskatchewan people 
have Internet access and rely on it, frankly, for timely 
information, perhaps more timely than any other medium that is 
available to them. 
 
So I wonder if that was contemplated in the Act either . . . if not 
in the Act then in the regulations or in the implementation of 
the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairperson, the, I think, 
appropriate response to that question is that once the documents 
are in the hands of the clerk, they are public documents. And 
certainly . . . and the preparers could certainly put those 
documents then on the Internet or indeed distribute them in any 
way they see fit. 
 
But I think the member has raised an interesting question about 
how we might prompt more documents to be on the Internet for 
the ease of access of citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1145) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Certified Management Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

The Chair: — Before I call subvote 1, I invite the Hon. Minister 
of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I think most of the 
officials have been previously introduced, but it’s been some time 
since we’ve been here and for the information of the members of 
the committee, to my left is the deputy minister, Neil Yeates. 
Seated behind is Frances Bast, senior policy advisor, finance and 
operations branch; and behind me, Lily Stonehouse, assistant 
deputy minister. Behind the bar are Brady Salloum, executive 
director, student financial assistance, and Margaret Ball, associate 
director, facilities planning unit. 
 
And also, Mr. Chair, before going to the first question today from 
the hon. member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, I would like to 
provide the written response to a question asked last time the 
estimates were before a committee. 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the minister: 
upon reviewing the estimates for his department, I see that a sum 
of $200.8 million has been allocated to universities, federated and 
affiliated colleges and educational agencies. I wonder if the 
minister could provide a breakdown of how those funds will be 

allocated in the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the hon. member. 
The increases in that funding category are in the amount of 4 
per cent. Each of the federated colleges has received a 4 per 
cent increase in their funding already. And there is 4 per cent 
that’s also targeted to be distributed to the universities. The 
final distribution of that, in precise terms, has not been finalized 
but it will be very shortly provided to the universities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thanks to the minister for his answer. Mr. Chair, I 
wonder if the minister, being that the finalization of allocation 
for this current year have not taken place on fund allocation, I 
wonder if he could indicate then, in the past fiscal year, how the 
funds were allocated — give us the breakdown as to the various 
institutions, how much money the various institutions received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in 1999-2000, the fiscal year 
upon which we’re building, the amounts allocated to the 
universities were as follows: University of Regina, 
$47,092,800; University of Saskatchewan, $125,428,300. There 
was $3 million allocated to university special initiatives, which 
is shared by the universities, and then a library outreach of 
$200,000. 
 
The federated colleges in the current fiscal year with their 
allocations then, our total — this is to Campion College, Luther 
College, St. Thomas More, Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College, and St. Peter’s College — in this current fiscal year, 
the one before review of the House at the moment, is 
$7,096,300 to the federated colleges combined. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I wonder if the minister 
could explain how those funds were allocated to the two 
universities. Is there a percentage of the total budget that goes 
to each university? And if so, what is that based on? 
 
I think there is some question on behalf of citizens that are 
concerned with funding to universities as to exactly how this 
breakdown is arrived at, and if the minister could explain that 
process, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the 
breakdown of the funding, which has been a formula that’s been 
in place a couple of decades, so really quite some extended 
period of time as this follows: the University of Saskatchewan 
receives 70 per cent of the funding, 26 per cent to the 
University of Regina, and then 4 per cent to the federated 
colleges. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I understand this 
funding formula has been reviewed by a Mr. DesRosiers and he 
brought forward some recommendations. I wonder if the 
minister could explain what the . . . give us the gist of Mr. 
DesRosiers’s recommendations and perhaps indicate his 
government’s position on the DesRosiers report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, again to the hon. member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood, following a review at the 
university — at the universities I should say, that would go 
back some three or four years — there was a decision made to 
review the formula of distribution, the formula for distribution 
of university funds in the province of Saskatchewan. And 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

Edward DesRosiers was engaged to provide some framework 
for that. Mr. DesRosiers did that then in 1998, and since that 
time there has been work to attempt to refine his proposal which 
was very much an activity-and cost-based formula, is what he 
was attempting to provide for the province and for the 
universities to understand the appropriate distribution here in 
the province. 
 
Just very recently then, Mr. DesRosiers has been re-engaged to 
provide more specific advice and I have not yet received his 
report. I do expect to receive it very shortly, and then after 
receiving that report what I will do then is provide a 
recommendation which government will then consider. And I 
anticipate making a decision in a relatively near future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, it’s my understanding that Mr. 
DesRosiers’ report indicated that the funding to the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) was not sufficient in comparison to 
the programs that it offered when you looked at the funding that 
was going to the U of R (University of Regina). 
 
In other words, if you were comparing the funding to the two 
universities and programs that were being offered, the cost of the 
programs that were being offered, the depth and scope of research 
being done at the U of S, that there was some fairly significant 
deficiencies in funding to the U of S. 
 
I wonder if the minister would care to comment and give some 
more particulars on those statements. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Again I thank the hon. member for the 
question, Mr. Chair. Mr. DesRosiers has been working recently, 
after consulting substantially within the province with all the 
stakeholders that have vested interest, and is in the final stages 
then of getting to me that final report which will be his more 
detailed analysis of the application of the activity- and cost 
share-based formula. 
 
It will be then, after receiving that report, that I will move that 
forward to review what it is in precise terms that — as precise 
as we can define — that the province will do relative to the 
distribution of funds. 
 
I just think it would be somewhat premature and inappropriate 
of me, Mr. Chair, to be speculating that in advance, and we will 
be dealing with that just shortly. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer, although he really hasn’t clarified the situation for me. I 
understand by consulting with the universities, and particularly 
with the people at the U of S, that Mr. DesRosiers’ report actually 
found that the U of S was being underfunded by some 5 or 6 per 
cent; in other words moving the funding to the U of S up by an 
additional 6 per cent. And if additional new monies cannot be 
found, that would mean a reduction in funding to the U of R. 
 
Now I don’t think it is the U of S’s position that there should be 
money taken away from one institution and given to another. 
But I understand that according to their calculations using the 
formulae or the findings of Mr. DesRosiers, that if they were 
applied, that it would mean possibly an additional $26 million 

that the U of S should be funded to in order for them to 
adequately carry out the programs and taking into consideration 
the cost of some of the programs that they offer, and those sorts 
of things. 
 
And I would like the minister’s reply to that situation as to 
whether in fact that is in fact the situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks again, Mr. Chair, to the member, 
for his question. I do acknowledge that both of the universities 
will have their calculated perspectives as to what is the 
appropriate application of the activity-and-cost-based formulas. 
They won’t be in total agreement on what those are. 
 
And that’s precisely why Mr. DesRosiers has been engaged to 
reconsult . . . not reconsult, but continue the consultation further 
to what he had done in 1998 with the universities, and then to 
make his recommendation which, as I say, I expect to see very 
shortly. 
 
What we’ll be doing in this fiscal year, the fiscal year before it’s 
reviewed and before the House right now, is providing funds 
within the allocations that are before us. And then if it is 
required, beyond the amounts of monies available to reach an 
equitable distribution, then we’ll look at doing that over a 
period of time in the years ahead. And both of the universities 
quite understand that, and I understand they’re amenable to that 
kind of an approach to dealing with the matter. 
 
To be more specific than that is just not possible for me at the 
moment. I do understand the interest of the universities, and I 
too will want to resolve this matter as quickly as we possibly 
can. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if . . . the minister has indicated 
that he will . . . he’d like to resolve the funding issue in this current 
fiscal year to the university as quickly as possible. Would the 
minister be prepared today to put a time frame as to when this 
decision will be reached? 
 
Realizing that the universities are in somewhat of an awkward 
position where they are trying to set their budgets, which has a 
direct impact on what level of increase they will be looking at in 
tuition fee increases and those sorts of things, it has certainly 
ramifications for students who are looking at attending at the 
universities. 
 
Particularly the U of S who has indicated earlier this past month 
that if there . . . that they may be required to raise their tuition fees 
from 6 to 14 per cent and those sorts of things. So there is a lot of 
uncertainty out there not only for the institutions, but also for the 
students that are looking at attending the universities this fall. 
 
And I wonder if the minister is prepared to say that . . . give us a 
time framing by which this decision will be made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the interest of the 
hon. member and his colleague. I would expect to be in a 
position to advise in precise terms both of the universities as to 
their operating fund increases within the next two weeks. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. I guess further to this area of funding for the 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

universities, is the minister in a position to give some 
assurances at this time that particularly the U of S will have 
sufficient funding so that they will not be forced to increase 
tuition fees to the point that they had indicated earlier — 6 to 14 
per cent? 
 
Can you give any assurances today to the universities and to the 
students who are looking at attending particularly the U of S? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, and to the hon. member, he will 
appreciate I know one of the principles that’s involved in trying 
to give that specific an assurance at this point in time. It is a 
principle that I value and has traditionally been valued by the 
Government of Saskatchewan in its relationship with the 
universities to respect the autonomous relationship. 
 
That is an important relationship for a number of reasons not 
the least of which is the relationship between a law-making and 
budget-providing body, the Legislative Assembly, and an 
institution which, by its nature, is a knowledge-producing body. 
And all too frequently we’re inclined to sometimes 
underestimate the significance of that in a free and democratic 
society. 
 
I’m proud to say that that is a tradition that has been respected 
and I continue to respect. And unfortunately what that means is 
that when there is that autonomous relationship between the 
province and the university, at the end of the day, the final 
decision regarding tuition fees rests with the universities. And I 
think the hon. member does both understand and appreciate the 
significance of that. 
 
I will be providing to the universities, as I said, within the next 
couple of weeks, the specific information to assist them in 
making their decisions related to operations. And included in 
that will then be the conclusions that they will each draw related 
to the tuitions for the coming year. 
 
I will certainly be asking the universities — and this will be no 
surprise to either of them — to do the best they possibly can 
with the funds that are provided. And we’ve defined the 
amounts of money that are available to be added to their base 
operating, plus there will be some that will be dedicated to the 
DesRosiers adjustment, I think is the terminology related to the 
matter the member has just raised with me. 
 
After having received that, they will make their decisions, and 
as I say, I, in providing the specific information, will be asking 
both universities to make the tuition fees as affordable as they 
possibly can to the students at both the universities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is also, I think, significant to just put it into a context that I 
think the universities, to be fair to them, have been working 
with that as their objective. And it’s for that reason that here in 
Western Canada the university tuition fees are really very 
favourably compared to other universities, and that’s a 
characteristic that I think we all value and would want to see 
continued. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder . . . what I would like now is 
to move to another area that has to do with funding to 
post-secondary education institutions, and that is 

post-secondary capital funding. 
 
I see in the Estimates that the minister’s department is 
proposing to spend approximately $31.8 million in capital 
funding. I wonder if the minister would provide the House with 
a breakdown of that funding and what specific projects perhaps 
at the various universities that some of the funding is going to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, I 
appreciate the question and to break it down for him: of the $31 
million plus in capital, in the department that you refer to, the 
precise amount that’s dedicated to universities is specifically 
$28.7 million in total. And just to put that — I’ll break that 
down in just a moment — but to put it into context, which is 
fair I think because we are certainly hearing in a number of . . . 
from a number of universities across the country, concerns 
about capital infrastructures. And there has been, I think over 
the course of the past decade, a substantial response to that. 
 
(1215) 
 
And I point out that in the 1992-93 fiscal year, the amount 
dedicated to university capital was precisely $3 million. And 
last fiscal year, that we just ended, was just a touch under $20 
million. And this year it’s bumped to $28.7 million dollars. 
 
That’s broken down as follows. To the University of 
Saskatchewan, for the Thorvaldson and Kinesiology Buildings, 
$7 million is committed to that this year for those capital 
projects. 
 
And related then to the nursing education program and the 
expansions that are required because the number of seats for 
training nurses in Saskatchewan has been expanded from 180 to 
260 — and as the hon. member will know, that’s training that 
combines both SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) as well as the university — but the 
university portion of that at the University of Saskatchewan is 
$750,000, three-quarters of a million dollars, in capital. 
 
At the University of Regina, there’s a million dollars dedicated 
to the chiller to assist with the air conditioning needs at the 
University of Regina campus. 
 
And then the basic capital assignment to the universities 
combined is just a touch under $20 million. When that’s all 
added up, it totals $28.7 million for the universities, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. 
 
Mr. Chair, when I recently visited the U of S, it was very 
obvious that the oldest building on the campus, the College 
Building, is no longer being used. It’s in a state of disrepair to 
the point where I’m told that within a year or two, it may have 
to be completely demolished. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Chair, the minister knows that this is not 
only the oldest building on campus, it’s an integral part of the 
heart of the university. It’s situated on the east side of the bowl. 
It’s a historic building. 
 
Some people will argue that it’s probably the most historic 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

building in the city of Saskatoon, and some people will take it a 
step further and say that it’s probably the second most historic 
building in the province. I won’t enter that debate, but I feel that 
it is, you know, certainly not only a university building, but it is 
probably part of our heritage. 
 
I wonder . . . and I’m also told by officials at the U of S that at 
this point in time they have no funds to restore the building or 
to put it in such condition that it is not a hazard. And I wonder 
if the minister would tell us if there are any plans by his 
department to deal specifically with the College Building at the 
U of S. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
hon. member. The historic place of the College Building, I think 
it’s fair to say that the university has made well known to 
anyone who might have some relevance to maintaining the 
building, and they’ve done a good job of communicating that. 
 
In dealing with the capital priorities of the University of 
Saskatchewan specifically, because that’s what you’re asking 
about, they identified the Thorvaldson Building and 
Kinesiology Building as their priorities, and that’s where the 
funding is directed in this budget that’s before us now. 
 
On the matter of the College Building, we continue to work 
together with the University of Saskatchewan to try to 
investigate possibilities for being able to sustain the building. I 
think it’s becoming increasingly obvious to everyone that the 
likely solution will involve some kind of combination of 
partnerships. And I am well aware that included in that, that the 
university continues to as well make a request to the federal 
government to assist in that regard as well. 
 
So we’ll continue to pursue a variety of possibilities that may 
achieve that objective, working co-operatively with the 
University of Saskatchewan, and to do the best we can 
balancing the capital affordability of the sector and the demands 
we have from many institutions of course with their capacities 
to perhaps find funds from other sources, and to see if there’s 
some way that working together that that can be achieved. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. I’d like to pursue this issue of the College Building a 
bit more. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’m told that to stabilize the College Building, it 
would cost approximately $11 million. And that would be just 
to stabilize it and put it in a condition that it would not have to 
be dismantled and destroyed. It would require an additional $7 
million to render the building functional and to be used, for a 
total of $18 million. 
 
Now that would also help the U of S with the severe space 
shortage that they have. I believe Mr. DesRosiers determined 
that for activities that are carried on at the U of S, that they 
require an additional 18 per cent increase in space. And by 
bringing the College Building on stream would help to go a 
long way to alleviate that problem. 
 
As the minister indicated in his answer that . . . I have been told 
by the U of S that they are looking at a partnership arrangement 
to bring this building back into usable condition. 

I noticed in the budget that there is $5 million set aside under 
the Centenary Capital Fund for post-secondary education. I 
wonder if the minister could give us any indication as to how 
that $5 million will be used in this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Again, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member 
regarding his question related to the Centenary Capital Fund. 
One of the things that I was very pleased about the budget 
before us is that it did stipulate in six different categories that 
there was a Centenary Capital Fund, 4 or $5 million a year for 
each of the next four years, to assist in dealing with capital 
demands that we would like to respond as we move forward to 
the beginning of Saskatchewan’s second century as a province. 
And I’m very pleased that one of those capital funds, the 
Centenary Capital Fund, was assigned for the use of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
What we have done there, Mr. Chair, is we have been in touch 
with all of the stakeholders in the post-secondary sector, 
including of course the University of Saskatchewan and all of 
the rest, and have invited them to identify their capital needs 
and to make application and to lay out as accurately as they can 
their numbers and rationale. 
 
And it will be no surprise to the hon. member that the 
University of Saskatchewan in is identification response to that, 
included the College Building of course. 
 
And that will be then, Mr. Chair, in the not too distant future, 
we’ll come to some conclusion related to this fiscal year. We’re 
currently analyzing them, and analyzing them as the 
stakeholders were advised in the context of the needs of the 
sector in its entirety and also in the context of the training 
strategy and the post-secondary education strategic plan. 
 
We discussed early in the estimates some of the broader thrusts 
of this budget that we’re trying to achieve and things, some of 
the new initiatives giving much higher priority, for example, to 
technology-enhanced learning in order to better bring the 
campus to the students that we heard so much about when 
getting particularly outside of the two larger cities, and other 
things. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, when we look at the capital requests we 
think it’s extremely important that the tax dollars that are being 
dedicated there are spent prudently. And that there needs to be a 
consistency between the balance of the needs of the institution 
to achieve what they need for their operational purposes as well 
as the needs of the province in its entirety, to support the 
post-secondary system. 
 
And so it will be in that context. And included in those 
considerations then, will be the specific project that the hon. 
member raises and that will be in balance with a whole host of 
others. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. I guess I just would have one more question dealing 
with this College Building at the U of S. I also noticed as part of 
this Centenary Capital Fund that there is $5 million set aside for 
parks and heritage functions. 
 
I wonder if the minister has taken to his cabinet colleagues and 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

the Minister of Finance the suggestion that because of the 
uniqueness of the College Building, it’s importance in our 
heritage of the province and that sort of thing, whether he has 
proposed to his cabinet colleagues that perhaps some funds 
from both the centenary allocation that has been allocated to 
Post-Secondary Education and also that $5 million that has been 
allocated to parks and heritage, whether it’s not possible for the 
minister to find some additional funds to put towards the . . . to 
start the process of rehabilitating that building? 
 
I certainly realize that it’s a huge undertaking and it can’t be 
accomplished in the matter of one fiscal year. But I feel and I 
know the university feels that if the province was able to come 
up with a bit of additional funding to put in specifically towards 
that project, that that perhaps would attract additional dollars 
and we could begin the process of saving that very significant 
building at the U of S, which not only serves as an educational 
building but also is a heritage building. I wonder if the minister 
would care to comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks again, Mr. Chair. My department 
will be raising that issue with the Department of Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing regarding their deliberations 
related to determination of Centenary Capital Fund. At the end 
of the day, it will be through consultation through both Treasury 
Board and cabinet that we’ll reach the final decisions on the 
Centenary Capital Fund. 
 
So there will be plenty of opportunity to do that, certainly in the 
post-secondary world as well as all of the others. And again, I 
say to the hon. member that we will be doing our best to take 
the funds we’ve got available to match them with the needs as 
defined by the stakeholders and the needs of the sector, of the 
post-secondary sector. But on the particular heritage 
characteristic that he raises, we’ll consult as well with 
Municipal Affairs Culture, and Housing in that regard. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. I have one more question dealing with the universities, 
and this is a question that I have been asked by a number of 
citizens and it has to do with foreign students attending our 
university. 
 
It seems that there’s a concern amongst the citizens of the 
province that perhaps they realize that a number of foreign 
students attend our universities under exchange programs and 
those sorts of things. But there’s also a number of foreign 
students that come directly to our universities with not being 
part of any exchange program, that sort of thing. And the 
question that citizens have is, do these foreign students pay the 
same tuition fees as the students of our province and our 
country, or do they pay somewhat higher? And I wonder if the 
minister could elaborate on that whole issue. 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. I think he 
will be interested to know there is what is referred to as a 
differential fee whereby foreign students do pay a different and 
higher fee than a Canadian student would. 
 
And I think most students on our campuses would see the 
presence of foreign students as a plus in the campus experience. 

And I would also point . . . well no, I won’t get into a different 
area than the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answers. And at this time I would defer to my colleague from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
noticed in one of the regional colleges, in the past few years 
they’ve managed to . . . been able to have very modest 
surpluses. And of course they start to add up over a period of 
time. 
 
I wonder if you’d be able to respond then, Mr. Minister, as to 
how well all the regional colleges are doing and being . . . to 
accumulate small surpluses through the last several years in 
their budgeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the 
surpluses in the regional colleges collectively in the last fiscal 
year have grown to the range of 5 to $6 million. One of the 
main reasons for that was the unpredictability of federal 
funding. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Certainly with 
the unpredictable financial contributions from the federal 
government, which has helped to create these surpluses, I see 
also a few that the monies are not getting used to reduce tuition 
fees and rather that these monies are being used to invest in 
SaskTel bonds, in Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. 
 
I wonder if you would be able to elucidate for me and for the 
rest of our caucus here, why the department feels so strongly 
that they need to take taxpayers’ money and reinvest it into the 
government and not use those monies a little more wisely and 
maybe use them to reduce tuition fees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. The tuition 
fees that are charged by the regional colleges for their students 
who are taking SIAST or university classes are identical to the 
tuition fees that are assigned by SIAST or the universities. 
 
On the matter of the fiscal management of their surpluses, the 
regional colleges do have the authority to choose how they 
manage that and they do that, in my judgment, in a responsible 
way, dedicated to the ongoing operations of the colleges. I do 
point out as well that those financial reports are all audited and 
are all tabled and are public knowledge. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, certainly we 
need to give credit to the regional colleges’ boards for being 
able to accumulate the small surpluses and not running deficit 
budgeting as we see throughout so many other areas of the 
province in regards to handling of provincial monies. 
 
But I guess when we see that that money is being invested and 
as an example in Saskatchewan savings bonds where the 
maturity date is the year 2003, should the regional college run 
into any financial difficulties, these monies are then not 
immediately available. 
 
I’m wondering then, has the department, Post-Secondary 
Training and Education, thought about putting any guidelines in 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

place so that those kind of monies that are in surplus are being a 
little more readily available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the policy 
that is used to guide the regional colleges in their investments is 
the same that guides the province. It’s from the comptroller’s 
office. 
 
Regarding the specific question he asks about Saskatchewan 
savings bonds, I think the hon. member will be somewhat 
reassured to know that Saskatchewan savings bonds are 
redeemable annually. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, when I first 
started my questioning, one of your first answers was that one 
of the problems that regional colleges have is being unsure of 
how much funding is going to be attributed to them from the 
federal government. 
 
Now I noticed that in the past, on their budget lines, there’s 
certain monies comes from the federal government. Now is this 
monies that . . . kind of a new monies from federal government, 
or is this still in the same package that normally comes through 
transfer payments from the federal . . . from the feds to the 
provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. Up until 
June of 1999, a year ago, the federal government would engage 
in direct purchases of training with the colleges, and that was a 
direct relationship. 
 
The federal government has now, for all practical sakes and 
purposes, withdrawn from training. And so in that context, the 
relationship with the federal government has become 
substantially more predictable. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good afternoon, 
Mr. Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was just wondering if . . . I’m going to put about 
four very clear questions to you, at least I hope they come out 
clearly. And I hope to get some very specific answers because 
we’re trying to fit in a number of people with questioning in 
estimates today within the time period we have. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many seats are made available in the College 
of Nursing in each of the cities of Saskatoon and Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, that’s a difficult . . . if the hon. 
member is into short snappers that’s a difficult one to respond 
to in that context. 
 
The question is clear; it’s the answer that is a little more 
complicated than it may seem. The hon. member will appreciate 
that there will be combinations of SIAST and the university 
training in total, and that the number of entry seats have 
increased over the last year. 
 
But I don’t have those precise numbers with me, and if it’s 
acceptable to the hon. member I’ll provide them to her in 
writing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 

also ask if you could provide in writing for me the answer to the 
following questions. How many seats were there available in 
the College of Nursing 10 years ago; how many seats 5 years 
ago? How many nurses graduated 10 years ago, how many 
nurses graduated 5 years ago, and how many nurses graduated 
within this past year? 
 
And I’d also like to know how many applicants were there for 
this year? And I’d like to know also, Mr. Minister, how many 
people are on the waiting list in each of those centres to enter 
the College of Nursing? 
 
I just want to make a comment in addition, Mr. Minister. It 
seems to me like all of the health facilities it seems in the 
province are stating that they’re short of nurses. There’s a 
number of nurses that have indicated to me that they’re really 
running. They feel that they’re short-staffed and that their duties 
have gotten to the point where they’re not sure that they can in 
fact do them safely any more because of the shortage of nurses. 
 
In view of the shortage of nurses, I’m wondering why there 
aren’t more seats opened up. 
 
I await your response, especially the response about waiting 
lists. And I would hope that your government would ensure that 
there are enough spaces, enough seats, made available to 
accommodate the need for nurses in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I thank you and I will look forward a little further down the 
road to your answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you like to comment? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I know the hon. 
member will be encouraged to just acknowledge the recent 
history where the number of training seats for entry into nursing 
has been increased from 180 to 260. So it’s been an increase of 
80 seats. 
 
And there is . . . with your colleague earlier we talked about 
some of the capital implications of that as well in order to 
accommodate it. And I know as well the hon. member will be 
encouraged, Mr. Chair, by the nurses’ bursary program that was 
introduced this year through the Department of Health, and it 
had a very high level of interest. 
 
Regarding the other detailed questions that she asks, she’s quite 
right — I don’t have those numbers off the top of my head. And 
we’ll provide them in writing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
acknowledge and I understand that the seats have increased 
from 180 to 260 in the past couple of years. However, the 
questions I asked you previously I think will indicate that there 
was a drop in the seats in years previous to that. 
 
And, you know, when seats are not available and there’s a drop 
in the number of seats that applicants can vie for, then of course 
it stands to reason that the minister and your government should 
see to it that seats are increased because there has been quite an 
outcry lately of a need for more seats and more nurses. 
 
(1245) 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

And so yes there has been an increase, but prior to that time I 
believe that there was quite a significant decrease, and this is 
really quite an interesting game we’re in here. 
 
I think what we have to recognize is that we do need to have 
nurses, and that there is a shortage, and that quality care of 
patients is at stake here. And again, I would ask your minister to 
acknowledge that there is a need for further seats. Possibly, 
once you look at the waiting lists, that may become more clear; 
and something may be done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I think the hon. member 
will recognize that the attempt is to do the best balance, the use 
of public resources to respond to the defined needs that you 
have. I think that’s what she’s suggesting should have to be 
done, and that’s certainly what the province has been intending 
to do. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if I could, I have just one or 
two questions to the minister dealing with the area of skills 
training. 
 
The minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve been approached on a 
number of occasions by people who operate small- and 
medium-sized businesses in our province, and they’re telling 
me that they’re having difficulty obtaining and attracting a 
skilled workforce. 
 
I can point to an example in my own constituency of Lilydale 
Foods in Wynyard. They are constantly searching for people to 
work at their plant. They’re having problems getting people 
who have the basic skills that are required and that sort of thing. 
And they feel that perhaps that the minister and his department 
could be playing a more active role in preparing people for the 
workforce. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could comment as to what 
programs they have in place to prepare people for people such 
as Lilydale processes in Wynyard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member puts his finger 
on what is an important role and responsibility of the 
department, and that’s to make the best connection with the 
resources we’ve got available to respond to the employment 
needs here in Saskatchewan. And we do that in a number of 
ways that I think are, by and large, working pretty effectively. 
 
We will have regional needs assessments done largely through 
three bodies. One is the career and employment services 
centres, which are located in 20 communities around the 
province; a second is through SIAST and its various advisory 
committees and so on that they have; and as well the regional 
colleges will work close at hand with employers within their 
regions, and in fact, I think there’s been some experience to that 
effect in the specific case that the hon. member raises. 
 
One of the main projects that . . . or one of the main programs, I 
should say, that’s used to respond to specific skills training 
that’s targeted for employers will be the JobStart, Future Skills, 
and that’s a program that will be drawn from both career and 
employment services centres as well as the regional colleges in 
order to respond to individual needs. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I know there’s a number of 
areas that we would like to continue to explore, but in the 
interests of time I believe my colleague has one last question for 
you so I’ll defer to the member from . . . 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, with your good sense of humour it would be most 
enjoyable to sit here the whole afternoon and deliberate with 
you. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I was wondering, and I’m not sure if you 
can divulge this information at this time, but with the Centenary 
Capital Fund of $5 million being designated to different 
institutes, I’m just wondering whether or not that Centenary 
Capital Fund funding will be considered for the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies that is proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The answer to that is no, it’s a federally 
funded institution. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I will take the 
honour of thanking you today for being here and answering our 
questions and providing information for not only the official 
opposition, but all the people of Saskatchewan. And I thank 
your officials for coming out today too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And I thank the hon. member for her 
comment, and her threat that this jocular working relationship, 
Mr. Chair, might take us on and on into the afternoon. 
 
I just want to . . . did the hon. member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood want to make a final comment? No? 
Then let me, on behalf of the department, say a word of thanks 
to all the hon. members, but under the leadership of the member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood as the Post-Secondary Skills 
Training critic in the opposition, for the questions that have 
been raised here. 
 
It is an important principle in this democracy that there be an 
element of accountability that occurs, and this is the forum for 
doing that. I have appreciated the working relationship what 
we’ve established since I’ve had the honour of coming to this 
portfolio. 
 
And I’ve appreciated the interest that was shown by the hon. 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood and a number of his 
other colleagues, as well as from my own colleagues from this 
side of the House, in the public consultations around access to 
post-secondary education. 
 
That’s a very important subject for the people of our province 
and I’m very pleased that it’s been taken very seriously by both 
sides of the House. And I thank the hon. members for their 
questions and their interest. 
 
And I also want to say a word of thanks, Mr. Chair, to the 
officials from the department. They’re hard-working officials. 
They do a very, very professional job and I’m very proud to be 
associated with the quality of work that they do on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, I will ask that the committee report progress. 
 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 
introduce my officials: to my immediate left we have Stuart 
Kramer, who is my deputy minister. To my immediate right we 
have Dave Phillips, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
operations. Right directly behind me we have Lynn Tulloch, 
who is the executive director of corporate services, and next to 
Lynn, to her left is Bob Ruggles, assistant deputy minister of 
programs. Thank you. 
 
(1300) 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, 
Mr. Minister, for this opportunity to get together again and once 
again, welcome to your officials as well. 
 
And I know that we have a lot of things that we need to discuss 
this afternoon, but I would firstly like to invite my colleague, 
the member from Swift Current, to pose some questions that are 
of concern to him. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of committees, Mr. Minister, 
and welcome as well to your officials here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, my questions relate to action 
that the department has taken recently against the city of Swift 
Current. And I will try to phrase my questions so that you are 
free to comment knowing that, I believe, the proceedings are 
currently before the court. So I’ll keep that in mind and try to 
phrase my questions such that you’ll be able to comment 
because I frankly think the taxpayers of Swift Current would 
like to hear some answers with respect to this particular action. 
 
I mentioned this particular issue to the minister some time ago 
at the beginning of session and I was appreciative for his 
prompt response; maybe didn’t agree with the answer 
necessarily, but I thank him for discussing it with me early on. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know the background to this has been a 
problem, a historic problem, that the city of Swift Current has 
had with respect to its sewage effluent. And from time to time 
over the decades, especially in wet years, the city has had to 
seek a permit from the department under its various names to 
discharge into the Swift Current Creek. 
 
Now that was an undesirable option that the city simply had to 
pursue — it had no choice. And the department recognized that 
when it granted those permits and — in the past — and of 
course there were public meetings held and a lot of concern 
expressed from downstream residents and that’s completely 
understandable as well. I think the people of the . . . the 
residents of the city of Swift Current who maybe were not 
directly affected by the discharge were also very uncomfortable 
with the fact that this had to happen. 
 

And so there were several options presented to the city as a 
result of a working committee that was put in place, including 
officials from the department under a different name at the time, 
and several options were explored, all of them fairly pricey for 
the taxpayers of the city of Swift Current. 
 
The most effective and one of the least costly of those was a 
new technology called snow-fluent, where literally during the 
winter months snow is made from effluent and the purification 
process, which has been duly licensed by our province and 
other provinces in the Dominion and other jurisdictions on the 
continent, purifies the effluent and then it melts in a decanter 
pond, and we don’t have to get into the technical aspects of that 
particular technology. 
 
But it isn’t cheap technology either. And when you combine the 
$1 million-plus that the city taxpayers spent on that technology, 
when you combine that with the fact that the taxpayers also 
funded the construction of additional lagoon cell, or that they 
currently fund a very extensive and not inexpensive effluent 
irrigation program whereby they’ve had to purchase land, 
because farmers simply don’t want to take irrigation when they 
don’t need it — and so the city basically had to purchase land 
for that as well, as well as irrigation equipment — when you 
add all of that investment that the taxpayers of the city of Swift 
Current have made to earnestly and honestly try to deal with 
this serious problem, you’re getting well over $2 million over 
the course of time that I’m talking about. 
 
Now, minister, I think that demonstrates a resolve and a 
willingness on the part of the taxpayers and on the part of the 
various city councils. And I believe there’s been two different 
city councils involved now to deal with this issue honestly. 
 
Obviously cities, like every jurisdiction, would like to use 
public monies for . . . well probably to provide some park 
services, to cut taxes. In the case . . . in this case, I’m sure the 
city would have liked to have used $2 million-plus for other 
things, but they didn’t feel it was right to leave the problem 
unaddressed. And your department, quite rightly, said this 
problem has to be addressed; we can’t continue to discharge. 
 
Now I’ll quickly fast-forward to an incident — I believe it was 
early last spring in the city of Swift Current — where there was 
a very accidental, very accidental discharge of effluent in the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
When it was reported to the city, the city immediately dealt 
with it. They dealt with their staff and were upset with what was 
a human error in terms of a valve not being turned off. But 
despite that, your department has pursued legal charges against 
the city of Swift Current, against the taxpayers. 
 
Now I can understand that kind of approach if the city had 
proven to be negligent or if the city had demonstrated a lack of 
care or caution as it relates to this issue in general. But clearly 
that’s not the case, Minister. 
 
And so I know you can’t comment on the case that may be 
currently before the courts, but I would ask you today to stand 
in your place please, sir, and inform the members of this 
committee on how you could possibly reach the decision, in 
advance of it now being in the court, how could you possibly 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

reach the decision to go ahead and lay charges against the 
taxpayers of the city of Swift Current when they have 
demonstrated the kind of goodwill they have demonstrated to 
deal responsibly with the problem of excess effluent in the city 
of Swift Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Very 
quickly I’ll respond as best as I can and I’m sure the member 
can appreciate that this being in the courts that it’s very difficult 
for us to make very many comments. 
 
What I will say is that it’s very, very important to SERM’s 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) role 
and obligation to the people of Saskatchewan and to the people 
of Swift Current and other areas, that we take our role in terms 
of working with waste water and the sewage systems 
throughout the province very, very seriously. It’s not in my 
interest, and it’s not in the purview of SERM, to see any 
Saskatchewan residents being charged much less the city being 
charged. Certainly that’s something that we don’t look forward 
to doing and something that we simply like to not do. 
 
However in stating that, I think it’s again very important — and 
I know he can appreciate this — that we don’t want to make too 
many comments other than to say that it’s something that we 
take very seriously in terms of our role, and as well that as 
always it’s something that all the people of Saskatchewan want 
us to do. When you’re looking at the proper handling of sewer 
wastes it’s got to be done. And all this information of course, as 
you’re probably aware, will come out to the court cases and it’s 
best that we not make any comments in reference to this being 
before the courts. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, and, Minister, 
thank you for that answer. I did try to word the question such 
that you could comment on it as a result . . . understanding that 
it is before the courts. And I appreciate what you’re saying. I 
think the taxpayers of the province do expect that SERM and 
other agencies of government including SaskWater are wanting 
to ensure that both our drinking water and how we are treating 
our sewage and our effluent is in the interest of public safety. 
 
I also expect that they would want you to enforce the laws that 
are in place fairly and that they would want the department to 
ensure that communities are complying with the regulations 
involving effluent and the discharging of effluent. And I guess 
that goes to the heart of this particular issue and it’s why, 
Minister, I do take great exception with how the department has 
acted in this case. 
 
Because, if they were dealing with a belligerent community or a 
negligent community who were almost purposely being 
negligent in respect of this issue and not really caring to resolve 
the problem of excess effluent, I would expect them to take a 
very hard line. I would expect them to go to court. I would 
expect them to hold that community and its leaders and I guess 
indirectly its taxpayers responsible. 
 
But, Minister, that is not the case here. That is not the case here. 
 
We are talking about a community that invested well over $2 
million to try to address the problem of excess effluent. We’re 
talking about a city whose total operating budget is $30 million 

a year. I think their capital budget for the whole city this year 
was under 5 million. So that’s a huge amount of money for the 
taxpayers to have spent in good faith, earnestly, to try to avoid 
the discharge of effluent into the Swiftcurrent Creek. 
 
And so I guess as a more general question I would ask this, with 
that preamble: what option would the department have — and I 
won’t ask about this specific case — but if the department has 
laid a charge like this against any municipality or body, what 
option do they have to revisit the charge and to drop that 
charge? That would be the question. 
 
You don’t have to comment specifically on this issue because it 
is before the courts. But maybe you could answer for me, 
generally speaking, what options would you have, if you had a 
will to, to drop a charge or withdraw a charge like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you again for the question. I just 
want to point out that it’s always to our value as a government, 
certainly as taxpayers of Saskatchewan and people involved 
with the province, that we make every effort to encourage 
people to follow the proper processes, the proper procedures. 
And we put systems in place to ensure that the public safety is 
one of the primary concerns that we have. 
 
And in relation to the sewage problems in Swift Current, we’re 
always, as I mentioned, always looking forward and are quite 
excited at some of the initiatives shown by various cities. And 
we certainly commend all the players in doing that. 
 
And as we mentioned before, some of these systems that we 
have set up is intending to do exactly what we all want to see 
happen, and that is to protect the public interest. 
 
And in saying that and I again state, that it is not my intention 
from day one to have any Saskatchewan residents being 
charged under any infraction. We do our very best to try and 
avoid that because this is certainly something that we want to 
see a lot of co-operation, collaboration, and certainly common 
objectives are shared by many people. So we want to bring as 
many people as we can to share in that workload; so charging 
them is certainly something that we don’t like to see happen. 
 
What we do know, that in this particular instance when a 
community or a certain system doesn’t follow the rules and 
regulations, charges are generally recommended by Justice. All 
the evidence is certainly brought forward by SERM and this is 
where Justice also plays a role in indicating, yes there is the 
ground for laying charges. And whether or not the alleged 
infraction is requiring charges is determined by the public 
prosecution branch of Justice. So they have certainly the upper 
hand. 
 
But what I’ll say in terms of, you know, if a municipality or a 
RM (rural municipality) or a village has a particular charge and 
a challenge in the court system, that I think the mediation 
process — the whole system of look, listen, there was a mistake 
made here, we have to make sure that it doesn’t happen again in 
the future whether it be one charge or another — that through 
the court process, mediation is always something that is an 
option. 
 
And we would encourage as many communities out there to: (a) 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

follow the rules; (b) that if there is an infraction, that they do as 
much as they can to immediately solve the problem; (c) is not to 
take any other action that contributes to the problem, and of 
course; (d) is go through the process of . . . hopefully through 
the courts seeking the mediation option. 
 
(1315) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of committees. And, 
Mr. Minister, thank you for the answer. I guess, what 
intervention have you made with Justice officials if any then in 
terms of this mediation process because I agree with you and I 
appreciate the remarks that you make in that regard. 
 
And I guess I’d like to go on record as the MLA for the area as 
encouraging you and the department, when consulted by Justice 
throughout this process, to advocate a position. I would 
recognize maybe there was a mistake made here. Maybe 
common sense needs to prevail and realize we’re not dealing 
with a rogue community that doesn’t care about the downstream 
residents in the Swiftcurrent Creek and the quality of water in 
that body. 
 
And I would seek that commitment here and then I would thank 
you in advance for your answer and to your officials for their 
indulgence. And I indicate I think that the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena will be pursuing questions as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Once again I 
have to inform the member that indeed we haven’t had any 
interaction with any Justice officials or anybody else for that 
matter on this particular issue. And I’m sure he appreciates the 
fact they have to be very, very safe and careful on this one. So 
therefore I can’t make any comments on the case. 
 
All I can say is that it’s something that we are aware of. It’s 
before the courts and we have to allow the courts to go through 
their due process. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Welcome to the officials, Mr. Minister. Last time that this 
department was up, Mr. Minister, the member from Carrot 
River Valley asked one question about logging in the area 
around Hudson Bay, especially dealing with the contracts for 
Weyerhaeuser. And we understand that last year the 
government determined that instead of letting the contracts out 
through the government department, they would . . . 
Weyerhaeuser would be making that decision. 
 
I’ve been contacted by a number of private contractors now 
who have now had their contracts lapsed by Weyerhaeuser. 
They hadn’t been aware before that this was going to be 
happening. 
 
A number of contractors had made significant purchases in 
equipment and machinery last year, to the tune of a quarter of a 
million dollars on just one contractor. So now they’re not 
allowed . . . they won’t have the capability of working . . . of 
Weyerhaeuser purchasing from them or them going directly to 
the mill. 
 
Can you tell me how this decision was made? If there’s any 
opportunity for these private individuals to come to you and say 

. . . at least to have given them some fair warning that this was 
going to have happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
want to point out to all the families and all the contractors that 
are involved in this particular challenge at this time is that it’s 
always unfortunate, and sincerely my heart and thoughts go out 
to some of the families that are losing their jobs and 
opportunity. 
 
However in terms of the logging in the areas around the Hudson 
Bay area, this is totally Weyerhaeuser’s choice. As a business 
that’s running in the forestry field they make these choices as a 
business, and as always as a government we strongly encourage 
Weyerhaeuser to be fair in their dealings with all the 
contractors. 
 
There is no question, sentimentally I agree that some of the 
challenges that many of these families have faced and some of 
the planning that they done, all of a sudden they don’t have 
contracts, you know. I think everybody across the province 
certainly can relate to that in their lives because this often 
happens to many folks. But as we mentioned before, 
Weyerhaeuser’s the ones that are actually contracting these 
folks. They’re the ones that decide how much you’re getting 
paid, who’s getting the work, and so on and so forth. So this is 
entirely a business choice. But on one hand we also strongly 
encourage them to be fair to all the people so we can minimize 
some of the impact that you’re speaking about. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I do appreciate that 
you are sincere in what you’re saying and I know that you don’t 
like to see people out of work. But sincerity, Mr. Minister, 
doesn’t pay the bills. 
 
Last year, one of the contractors that I talked to had been 
speaking with the government, and they were excited about the 
possibility of more work because of the mill opening up in 
Hudson Bay. They weren’t given any indication at all that this 
is going to have happened. So when you put your life savings at 
risk and believing in this province when you have a government 
contract, I think that’s sort of different than when you are 
dealing in a private business. 
 
I know there seems to be some sort of feeling especially for 
bankers that if you’re dealing with the government, then it’s 
solid. I believe that there’s some obligation on the part of 
government to make the people that they’re dealing with aware 
of what’s going to be happening. We can’t just wake up in the 
morning and hear what’s going to happen to our lives on the 
radio. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I know that you can’t go to Weyerhaeuser and 
tell them you’ve got to hire all these people back again, but can 
you tell me what I can go to my contractors and say? I know 
they’re going to be pleased that you’re sincere in your regrets of 
what’s happening, but that isn’t going to pay the bill, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So is there any plans by your department to see what kind of 
follow-through that you can do for these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again I want to thank the member for 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

her question. And I think the most important thing is, as I 
mentioned, is that nobody in Saskatchewan, certainly myself, 
want to see any families lose their opportunity, lose their 
employment, and certainly be at risk of losing a lot more if they 
don’t have work. 
 
But what I do want to know . . . what I do want to point out is 
that Saskatchewan is certainly looking at expanding the forestry 
industry. Forestry is also expanding in the Hudson Bay area. As 
the member may know, there’s a brand new OSB (oriented 
strand board) plant being built. There’ll be a number of brand 
new jobs in that area and clearly there’s some excitement in 
forestry in general. And I haven’t got all the figures and the 
stats in front of me as to what this does for the economy and for 
employment in that particular area. 
 
But what I will say again is that we hope that the families are 
able to find other work and we sincerely again can sympathize 
with their challenge. 
 
But clearly Weyerhaeuser are the individuals that decide who 
their contractors are. Government does not have a role in 
determining who they will employ or who they will not employ. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, 
Mr. Minister. This worked out very, very well in terms of your 
last answer and where I want to go next. 
 
Recently there was an exemption granted in the Porcupine . . . 
Pasquia-Porcupine forest management area from using 
softwood with a top diameter of less than 10 centimetres. Now 
this exemption apparently lasts until eight months after the new 
OSB mill that you just mentioned is completed. 
 
Can you explain to me, Mr. Minister, why that exemption was 
granted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
want to point out that the information that you’ve given me 
today is very sketchy. I would need very specific information as 
to who the exemption is to, which area you’re speaking about. 
And if you could either give me more information now or 
forward us a letter indicating the complete information, we’ll be 
able to find out exactly what the issue is at hand. 
 
And I want to assure you that we’ll try and do it in a timely 
fashion where you’re not waiting three weeks for the answer. 
So if you give us more information now or by way of a written 
letter, you know, certainly we’ll get the answers for you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I think you probably are aware of this. I know that it 
has been discussed by your advisory committee, and I know 
that you probably have gotten some concerns from individuals 
in the Hudson Bay area on this particular topic. 
 
But bottom line is, is that what has happened here, as I 
understand it, your department has granted an exemption for the 
use of any softwood timber less than four inches in diameter 
which is basically the tops, the tops of the trees. Now there are 
some estimates that say that in the Hudson Bay area this equates 
to about 65,000 square metres annually of wasted fibre. 

And a little earlier this afternoon, Mr. Minister, I forwarded to 
you some pictures taken by citizens in the Hudson Bay area of 
the waste as a result of this exemption. And I think after having 
looked at them you would probably agree with me that it’s 
pretty dramatic to see that amount of our natural forestry 
resource being wasted and left strewn around in the bush the 
way that it is. And the exemption of anything less than four 
inches in diameter is different, of course, than what was 
previous because it was three inches and less. 
 
So this has added huge volumes of waste that are being left 
around in the . . . particularly the Pasquia-Porcupine forest 
management area. And my question was: what purpose was 
given for the granting, or what reason was there for the granting 
of this exemption? And was there ever any effort to find some 
other use for this extra fibre that, as you will see from the 
photographs, is just piling up in the bush? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
point out to the member, and I appreciate the information that 
you have given me and certainly in the follow-up question, and 
I want to assure you that I was not aware of the exemption that 
you speak about. And again I encourage you to give us the 
exact details and we will get back to you. 
 
I think the important thing is the people of Saskatchewan 
through time and continuing through time will also encourage 
us to be very, very rigid in some of the manners in which we 
manage our forest. 
 
And as you probably are aware, there’s been a new Forest 
Resources Management Act proclaimed April 1, 1999. As well, 
we have new forestry regulations enacted April 1, 1999 as well. 
So Saskatchewan is the leader when it comes to proper forest 
management. 
 
And a photograph that . . . you did show it to me and I 
appreciate that information and certainly it really hits home, 
some of the comments that you’ve been making that we should 
find total utilization for all the wood and the timber supply 
that’s out there. And I certainly view that sentiment . . . and that 
is our objective as well as government. 
 
And we always discourage and frown very, very hard on those 
individuals that may want to waste this valuable resource. So 
my point to you is that, give us the exact details as to where the 
area is, who the exemption is for. If you have any additional 
information, we will investigate that particular aspect, and if an 
exemption was granted, and we’ll also give the details as to 
why it was, But certainly from our perspective, exemptions of 
that sort, personally I don’t feel that there’s a warrant . . . it’s 
warranted throughout the province. 
 
As I mentioned before, our objective is to manage the forest as 
best as we can. That is what the people of Saskatchewan wants, 
that is what the industry wants. And so I think it is incumbent 
upon us as government to really look at some of the challenges 
facing forestry as a whole. 
 
So when we get information from opposition, or from interest 
groups, or from any of the environmental groups that are out 
there, we sincerely appreciate that information. And we will 
investigate and we will get back to you in terms of why the 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

exemption was granted and exactly how we can improve the 
whole problem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Some of the 
information that I relate to you, Mr. Minister, came directly 
from documents that you provided me through a freedom of 
information request. 
 
Let’s move to the Prince Albert forest management area. And as 
I indicated in the Pasquia-Porcupine, we were looking at a 
situation where the exemption was only going to be granted for 
eight months after the completion of the new OSB mill. But in 
the Prince Albert forest management area — and this was 
authorized in a letter to Mr. Hanen, I believe of Weyerhaeuser, 
from Lorne Scott — the letter authorized them to leave about 
661,000 square metres annually of softwood fibre, with a top 
diameter of less than 4 inches, in the bush for up to, in this case, 
ten years. 
 
So can you explain to me, Mr. Minister, why we now are 
wasting huge amounts of fibre in both of the forest management 
areas? 
 
(1330) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. And as I mentioned before, Saskatchewan really has 
some very tough management Acts in terms of forestry. We 
have all the regulations and the rules we feel is necessary to 
manage the forest as best we can. And as always, we also are 
looking for advice and comments, as I mentioned earlier, on 
how we can improve that system. 
 
And what I wanted to point out is that, sincerely, we appreciate 
the information that the member has given us. And we want to 
get to the bottom of that because obviously, as he’s mentioned, 
if some of the figures that he’s mentioned are correct, then we 
don’t want to see any waste of any sort. 
 
And I would encourage the member . . . from the documents 
that you’ve given me, from the photographs, the only 
information that I have in this particular documents are the 
words on the bottom marked, image 47.jpg. Now if that’s a 
code for a certain place or a certain part of our forest then 
maybe you can share the code with us so we know exactly the 
area you’re speaking about. 
 
But clearly SERM is managing 37.7 million hectares of land in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s a job that we really 
embrace, and we look forward to doing. We do our very best to 
manage all those interests on that land as well. 
 
But as I mentioned, in terms of forestry, we take that work very, 
very seriously. And this department and certainly this 
government made an effort to develop the forestry industry so 
we can maximize all the potential jobs that might be created, 
while at the same time achieving that balance of trying to make 
sure that we don’t see any waste of this valuable resource at all. 
And if there’s another market, if there’s another industry we can 
use some of the exemptions that you speak about to minimize 
the waste, then certainly all avenues will be looked at. 
 
But again I encourage the member as always just to, if you can 

for us, is to give us the specifics on which area you’re speaking 
about, of the exact amount of volume of wood, who’s getting 
the exemption, how long this has been going on. We can find 
that out if we get the basic information from you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’ll go one better. The gentleman who in fact took 
those photographs asked me to extend an invitation to you to 
come and visit, particularly in the Hudson Bay area, and see for 
yourself first hand the waste that has been going on there 
particularly this last winter. 
 
Because the community is very, very concerned. And as I 
indicated yesterday in speaking to the forest management Act, 
the community and the communities that derive their living 
from the forestry, the individuals in those communities are 
perhaps the most ardent conservationists because they are the 
people that derive their living from the forestry. So they are the 
people who are the most concerned, and who get very upset 
when they see the kind of waste that is happening in their area. 
 
Now there are also I think, and this relates even to some of our 
previous discussions around fire control, there are other issues 
there that perhaps Environment and Resource Management 
should be giving some thought, as I’ve had indicated to me by 
people who know far more about this than I do. 
 
But with the amount of waste that you see in those photographs, 
laying on the forest floor, apparently that waste can become 
quite a fire hazard as it dries out over the course of the year. So 
there may be all sorts of other issues related to this as well that 
should be explored. 
 
But I would like to ask the minister if he would be interested in 
responding to the individual and individuals in the community 
who invited him to come out to the area and take a personal tour 
for himself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. And I just want 
to advise that member that I will accept his invitation, kind 
invitation to attend a visit to the area and to look at the 
particular problem area as well. What I will point out though is 
that I think previous ministers had been to the site, and I 
understand that the Hon. Lorne Scott, the previous minister of 
SERM, was in there to visit the site and view the site. 
 
And to also point out, earlier I mentioned the fact that certainly 
the government has some tough acts in place to ensure that 
forestry is not abused. I think a lot of the environmental groups 
that are out there, the movement in general is very concerned 
about the number of activity in terms of forestry happening in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But more so, Mr. Speaker, the third component of a good 
forestry management plan and partnership that is necessary is 
also the forestry companies. Now it’s unusual for a Minister of 
the Environment to get up and defend the forestry companies. 
We don’t do it too often, but what I will say is that in general 
the forest companies themselves know and appreciate that this 
is a very valuable resource. They will not knowingly, I think, 
make a great effort to waste a resource and do things that are 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

contrary to good forest management practices. 
 
So not only do they assume that responsibility that it’s more so 
their job to make sure that they manage the resource once they 
get the resource — that they value add to it, that they create 
jobs and so on and so forth. 
 
Their role is clear. And we’ve had conversations with a number 
of forestry companies where we have said that we’re quite 
serious in enforcing the rules and regulations that the province 
has put in place, not only because we have to, because the 
environmental movement, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
people involved with all kinds of industry across the border 
want, is they want that balance between environmental 
stewardship, and certainly the development that needs to 
happen to create jobs and opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that being said, I will say again that I accept your kind 
invitation for the visit to the site. Certainly I know that my 
predecessor, the Hon. Lorne Scott, was at the site previously, 
and that we’ll continue working with the people of Hudson Bay, 
continue working with the environmental movement, continue 
working with the forestry companies, and continue working 
with the people that are impacted, not only those that have jobs 
in the forestry sector, but those that could be having other 
opportunity whether it’s outfitting, or whether it’s having a 
cabin in the area. 
 
But we must do our very best to be inclusive of all people that, 
as I mentioned, have a need for the 37.7 million hectares that 
SERM manages throughout the whole province. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it 
appears that we’ve gone to a very high grade form of logging in 
this province with what these exemptions have allowed to 
happen in terms of the amount and the volume of wood that’s 
being left in the bush. 
 
I should advise you, Mr. Minister, that a number of months ago 
I actually met with Weyerhaeuser to discuss some of these very 
same concerns, and in a lot of ways we had much the same 
conversation as you and I are having now. 
 
They explained to me why they felt it was necessary to go to 
you in the first place and get the exemptions in order to be able 
to allow that . . . or be able not to use the material that was four 
inches or less. 
 
The one frustration that I had in that meeting, Mr. Minister, was 
I suggested that if all of their reasons were legitimate and that 
the department had seen them as legitimate and was able to 
grant the exemption, then perhaps there should be a way of 
using the material that was left behind. And there are lots of 
people throughout all of northeast, northern Saskatchewan that 
could use the material for rails, fence posts, firewood, any 
number of different things. 
 
And as a matter of fact, there’s something really interesting 
happening in the town of Hudson Bay itself right now. There is 
a new program being developed for people with disabilities. 
And I know, Mr. Minister, you have been involved and have a 
great deal of understanding of the various programs, services, 

that are offered for people with disabilities. And there is a 
program that is going to be developed in the town of Hudson 
Bay. 
 
Now this could be an opportunity for both government and the 
company to make some extremely good use of this waste and to 
as well be able to allow someone who requires an opportunity 
to be able to be productive and become engaged in business and 
employment by allowing them to use some of this. Perhaps, as I 
say, in the production of rails or posts or firewood, whatever the 
case may be. 
 
And can I get some assurance from you, Mr. Minister, that you 
would encourage everyone involved here to look at any way 
possible of using this waste? And particularly if there is some 
very, very socially relevant way of doing it in terms of services 
to persons with disabilities or perhaps providing firewood to 
individuals who are having a more difficult time in terms of 
income and that sort of thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
want to point out to the member that I think the idea that you 
share with us is a very good idea. 
 
And I know that you have a long affiliation and a long history 
with such folks as SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) and SARCAN, and certainly I think you 
can appreciate the value that many people that do have some 
disabilities are able to contribute economically and socially to 
the great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also commend the people of Hudson Bay, because 
certainly some of the ideas that they’ve come up with in terms 
of this particular concept is something that we should certainly 
pay a lot of attention to and support as best we can. 
 
There is no question that throughout my travel in 
Saskatchewan, that each trip and each meeting that I have, I’m 
very, very encouraged and very, very enthusiastic of the type of 
intelligence and the type of planning and the type of 
commitment, but more so the type of energy the people from 
Saskatchewan, from all across Saskatchewan, all walks of life, 
have towards trying to do the best that they can in their 
particular capacity to make the best of the world that they live 
in. And certainly that’s all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And Hudson Bay, as I’ve mentioned, certainly should be 
commended for that concept of using any particular waste wood 
that is available out there to try and create some employment 
opportunity to people with disabilities, for firewood, and so on 
and so forth, railings. And the list goes on. 
 
But any time that we have the opportunity to support that . . . 
strengthen that initiative, we’ll undertake to do exactly that. 
 
In reference to the point of the smaller wood, it should be noted 
to the members of the Assembly, and certainly to the member 
from the Northeast, that in terms of the smaller wood, 
Weyerhaeuser are looking for the best uses of materials left 
behind. And we’re strongly encouraging them to look at that 
particular option. 
 
The Hudson Bay . . . The OSB plant you spoke about in terms 



June 9, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

of the tremendous jobs that will be created in the Hudson Bay 
area, they can indeed use small and large hardwood fibre. So 
there is a market for the small wood. Wapawekka sawmill that 
just opened is designed to saw and use small timber. There’s 
some exciting, innovative ways in which they can use small 
timber and they are looking at that option. As well, the new Big 
River sawmill expansion is better technology for smaller 
timber. 
 
So in reference to the issue of waste, as I mentioned before, it’s 
certainly incumbent upon us as the ministry that’s taking care of 
the forest, that we ensure that some of the forest companies that 
have the right to harvest wood utilize all that wood as best as 
they can. 
 
And there is some exciting new expansion plans for the 
province of Saskatchewan; there’s the 10,000 jobs that people 
are speaking about. While we’re quite proud of that particular 
aspect of the government, what we have to realize, that as 
SERM our primary job here is to make sure that they’re 
harvesting within their guidelines, that they’re following all the 
rules and regulations. 
 
So we’re very serious in that regard. So when the opportunity 
comes for expansion and economic benefits, we say use all that 
wood, don’t waste all that wood. If there’s anything leftover 
other people have other uses for it. And we do it under a 
sustainable attitude. And I think in the long run that will best 
serve the Saskatchewan people’s interests and especially the 
people in Hudson Bay. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
well, you’re right about the OSB plant in Hudson Bay, but the 
fact of the matter is that the waste will continue until at least 
eight months after it’s completed; and in the Prince Albert FMA 
(forest management area), apparently from the exemption that 
you granted, it will continue for 10 more years. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, it’s very, very fair to say that there are a tremendous 
amount of individuals and communities that are very, very 
concerned about that and concerned throughout the entire 
province. 
 
(1345) 
 
If I could just switch topics briefly here, Mr. Minister, as I 
understand it, the department has had some difficulty in 
provincial parks in the last couple of years in collecting their 
fees from the private operators and some private — not all 
private but some — private operators and businesses within the 
park boundaries. Now I think we all know and understand that 
the vast majority of businesses and operators within park 
boundaries are very, very responsible people and do a very 
good job. 
 
But I understand that there has been some difficulty in 
collecting these fees. Can you tell me, in the province, how far 
in arrears are some of the private operators and businesses 
within the boundaries of the provincial parks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just 
to respond to the member that in terms of the collection of fees 
from all the private businesses in the provincial parks, we have 
in excess of 100 businesses in the provincial parks that are 

responsible for paying fees. 
 
There are about a dozen that are in arrears. There are only two 
of those dozen that are in serious problems. But since then the 
two of the twelve that are in arrears have made some significant 
payments on their arrears, and the other ten that are remaining 
do have a payment plan in place. 
 
So we’re running about 12 per cent in terms of the overall 
businesses in the park that are in arrears, but there are some 
serious contributions and commitments that they have made for 
repayment to complement some of the significant payments that 
they have made immediately to certainly alleviate this particular 
problem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
Can you indicate to me the total amount that those . . . that is 
represented by those in arrears that you just discussed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just 
to point out the fact that we can’t be very, very forthcoming 
with the names or the amounts that some of these individuals 
owe because obviously there’s some business interests at play 
here and we are always very cognizant of the fact that there 
are some legal issues at stake here. 
 
So what I want to point to the member is that we will provide 
you with as much information as we can without 
compromising some of the confidentiality that we have with 
some of the lessors in the park . . . or the lessees. And I can 
assure you that it is our intention to work very, very hard on 
collecting as many of the arrears that we have out there. 
 
But again, as I stated, this is not something that we want out 
there in public, primarily because this is a contract with some 
of these folks. And to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
we’re going to be diligent in ensuring that the 98 per cent of 
the people out there that are good with this whole system 
continue being good. The 2 per cent that are in arrears, that 
we come down fairly hard on them to make sure they 
continue paying their arrears, all the time kind of respecting 
some of the fact that they are running a business and some 
information certainly needs to be kept from public. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister. 
Would one of the reasons that park fees went up this year be 
because of the department’s inability to collect these delinquent 
fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The bottom line here in terms of the 
increase in fees, the obvious answer is no. That has not 
contributed to the overall problem in terms of the arrears 
situation. 
 
What I will point out though in terms of the Victoria Day 
weekend, May 18 to 22, compared to last year and in reference 
to this year, in spite of some of the increases, we’ve had a 38 
per cent increase in the revenues from the park that are certainly 
a good contribution to the park system as a whole in terms of 
use, in terms of some of the revenue that they use to develop the 
parks and protect the parks. 
 
So in reference to the challenge associated with the increases, as 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2000 

I mentioned before, it’s always tough to make some of these 
choices, but I think the people of Saskatchewan appreciate the 
fact that some of these increases have to occur. But frankly I 
think overall from this year to last year we’re seeing a 30 per 
cent increase, and quite frankly that’s good news for all the 
camping industry throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just 
a couple of other questions in a couple of areas, hopefully fairly 
quickly here as time is moving on. 
 
Can you tell me what the total amount of environmental 
handling charges collected this year will be? What amount of 
that will be paid out to SARCAN for recycling? And where the 
balance, the difference, of the funds goes in the department 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that there has been incredible success in the SARCAN 
movement in terms of getting some of the containers returned. 
 
For 1998 and 1999, the overall return rate was 94 per cent, and 
that’s an incredible testament to some of the efforts of folks 
being involved with SARCAN and SARC. 
 
For the 1998-99 fiscal year, approximately $38.2 million in 
revenues for environmental handling charge and deposit was 
collected by the provincial government: 25.8 million deposit 
was returned to the public, the people that brought the bottles 
in, and 8.1 million was paid to SARCAN. 
 
And the balance which is a small . . . I’m not sure of the exact 
difference here, but the balance was put in the general revenues, 
and those general revenues of course are also used to protect the 
wide environmental interests for the people of Saskatchewan 
and certainly that has been submitted to the General Revenue 
Fund. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just 
a couple of other issues very quickly. Mr. Minister, recently a 
Prince Albert resident sent my office extensive documentation 
outlining her concern surrounding Woodland Campus in the 
city of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you familiar with sick building syndrome? 
Has your department investigated some of the environmental 
concerns at Woodland Campus, and what were the results of 
those investigations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Just to report again that in terms of this particular 
challenge, we are working with SERM, SIAST, and the city of 
Prince Albert are working to look at the thing and investigate 
the problems that you speak about here very thoroughly. 
 
So I can report to you today that all three organizations are 
looking at this. They’re going through a thorough evaluation so 
see what the problems are. So again I can assure people of 
Saskatchewan and certainly Prince Albert that SIAST, the city 
of P.A. (Prince Albert) and SERM are working very hard on 
this particular challenge and we’ll be looking forward to 
continue that work until we’re able to resolve the problem. 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. So 
has your department conducted any tests? Have they looked at 
the surrounding area at all? What kinds of activity has your 
department been directly involved with in terms of attempting 
to ascertain what it is that is happening in this particular area in 
Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
report again that these . . . of course we have ongoing meetings 
on a regular basis. And SERM’s role right now at this stage of 
the game is we’re looking at groundwater quality and the 
monitoring, as well as we’re sampling some of the soil in the 
area. So SERM continues to gladly work with both the city and 
SIAST and we’re doing our particular part at this stage of the 
game and again, as I mentioned, looking at the groundwater and 
certainly looking at the soil. 
 
So we’re taking this work very seriously and we’ll continue 
working with all the three partners to try and come up with a 
good resolution to the problem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
know that there are many other things that we could go on 
discussing, including representative area networks. I know that 
there are a lot more concerns that I have around this particular 
issue of sick building syndrome. 
 
But given the time, I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank you and thank your officials for coming today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Have a very pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:02 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


