





























































Hansard: May 29, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1413 
 May 29, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — I remind committee members that the 
department was last here on April 12, but that being some time 
ago, before I call subvote 1, I’m going to invite the hon. 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you Mr. Chairman. Beside me is 
Steven Pillar, the associate deputy minister. Next to Steven is 
Wanda Lamberti, director of budget and financial planning, 
finance and management services. On this side of me is Roger 
Carriere, director of program support, community care branch. 
Directly behind me is Barb Shea, executive director of the drug 
plan and extended benefits. Next to Barb is Marlene Smadu, our 
assistant deputy minister. Next to Marlene is Jim Simmons, 
executive director of community care branch. And at the back 
we have Carol Klassen in the middle, assistant deputy minister; 
Kimberley Wihnan, assistant to the deputy minister; and Neil 
Gardner, executive director of corporate information and 
technology. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and good 
evening Madam Minister and welcome to all of your officials. 
 
For this second in a series of Health estimates in the department 
that has a great deal of scope and breadth and a pretty 
significant budget — a matter of outstanding business, Madam 
Minister, from our last session on April 12. I had asked for — 
and you had agreed to provide, and you did provide — some 
information on the SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network) network in terms of summaries of the projects that 
were undertaken. 
 
It was my understanding that I had asked for a more specific 
and detailed . . . I appreciate the summary, but I certainly would 
ask if you could break that down even further in terms of 
individual contracts that were awarded. This was . . . you know, 
general categories that you’ve outlined for me, and I do 
appreciate that, but I would ask for your undertaking to drill 
down a little deeper, if you like. And I had mentioned that I’d 
like it to the standards of the public accounts scrutiny which 
indicates contracts above a pretty minuscule level, and I’d like 
those kinds of bits of information if I could, Madam Minister. 
 
Would you like to respond to that on record? Can we have that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, we’ll provide 
some more detailed information for the member. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 
do appreciate that. I think it’s important for us to understand all 
the various components of the SHIN system and where it’s at, 
so I appreciate that undertaking. 
 

Madam Minister, as I indicated to you tonight, the first item that 
I want to visit tonight is the whole issue of the drug plan and the 
process of how the drug plan works and how drugs are brought 
on to the drug plan formulary. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could, would it be possible at this 
stage to introduce a guest in the gallery? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale 
has asked for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wasn’t 
entirely sure of the process when I was already on my feet. But 
this evening with us is Tracy Kuhtz, and Tracy is the executive 
director of the Alzheimer’s society. And certainly as I think 
members know, and certainly the minister knows, the 
Alzheimer’s society has been very, very diligent in terms of 
advocating on behalf of people with the most debilitating 
disease of Alzheimer’s, and we certainly welcome her to watch 
proceeding this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I get to 
start again, thank you. 
 
Madam Minister, as I’ve indicated, I believe in our first series 
and certainly it’s been my practice in the past, I would like to 
give an opportunity for you to initially give a brief overview of 
the drug plan and how it works, a brief overview of the plan and 
at that stage do that. And then I would like to move on to the 
formulary process, per se. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I welcome the opportunity to 
actually do some of that. That’s a good opportunity to describe 
the drug plan. And I also welcome Tracy. 
 
The drug plan . . . the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan is 
structured to assist families with low incomes and families with 
high drug costs and those with a combination of the two. And 
the benefits of the drug plan is targeted to those with the 
greatest need and the least ability to pay for their medications. 
 
All the residents in Saskatchewan are covered by this except 
those who are not covered by other agencies, such as registered 
Indians, RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), veterans, 
and the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
There are specific benefit programs in the drug plan like the 
special support program, emergency assistance, exception drug 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

status, palliative care coverage, social assistance clients, and 
family health benefits. And we also have the Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living under the drug plan. 
 
Saskatchewan remains one of the three provinces which 
provides some assistance with drug costs for the population as a 
whole. And our drug costs, for some examples, in ’94 to ’95, 
our government paid 52.4 million in prescription drug costs; in 
the 2000-2001 government budget, it’s 98.9 million. So there’s 
a significant increase in the cost of the drug plan. 
 
We have two drug committees that review drugs which I just 
want to describe to you the process. The Saskatchewan 
Formulary Committee is a professional committee which 
provides technical assistance to the provincial government. 
Their activities include advice on the selection of drugs to be 
covered by the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan, an 
ongoing review of existing products currently covered by the 
plan, and development of appropriate drug education tools for 
consumers and health professionals. And the members of the 
committee represent the special interest groups as shown. And 
Dr. Bruce Schnell is the chairperson. 
 
And the other committee . . . and there’s members on, members 
at large, a member from Saskatchewan Health, a member from 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, a member from 
SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), a 
member from the college of physicians and surgeons, one from 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association, one from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, and the college 
of Medicine, as well as members at large as I’ve said. 
 
The other committee is the Saskatchewan Drug Quality 
Assessment Committee, and this is appointed by the Minister of 
Health to advise the Saskatchewan Formulary Committee, 
which I just mentioned, and outline the membership in the role, 
in compiling and maintaining of the Saskatchewan formulary 
which is the list of all the drugs that we have under the drug 
plan. Their activities include review of scientific reports about 
new drugs to determine their safety, effectiveness and quality in 
relation to therapeutic alternatives, the evaluation of reports of 
comparative bio-availability studies to determine the 
compliance of different brands of drugs with standards for 
bio-equivalence, review of new chemical agents and existing 
products to determine their appropriate role, if any, in drug 
therapy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Members of this committee include Dr. John Tuchek as the 
chairperson. We have someone from the College of Pharmacy, 
two from the College of Medicine — Dr. Bruce Schnell who is 
the chairperson of the Formulary Committee is ex-officiary 
member of this one — and another member from the College of 
Pharmacy and a member representing the departments of 
medicine and pharmacology from the College of Medicine. 
 
That is the basic overview of the drug plan in pretty much a 
very sketchy way. But it gives the two committees that 
determine the drugs that are on. 
 
Also, we can talk about some of the new drugs, and so it gives 
us an idea of how many drugs would have been approved — 
say — in a year. And this year we have had . . . I have a list 
with me, and they’ll be included in the July edition of the 

formulary. There are over 200 new drugs that have been added 
to the formulary this year, and 70 of the new drugs or . . . there 
are more than 70 of these that are new drugs or new formats of 
drugs. And these include important new therapies for arthritis 
like Celebrex and Vioxx, and therapies for hepatitis, asthma, 
diabetics, and other diseases. And there are more than a hundred 
new generic products that have been added. The addition of 
these products helps to make drug therapy more affordable for 
our residents. So like I said we do have a list of all those new 
drugs if you are interested in that, but that’s sort of a broad 
overview of what the drug plan is like. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, before I would like some further discussion on the two 
committees that you outlined, I would like to talk about the plan 
itself a little bit. You indicated there’s a number of sub-plans, 
for lack of a better word, within the global plan that address 
people with special needs and things of that nature. You 
mentioned that there’s a social assistance plan. Does that plan 
cover a hundred per cent of anything that’s prescribed, or how 
does that plan work for people that require the financial support 
because they’re on social assistance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
social assistance clients, those who receive social assistance 
will pay no more than $2 for each covered prescription and it 
does only cover drugs that are on the formulary. Certain drugs 
such as insulin and oral contraceptives are no charge, and if you 
are under 18 you will receive covered prescriptions also at no 
charge. During 1998-99 the drug plan paid out benefits of 17.4 
million on behalf of 51,797 social assistance beneficiaries. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Thank you for 
as well mentioning and anticipating my next question was if 
they’re irrespective if they are on the formulary or not. So they 
have to be on the formulary before that they’re covered in any 
way. 
 
Madam Minister, as you know there is drugs you know, like 
Aricept, for example, that has been the most recent talked-about 
drug for Alzheimer’s disease. And there are people . . . this drug 
has been approved by Health Canada for a number of years, I 
understand. So it is available in Canada as a prescription drug. 
But individuals who purchase this drug have to pick up 100 per 
cent of the cost of it. 
 
And at this stage I understand, and we’re going to talk about it 
more, it’s not on the approved . . . on the formulary. So people 
on social assistance, who are unable to pay the cost of Aricept 
out of their personal well-being or wherewithal, absolutely have 
no access then to this drug. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — That’s true. The drugs, as I said, have to 
be on the formulary before they are covered. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So I know this is going to be difficult for 
you, but then it means that the people that have got the money 
got a different level of potential care than the people that do not 
have the money. Is that correct? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — What we’re doing, and I can explain to 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

you the status of the Aricept review because I’m sure Tracy 
would like to hear that too, there is a, like I said, the process of 
the two drug committees which review the submissions. And 
they definitely have done a lot of work with Aricept. Some of 
the delay has been caused by new information that has come 
from the manufacturer as well as some from us asking for more 
information. 
 
The committee met on April 27 and they considered the 
information that’s been provided since they last reviewed 
Aricept. And I haven’t received a written response from the 
committee but I understand they’re waiting for a report from the 
Canadian Coordinating Office for Health Technology 
Assessment, which is called CCOHTA — CCOHTA — before 
making another recommendation. 
 
CCOHTA is commissioned by the provinces and territories to 
provide additional information in the area of drugs and 
technologies and we do value their role. The report will provide 
us with additional information that the committee can use in 
their assessment. The CCOHTA report talks about the 
methodology of how all the drugs that they’re reviewing — 
how they’ve studied what they’ve done, the clinical trials, and 
that sort of thing. 
 
The next meeting of the Formulary Committee is June 15 and I 
do understand that of course there are people who would rather 
have a response sooner than that, but in all fairness we want to 
have all the information that’s possibly available before we do 
make the decision on this. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I just wish to remind the hon. 
minister that references to guests and involvement of guests in 
answers or in debate is not permitted. I know it was a fairly 
fleeting reference but it’s just a reminder to all members. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
sure that we’ll all be very diligent not to engage anyone in the 
gallery in the debate. 
 
Madam Minister, I thank you for that comment but it wasn’t the 
answer to the question I asked. I used Aricept simply by way of 
example. There certainly are other drugs that I could pick that 
takes us off on a different topic to talk about the principle that I 
was getting at. And that is that people on social services, if they 
can’t afford to pay for a drug that hasn’t been included in the 
formulary, are not going to be able to access that drug. They 
don’t have the money, Social Services won’t pay for it, and it 
isn’t included on the formulary — where other people that have 
the money to pay for the drug, be it any other drug, have the 
opportunity to do that. So what you’ve done is created a 
situation where people that have money have a different level of 
health care than those that are on social services. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
happens in Saskatchewan is no different than other provinces. If 
you don’t have the drug on the formulary, it isn’t covered by the 
drug plan and what . . . Many of the drugs that we review are 
not included on the drug plan because they’re not either 
cost-effective or of value to the health system. So we don’t 
approve every drug that Health Canada brings out nor does 
every other province. 
 

So we’re no different than that, than the other provinces, when 
we talk about which drugs do come into the formulary and 
which don’t. We have the two committees which I think is 
fairly unique that we have a rigorous screening process with 
these two committees of experts that look at the clinical trials, 
the medical evidence, and they give us their best advice. 
 
And those committees, as I’ve read to you, include members of 
the professional groups from the Colleges of Medicine and 
Pharmacy and a wide variety of professionals who deal with 
drugs, that their best advice to us is what we follow. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
point I was making is that for all the protesting that you do from 
that side of the House, you have to acknowledge that in the 
instance of the availability of certain of these drugs there really 
is a two-tiered health system in this province depended on if 
you have the money to purchase this drug or not. And so that’s 
the point. 
 
The other point is, Madam Minister, while we’re briefly on 
people that require help from the province by virtue of the fact 
that they’re unable to provide for themselves and are on social 
assistance, what is the cost to them for ambulance services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For 
ambulance trips into the North, we do pay for those for social 
assistance clients. For details about southern trips, you’d have 
to ask Social Services estimates because we don’t have that 
detail. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I 
appreciate that. We certainly will direct that then to Social 
Services. 
 
But I want to, I want to move back to the formulary. And I will 
use Aricept as the example, but please . . . I want to illustrate a 
point here and use Aricept as an example. 
 
You’ve indicated that there are the two committees of the drug 
plan that review the drugs that are approved by Health Canada 
and are reviewed to see if it’s appropriate for them to be 
included under the formulary plan. 
 
Madam Minister, when they review these drugs, what criteria or 
what terms of reference do they use? And I’m thinking in terms 
of, do they use the actual hard cost of the drug? Do they balance 
that out against the efficacy of the drug and how well it’s 
performing? Do they look at other costs that are going to be 
incurred by society or the health system? 
 
And I’m thinking of things that if even a fairly expensive drug, 
on its own merits, is able to save money in the long-term care 
budget or the budget that needs long-term hospitalization or 
things of that nature, how broad is the mandate or how narrow? 
And how thoroughly do they look at the total ramifications of 
including any drug in the formulary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Drug Quality Assessment Committee which is the first 
committee that looks at the drugs, it actually looks at . . . has a 
very broad criteria — broad range of activities — that they take 
into account. 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

They look at the scientific material and they review these 
scientific reports about the drugs to determine their safety, their 
effectiveness, and their quality in relation to therapeutic 
alternatives. They evaluate the reports, like I said, of the 
comparative bio availability and they do that to determine the 
compliance of different brands of drugs. They also review new 
chemical agents and existing products to determine their 
appropriate role, if any, in our drug therapy in Saskatchewan. 
 
This drug quality assessment committee does not look at the 
cost. They then refer to the drug . . . to the Saskatchewan 
Formulary Committee, and the Formulary Committee takes into 
account exactly what you said — a very broad look at the 
impact of having this drug on the formulary. What does it do to 
the acute care costs or long-term care costs. They do look at all 
of that exactly as you have described. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, certainly you would appreciate that the whole field of 
technology and drugs is changing very dramatically. And I 
noticed that from your numbers and your opening comments 
that from ’94-95 I believe it was 52-odd million dollars that was 
spent on the drug plan to this current year something in the 
magnitude of $98 million. 
 
Madam Minister, I recognize that’s increased costs. Can you 
. . . does your department have a breakdown on — is this 
because more people are taking drugs, that the drugs are more 
expensive, or is there a breakdown as to . . . or you’re covering 
just more drugs for more people so the base is much expanded? 
Do you have any breakdown in terms of why these costs have 
gone up so much? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The increase in the drug plan this year is 
all of the things that you mentioned, actually. The utilization 
increase this year is . . . 14.8 million of the increase is just 
utilization increase. And we do have 6 million prescriptions in 
Saskatchewan a year for a population of a million. 
 
And our new therapies account for $4.6 million of the increase 
in this year’s budget. For example, the new medications that 
have been added and some of the costs — I’ll just give you an 
example of how much one drug will cost the system: Rebetron 
for hepatitis is $1 million; Celebrex, as I mentioned, for 
arthritis, is $1.3 million; the new agents for asthma are $.5 
million; and new patients added to the approval list for MS 
(multiple sclerosis) drugs is $1 million; and 
cholesterol-lowering agents account for $.8 million. So $4.6 
million is for new therapies, and that just gives you an example 
of what one drug can cost the system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, but I assume 
that people that would have conditions where these drugs are 
appropriate would have been being prescribed other drugs, so it 
isn’t as if it’s all a new cost. There probably is . . . because 
they’re being prescribed one of these new drugs that have been 
approved, the older drug that it replaces is probably not 
prescribed in the same frequency. 
 
Madam Minister, as you’re aware, there has really been 
relatively recent discoveries of drugs in some categories, and 
Alzheimer’s is one of them, where Aricept has been on the 
market for some time, and now there’s a new drug — Exelon or 

something, I believe — that has been very recently licensed or 
approved by Health Canada for inclusion and availability in 
Canada. 
 
Madam Minister, when a drug is fairly new . . . and I have to 
tell you that I am, I’ve been deeply touched, and I can share 
with you some of the stacks of cards that I’ve received, and 
letters, from people who anecdotally have described to me what 
the impact of Alzheimer’s disease has been on individual 
families. And I’m afraid to get started in terms of reading into 
the record some of the comments, but you know, it really strikes 
me that there is a tremendous anecdotal at least evidence . . . 
and I believe increasingly scientific evidence . . . that has some 
interesting things that I’ve detected out of even these comments 
where people that are saying my mom or my dad have been on 
Aricept for a year or more and they’ve seen very significant 
results by virtue of the fact that they’ve been on this drug. 
 
(1930) 
 
And I understand that, you know, we can read this into the 
record and certainly I know that it’s important, but there is so 
much hurt, there’s so much desire, and so many of these 
people’s stories that it touches me deeply that the system is not 
giving people that have Alzheimer’s disease any drug at all 
really that works. 
 
And I appreciate that there’s a broad base of drugs that are there 
for some categories and other diseases, and I’m not trying to 
minimize the importance that those drugs be properly 
considered; but from what I understand that there really has 
been no major drug that has provided significant benefit — not 
to everyone, I understand that as well. There are a significant 
number of people who have advanced stages or early stages of 
Alzheimer’s where Aricept has little or no positive effect. I 
understand that. 
 
But for the people that do respond to it, they generally respond 
pretty significantly and the benefit, from the anecdotal evidence 
that I received over the last few weeks, is pretty significant for 
those people and those people’s lives. 
 
And, Madam Minister, it strikes me is that something needs to 
be done in order to address a very serious segment of our 
population who increasingly are coming in contact with the 
problems of Alzheimer’s disease and what it’s doing to their 
families. 
 
And, Madam Minister, it also strikes me, as I understand, is that 
the companies that are actually applying for these drugs to be 
included in the formulary — and Aricept is Pfizer I believe — 
have put a program in place or offered a program and I 
understand, but I also could be corrected that the company that 
is proposing this new drug that’s just been licensed is going to 
have a similar program, where they’re saying that they will 
cover the cost for an initial 12-week period of time. 
 
And if that 12-week period of time is a critical time where the 
medical professionals — the doctors — can determine if a 
patient is going to respond positively to these drugs or not, and 
certainly and surely, Madam Minister, if it can be demonstrated 
at no cost that a drug either is going to be effective or not, for 
those people where it is shown to be effective, that we could 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

even put those kind of caveats on it that in those instances 
where it is demonstrated at no cost and virtually no risk to the 
drug plan, that Aricept would provide potential significant 
benefits to a patient. 
 
Surely that’s an important consideration to address the concerns 
that people are saying right across this province and the 
absolute frustration and hurt and pain that they’re going through 
wondering how they’re going to cope with the issue of 
Alzheimer’s disease in their families. 
 
Madam Minister, many times as well the cost — and I doubt if 
the Formulary Committee considers it, they may consider the 
cost to the system — but do they consider the cost to the 
families. In many instances these people aren’t institutionalized 
in the initial stages of the disease. They’re kept at home. 
They’re kept at their children’s home. They’re looked after by 
their families. There is a tremendous social and emotional and 
personal cost involved with this, Madam Minister. And I 
challenge the drug committee to say that they’ve actually 
considered all of these issues rather than just considering the 
hard dollars that are involved with the health system. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d invite you to comment on the issues that 
I’ve just raised. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. 
 
A lot of times we do also get a lot of the cards and the anecdotal 
evidence and a lot of times people express their frustration that 
you don’t know what it’s like or you don’t have any idea of 
what it’s like for families that are suffering through this. And I 
in particular know. I had an aunt last year who died and she had 
Alzheimer’s so I know exactly what it is like. 
 
And it’s difficult to deal with the emotional side of many of 
these issues, so that was why, about three years ago, we did put 
the two committees in place, so that we have good scientific 
evidence from the medical community that does look at all of 
the issues, even including how long people will stay out of 
nursing homes and the impact on the health system, like I said 
before, of the benefit of that. And they base their decisions on 
clinical studies and evidence and they give us their best advice. 
 
And we have to make difficult decisions then in a health system 
that has many things that are pressuring us to add more money 
here or there, and that’s why we rely on those two committees 
of experts to give us that advice. So when we make the 
decisions, we look at the system as a whole and the good of the 
whole. 
 
And they have said that there is some modest benefit for some 
people. They don’t disagree with that. But when we make our 
decisions, we have to base it on what the good of the whole is 
and the good of the system, and to maintain a drug plan that we 
can still operate and offer to people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. But the point 
I was trying to make is that there is really no other drug that I’m 
aware of that provide even modest benefit for individuals with 
Alzheimer’s disease. It’s really been a disease that has escaped 
the ability of the medical profession to treat it effectively, and 
that’s what makes it so frustrating and debilitating is the fact 

that there’s really been no tools until relatively recently for 
people to deal with this. 
 
And the other thing of course is is that, is it somewhat unique 
with the offer of the two drug companies for them actually 
being willing to cover the cost of the drug for an initial 12-week 
period while the medical professional can determine in that 
period of time what the proposed or prospective efficacy of this 
drug is going to be. And it seems to me that that is in some way 
significantly changing the equation here because it does 
minimize the risk and potentially the cost because if there is no 
benefit then certainly I would agree, Madam Minister, that it 
doesn’t much make sense that the formulary would cover it for 
a person where there’s really no benefit. 
 
But certainly it would seem to me that if the drug company is 
believing enough in the value of the drug that they’re willing to 
cover the first 12 weeks while that’s determined, then the 
Formulary Committee would have to admit that you’re really 
starting to narrow down the potential people where this will be 
no benefit to. And so that if you put on the caveat that this is 
only covered where that initial trial occurs and it’s 
demonstrated that there be a potential benefit, is that not a 
similar caveat, if you like, for the prescription of Aricept in 
Alzheimer’s patients as exist in other provincial jurisdictions 
that they recognize this dilemma, if you like, as well. Where it 
works it works pretty well but it might not work at all and 
therefore it would be inappropriate to have continued 
prescription of that drug or have it covered under that 
circumstance. 
 
Does this not change the equation and is that not the logic of 
why other jurisdictions indeed do include Aricept under their 
formularies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I did have that on my list to 
respond to and I’m sorry, I forgot it. 
 
The three month coverage that Pfizer is offering, we still have 
to have a commitment to those people who it does benefit to 
continue the coverage, if it does benefit them. We still have to 
have had a commitment at the beginning, going into this, to 
cover — if it does benefit them — to continue the coverage. So 
I think it would be unfair to people to say we’re only going to 
do it three months and then, whether it benefits you or not, we 
have not made a commitment as promised to put it on the 
formulary and cover it. 
 
What we also . . . the benefit that the drug . . . the Formulary 
Committee and the Drug Quality Assessment Committee — 
they do look at how much the drug will benefit the system and 
how much it will benefit people. For example, it takes five 
people to find one that it will benefit. So they look at all of 
these things. They look at the trial. They looked at the offer. 
 
Ontario has found that they’ve had less than . . . significant 
people dropping off of the program, so the criteria may not be 
as rigorous as it could be. There’s other provinces who have 
decided not to cover it, like BC (British Columbia) and the 
Maritimes. So it is a mixed response across the country. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wasn’t 
suggesting for a minute that we should take up the drug 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

company’s offer of a 12-week program and not have any 
approval on the formulary. I’m asking you to include it on the 
formulary because I believe that it’s an important drug for a 
whole category of people who haven’t had anywhere to turn in 
terms of medicated relief, the Alzheimer’s people. 
 
I mean this disease has been a major challenge to the medical 
profession for a good number of years, with really no light at 
the end of the tunnel in terms of anything that will mitigate the 
severity of this disease. And now we have Aricept that, while I 
recognize isn’t a utopia for everyone, but for the people that it 
does work for, it seems to work very well. 
 
And I’d like to quote from a letter that I received not very long, 
and it says, and I quote: 
 

I’m writing to let you know that I believe the provincial 
drug plan should cover Aricept. My mom has been 
diagnosed as having Alzheimer’s disease. Once diagnosed 
by her physician he suggested that a newly approved drug, 
Aricept, developed for the treatment of the disease, might 
prove beneficial. 
 
We went ahead with his suggestion and although you 
cannot scientifically prove its benefit, we feel that it has 
slowed its distressing effects that Alzheimer’s can inflict 
on not only the person with the disease but the entire 
family as well. My mom is more alert and much more 
aware of what is going on around her than she was before. 
She seems more like the mom I knew. 

 
And that’s the kind of anecdotal evidence, Madam Minister, 
that comes time and time again I’m sure to your desk and 
certainly to mine. And people acknowledge that this might not 
work on a double-blind study, but it seems to do the job very 
effectively for those that it has a positive effect on. 
 
So Madam Minister, what I’m asking you to do is to say look it, 
let’s consider this in a different way. This isn’t just another drug 
to lower hypertension or blood pressure among many. This isn’t 
another among many drugs you’re approving in order to lower 
the cholesterol level or any of the other things that are very 
important. 
 
There has not been anything available for Alzheimer’s people 
so that they have something to at least try. And in the 
individual’s word it works. It seems to work with a great deal of 
satisfaction for a great deal of people. And it’s especially 
important because this is a category of disease that has had 
nothing. 
 
And people have written to me and I quote from other letters 
where they say, what’s here for us? It’s almost like 
discrimination against Alzheimer’s patients because we have 
nothing. We have nothing at all other than Aricept and now this 
new drug Exelon. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m asking you to consider this in a 
special way because there has been nothing for this whole 
category of clients and patients, and take advantage of the fact 
there’s a 12-week program that will at least screen out some of 
the people where it isn’t effective. And for those people that are 
more effective give them something to hold on to, Madam 

Minister. I think it’s a special circumstance and deserves your 
consideration. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I am as anxious as is everyone 
on this side of the House to offer real substantial help for 
Alzheimer’s patients. We have the committees and the expert 
committee as I’ve described to do their job. They have not 
made a recommendation with the latest information yet. And 
I’m waiting for that and, as soon as we get that 
recommendation, we will be making our decision. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I understand that the committee has the reports from 
CCOHTA committee that you referred to earlier. I have a 
question. I understand that the Pfizer company themselves were 
going to provide a very current 12-month study that they have 
been undertaking. 
 
Can I ask you if that is correct in terms that there was that 
undertaking by Pfizer? And second of all, have you received 
that information yet? And if not, when is it due? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’re all nodding over here. Yes we have 
received it. The drug committee does have it, from Pfizer, the 
12-month study. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, and I’m assuming 
that that information will be included in the study of what 
they’re going to do. Is that a confidential study, Madam 
Minister, or could we request a copy of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — You’re referring to the 12-month study? 
Yes, we’ll have to ask Pfizer because as far as we know, we 
don’t know the answer to that. We’ll have to ask the drug 
company. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, you’ve indicated that the next meeting of the 
Formulary Committee is on June 15. Can you tell us if the 
issues surrounding Aricept is going to be on that agenda, or is 
there going to be some further meetings before the issue of 
Aricept or Exelon’s inclusion in the formulary is going to be 
decided? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Aricept is on the agenda of the 
June 15 meeting. Exelon, we have no information on at the 
moment, and the two drug committees have got no submission 
for that drug yet. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, to finish the process off, then the drug 
committee makes recommendation to your office, and then you 
make the ultimate decision. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, that’s true. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, would you have at your 
disposal previous decisions that have been made? Has 
ministerial discretion been used to consider the 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

recommendations but to make a decision in another direction? 
For example, was the inclusion of Betaseron for MS sufferers, 
was that on the basis of the recommendations of the committee? 
Or was that a ministerial decision that I might say was the right 
one, but how did that process occur? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The final decision with the 
recommendations from the Formulary Committee does rest with 
the minister. And I would be consulting with my colleagues on 
the final decision or the recommendation from the committees. 
 
But after the MS recommendation by the Formulary 
Committee, we put together a task force on high-cost drugs to 
review our system of how we deal with reviewing and making 
recommendations for new drugs from the . . . onto the 
formulary. And they confirmed the validity of the system that 
we had in place. So that is why we are relying upon them. 
 
And the length of the process with Aricept, we’ve asked for 
more information and sometimes Pfizer has said, wait a minute 
— there’s more information we want to give you. So we have 
done a lot of looking at the very best information we could find 
to make sure we make the very best decision on this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Madam Minister, at the end of the day, 
the decision to include or accept on the formulary or not will be 
yours. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said, it does say the Minister of 
Health makes the decision. That will be my decision but in 
consultation with my colleagues. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome and welcome to your assistants. Recently a study was 
released I believe, maybe as soon as today; I’m not aware the 
exact date it was released, but it was released by Health 
Services Utilization and Research Commission. Could you tell 
us who makes up this organization, who funds them, and who 
they are accountable to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m going to give you a lot of information. 
The background for HSURC was — it’s the Health Services 
Utilization Research Commission — and it was established as a 
crown corporation in February of 1992, and then The Health 
Services Utilization and Research Commission Act was passed 
in 1994. Saskatchewan Health gives 2.108 million to HSURC 
annually for, and it has done for each of the fiscal years ’92 to 
’93 to ’97, and we’ve increased the funding by a quarter of a 
million dollars annually for the years ’97-98 and ’98-99, and 
because they’ve been doing some projects that they needed 
extra money for. 
 
Dr. Liz Harrison is chairperson of the board of directors and 
other board members include Dr. Barry Maber, who’s the 
vice-president of medical affairs I believe in the Saskatoon 
District Health Board, Cecile Hunt, Dan de Vlieger, Jean 
Morrison, Jerry Danielson, who’s also a doctor, Marianne 
Hodgson, James Irvine is a doctor, Robert McCulloch, and Paul 
Peloso. The CEO (chief executive officer) of HSURC is Laurie 
Thompson. He’s the director of research and grants awards. 
They have a director of research and grants awards and a 
communications officer, and four to six research officers, two 
research transfer officers, and three support staff. 

What they have ongoing is . . . it doesn’t have any authority to 
impose its recommendations on health boards or service 
providers and it does present its findings and recommendations 
to stakeholders through a newsletter, publications, or 
presentations at meetings or conferences. 
 
It currently has a number of research projects underway. The 
home care one we saw today, and evaluation of mental health 
services, and assessment of the appropriateness of acute care 
utilization and community services by persons with severe 
psychiatric conditions. A clinical practice guideline 
development is a study to assess the effectiveness of selected 
clinical practice guidelines. System quality indicators is a 
project to participate in the development of health system 
quality indicators for use by the health districts. And elective 
surgery prioritization, a study in collaboration with medical 
associations, health ministries, and research organizations in 
western Canada to develop and evaluate waiting list protocols 
and information systems for cataract surgery, hip/knee 
arthroplasty, hernia repair, diagnostic magnetic resonance 
imaging, and access to pediatric mental health services. 
 
And I think that’s about all right now and you can ask for any 
more details. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When was this 
study actually completed? I realize it was released today but 
when was it actually completed? Who set the research question 
which is, do outcomes for community living seniors differ as a 
result of receiving preventative home care? And what did this 
particular study cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Actually HSURC, based on consultation 
with health districts in 1995, picked three different studies to do 
on home care. And they’ve done one already which is the one 
that was released I believe more than a year ago, as a substitute 
for hospital care. We’ve seen that one. 
 
And this is the second one in the series. This is the one as 
preventive . . . as home care as a preventative service aimed at 
reducing long-term care use. And the third one will be a 
substitute for nursing home care. So they started in ’95 with the 
first one. 
 
We’ve had the first one probably a year and a half ago at least I 
think. This one has been two years in the making which we just 
saw released today. The cost is not broken out per project that 
we know of because they have a global budget that’s been 
determined by their board. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, when did you receive this 
study? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I participated in a briefing with the 
department on Friday to see it. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — On the first page under methods it states that 
the study population will be followed over six years, that is ’91 
to 1996. So is the actual data in this study four years old? Or 
how do you explain those dates? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not sure about the dates that you are 
giving me, but the report itself on page three says they obtained 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

eight years of anonymous data on all — that’s from ’89-90 to 
’96-97 — of anonymous data on all Saskatchewan seniors aged 
75 and older as of July 1, 1991. 
 
The data described each person’s use of hospitals, physicians, 
long-term care, special care homes, home care, and prescription 
medication. And they adjusted for many factors to streamline 
the process. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So then you . . . The results of this are just 
coming out now but they are somewhat outdated. Is that what 
you’re insinuating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — No. The data that they used took those 
eight years, and then they compiled all their research and have 
now come out with the findings almost two years later. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I find it very alarming what this study is 
reporting and I quote from the results. It says: 
 

There is no evidence that light level preventative home 
care actually keeps seniors alive longer or living 
independently longer than those not receiving the service. 
 

In light of this finding, Madam Minister, why has it been the 
focal point of your government since 1993 to make home care 
one of the main points of this whole system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The first study which dealt with acute 
care, home care as a follow-up to acute care, or taking some of 
the days that you would stay in the hospital and providing those 
services at home, showed us that there was an immense value to 
home care for that substitute for acute care services. 
 
The third part of the study will talk to us about nursing home 
and keeping people in their own homes as an alternative to a 
nursing home. This one that they’ve done in the middle is 
definitely interesting that what they have found out is that one 
of the biggest benefits is going to be looking at social housing, 
seniors’ housing, and that the social isolation of seniors 
contributes greatly to their health and their health outcomes. 
 
And that is something that we’re going to see. I think the 
districts look at it quite closely, as well as the department, as we 
make policy to look at what we do in home care from now on. 
But I wouldn’t suggest that the districts are going to cut their 
preventative home care services because the report actually 
stipulates that what they did find was that the greatest benefit 
was to the highest-risk people. So the districts should be 
assessing the highest risk and the greatest need and targeting 
their services there. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, I guess we find it a 
little ironic that prior to this study coming out, you have already 
made the move to cut a certain level of home care in the health 
districts. And I quote from a letter from the district CEO at 
Living Sky Health District. The letter states: 
 

Those individuals for whom the risk appears to be low will 
be discharged from home care services and attempts will 
be made to put them in touch with someone they may be 
able to hire privately. 
 

You were unaware of this study prior to Friday, yet this press 
release was on May 5 and this letter had already been received 
by Living Sky Health District. Could you explain that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Living Sky have had a review done of 
their home care utilization, and they found they had the highest 
utilization in the province of home care services. So they made 
the decision to target their home care resources to the people 
there that had the highest need. And that’s what the report 
actually says and validates what Living Sky has done. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I guess the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to know if home care is still a priority 
of this government or if your plan is to move home care the 
same way as long-term care has been progressing, where level 1 
and 2 has been eliminated from public long-term care. Are you 
now moving to remove the bottom level of home care so that 
people have to pay for the services themselves? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just to reaffirm our commitment to home 
care, as I said, the first study talked about home care as 
necessary to relieve some of the days that are being spent in 
acute care. That is an extremely valid use of home care. And 
we’ll find, when HSURC does their study on long-term care, 
I’m sure we’ll find the same thing — that people that can stay at 
home and not have long-term care will be benefited by home 
care in their own homes. 
 
Now our funding for home care between ’91 and ’92 and 2000 
and ’01, this year’s budget, has increased by 146 per cent. That 
is a huge commitment on this government’s part to home care. 
We truly believe home care is a necessary service, but what we 
want to make sure that we’re doing is providing the right 
services to the right people and the highest need people getting 
the best services that we can provide. 
 
This year’s budget increase for home care is 6.4 per cent, which 
is about $5 million. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. My question 
again is: are you going to eliminate the low-level services and if 
you are, are you suggesting then that the people seek out private 
care? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This report is useful in showing us exactly 
where the money is best spent and giving us information on 
social housing, which is something we have to spend more 
attention on, but we’re not expecting major changes to be based 
solely on this piece of research. Districts still have to look at 
their client population, what are their best needs . . . what are 
their needs and how are they best served. So we’re not 
expecting a wholesale change based on this one report, but it 
does give us added evidence to look at other types of housing. 
 
Assisted living is becoming something that’s very valuable, 
different housing options for seniors and other people in the 
community that need assistance with their daily living — we 
need to pay more attention to that, and this is what this report is 
showing us. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. On to dealing 
with long-term care as it relates to home care — when people 
are no longer able to stay in their own homes and receive home 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

care and it’s not adequate for them, and yet they do not, they are 
not assessed a level 3 or 4, what is your advice to them or what 
is available for them to access for care? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think what we want to talk about is home 
care assessment. 
 
It’s . . . each district does the assessment of need, and they have 
criteria that they base that assessment on. We are now looking 
to collaborate with the other Western provinces — BC, Alberta, 
and Manitoba — at a new home care assessment tool that is 
coming available. And we will be testing that so that we’ll have 
some standard of assessment across . . . actually across Western 
Canada. So we can look at what exactly do people need, and 
how do we determine that need — which will be very valuable 
information. And I think that’s the key, is that we actually 
assess people properly and determine what they need and then 
meet those needs in whatever way is possible with our 
resources that we have in each facility or each district. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, is there any process of appeal 
if they are assessed lower than a level 3, and yet they feel and 
their family feels that they need long-term care? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Your question about the appeal process — 
yes, there is a process to appeal if the decision has been made in 
assessment that you don’t agree with. 
 
Your question earlier about level 2’s — that we have totally 
given up on support for level 2’s — we still have about 300 
people that are assessed as level 2 in our long-term care 
facilities in the province. So we do still support level 2 if it’s 
necessary, and that again depends upon the assessment that’s 
been done in each district or community. 
 
Home care is available and individuals are assessed individually 
through, in some places, a coordinated assessment unit and it 
looks at the need that they have for home care and the risks that 
they are encountering if they lived by themselves or if those 
needs are unmet. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell 
me where these level 2 facilities are? I was not aware that there 
were any still available in the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The level 2 people are actually not in any 
one facility; they are sprinkled throughout many facilities in the 
whole province, although Regina has a facility called 
Qu’Appelle House because they have a critical mass of that 
type of need so that they can put the people all in one facility. 
Otherwise they are in different homes across the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, are these affiliated hospitals 
or health centres, or are they served by the health district? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — They’re either affiliated or owned by the 
districts, some of each, yes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, we now have, according to 
the latest information I’ve received, that we have 239 personal 
care homes in the province, and in those 239 homes there are 

2,195 beds. Madam Minister, a question to you is, where would 
these people be if we did not have private, personal care homes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Interestingly enough, the current number 
of personal care homes has not changed significantly since 1992 
— the number of homes or the number of beds. So the personal 
care homes provide an expanded private accommodation and 
care option for individuals with light-care needs, as you were 
saying, who do not need or who do not want to make use of the 
public system. So some of it is personal choice, and some 
people really do want to stay in their own homes, and some 
people do need to go into special care homes, but the interesting 
information is that those numbers have not changed much since 
’92. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, I would request a list 
of the personal care homes that were in 1992 and what they are 
today because in my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, I 
believe with the exception of maybe two, they’re all since . . . 
have all been built since 1992. 
 
And I guess the question . . . you stated that a lot of people 
prefer to go into private care homes. It’s been my experience 
that they have no choice. There is not a bed available in a public 
facility. And many people that go in there do so at great 
financial hardship and many cannot go in them because they do 
not have the financial basis to go in and pay the full price. 
 
So, Madam Minister, is this a goal of your government that we 
are moving to two-tiered health care in long-term care? And 
will this continue or what is your plan for addressing the need 
for long-term care beds in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I give you some information, I do 
want to comment on your remark about us going to two-tiered 
health care. And I think I can assure you that is not our 
intention and it certainly wasn’t in my campaign literature. We 
do have, in Saskatchewan, we have 118 long-term care beds per 
1,000 population. The national average is 108 beds per 
thousand, so we are still above the long-term care . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I believe I’m answering the question from the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
And I believe it shows our commitment to long-term care when 
we have a significantly higher number of long-term care beds 
than the national average. We still look at assessing people that 
have the highest need and the highest risk, getting the first 
long-term care bed or the first special care home bed so that we 
ensure people have access to those beds that actually need them. 
 
And still we can’t discount that the personal choice of people 
. . . some people do not want to go into nursing homes. They do 
want to stay in their own homes or if they’ve been in another 
home, a personal care home, they do want to stay there as they 
age in place or as their assessments increase and they become 
level 3 or level 4. And then home care does go to the personal 
care homes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I guess this 
debate will continue on to us on this side of the House. We believe 
that people requiring to go into private care because there is not 
public care available is two-tiered health care. 
 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

Madam Minister, I’d like to ask you a question about the Souris 
Valley extended care hospital in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. I would like to ask you how you can justify spending $17 
million to build a new facility and yet we are going to lose 40 
beds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The old facility in Souris Valley needs to 
be replaced so the provincial share of the new building will be 
16.245 million. We will be replacing it to design it to serve 
people better. 
 
The loss of the 40 beds — South Central District has over the 
Saskatchewan average of long-term beds per 1,000 of people 
over 75. So as the demographics has changed and as the district 
has taken into account the demographics, they have determined 
that they can do with 40 less beds in long-term care. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, I think that there’s 
many people in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy would 
dispute what you have just said. And I know that there have 
been at least two studies done that show that Souris Valley 
extended care building is very sound and will be standing long 
after most of the other buildings in Weyburn are flat. 
 
So I think that this needs to be looked at again and looked at 
very carefully. The people of the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not prepared to see this building lost. 
 
And on that note, Madam Minister, if you move this facility out 
of Souris Valley extended care hospital, what do you propose to 
happen to this building? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — When we propose capital projects in 
communities that we work . . . the department works very 
closely with the community to determine what type of facility 
will be best in meeting their needs. SPMC, Saskatchewan 
Property Management, owns the building and will be working 
with the community when it’s vacated to determine the next use 
for it. 
 
It will cost more to renovate this building which I believe . . . 
we think it was built in the 1920s. It will cost more to renovate 
it than it will be to build a new one that will meet the current 
long-term care service standards. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, I don’t think this issue 
is going to go away, and I'm sure we’re going to have further 
discussions on this area. My latest information is that will cost a 
million dollars to dispose of this building. And if it has no use, 
that is what’s going to happen. So I don’t see where the savings 
are going to be here. 
 
But I’d like to move on to something else. As the minister 
responsible for long-term care, how are you planning to ensure 
that doctors are maintained in centres where there are long-term 
care facilities and the population is older and they depend on 
maintaining a doctor so that they can stay in their communities 
or access care in long-term care facilities in the smaller towns? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Actually this is . . . Thank you very much 
for the question because we have pages on incentives that we’re 

doing to recruit and retain rural physicians, and it is a challenge. 
Many physicians don’t feel comfortable going into solo practice 
anymore. So what we have done is put the following programs 
in place to help address the challenge of ensuring stable 
physician services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Physician incorporation, we could put . . . the medical services 
Act is on the floor right now, and physicians were quite anxious 
to have that. The emergency room coverage and weekend relief 
program . . . physicians practising in rural Saskatchewan are 
supported through an integrated emergency room coverage and 
weekend relief program. We’ve put $6.8 million in funding to 
compensating physicians providing emergency room coverage 
in rural areas and to assisting those communities with fewer 
than three physicians to access a list of other physicians willing 
to provide this relief coverage when needed. 
 
And a tripartite committee with representatives from the 
Department of Health, SAHO, and SMA, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, works with the health districts and the 
physicians to develop criteria to ensure that eligible physicians 
are compensated for providing this coverage. And this has been 
as of January 1 of 2000. Physicians will directly bill the MS . . . 
the medical services plan for these services. 
 
We have a physician recruitment coordinator and this was an 
initiative that we announced in ’97. And this coordinator is 
responsible for assisting rural districts and physicians in the 
recruitment process. As part of this the physician provides 
valuable links with students and recent graduates of the College 
of Medicine at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
Quite exciting is the rural practice establishment grant program. 
This program makes grants of $18,000 available to 
Canadian-trained or landed immigrant physicians that establish 
new practices in rural Saskatchewan for a minimum of 18 
months. It’s an ongoing program modelled after a similar 
offering in 1997 that was credited with assisting in the 
recruitment of 23 new physicians to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Six Canadian-trained physicians took advantage of the program 
in 1998, locating in communities such as Meadow Lake and 
Kindersley. Currently there are three applications being 
reviewed and one already offered. 
 
We have the medical resident bursary program which was 
introduced in June of ’98 and provides bursaries of $18,000 to 
three family medicine residents to assist them with educational 
expenses. In return for the assistance the applicants must agree 
to a rural service commitment. Currently this program is fully 
subscribed. 
 
We have the undergraduate medical student bursary program 
which provides an annual grant of $18,000 to medical students 
that sign a return service commitment to a rural Saskatchewan 
community. This level of assistance was increased in 1997 to 
recognize increased cost of living and improve uptake. The 
program is again fully subscribed with more than 15 students 
currently receiving support. Since its inception in ’91 over 60 
medical students have received assistance under this program. 
 
We have rural practice enhancement training which was 
announced in 1997 and provides income replacement to 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

in-practice rural physicians and assistance to residents wishing 
to take specialized training in an area of demand in rural 
Saskatchewan. A return service commitment is required. 
 
To date a number of residents and practising physicians have 
accessed this program. There were four applicants for the 
2000-2001 program. 
 
We have a re-entry training program which was initiated in 
1999, and this program provides two grants annually to rural 
family physicians that wish to enter specialty training. 
Physicians must have practised full-time in rural Saskatchewan 
for two years to qualify. Physicians with fewer than five years 
of full-time rural practice will be required to make a return 
service commitment. Preference will be given to applicants who 
voluntarily sign a service commitment beyond the minimum of 
five years. One physician is currently enrolled in this program. 
 
In addition the new budget, the 2000-2001 budget, provides for 
an additional two positions for training physicians at the 
residency level. Details about this enhancement to the medical 
training opportunities will be announced shortly. 
 
We have rural emergency care, a CME (Continuing Medical 
Education) program. The rural emergency care Continuing 
Medical Education program was established in February of 
2000 and is intended to provide funds to rural physicians for 
certification and re-certification of skills in emergency care and 
risk management such as advanced cardiac life-support, 
pediatric advanced life-support. 
 
Full cost of Canadian tuition and a portion of both travel and 
accommodation expenses to a maximum of $250 may be 
reimbursed. Funds cannot be carried over or accumulated, and 
physicians must have 12 months continuous licensure and have 
practised in rural Saskatchewan for at least 12 months prior to 
applying, and are expected to provide service in rural 
Saskatchewan after completing the educational activity. 
 
They have resident relief, a weekend relief program, which was 
introduced in March of this year and it matched the second-year 
family medicine residents with larger rural communities 
seeking weekend relief. The communities must have three or 
more physicians and be ineligible for the weekend relief 
program that we’ve described before, under category (a) 
communities which were smaller ones. The program formalizes 
an existing practice, provides an opportunity for medical 
residents to supplement their income, and increases their 
exposure to the range of opportunities in rural communities. 
 
They have a locum service program which is operated by the 
SMA and funded through transfers from the department. It’s 
perhaps one of the most popular programs for practising 
physicians, providing coverage while they take vacation, 
education, or other leave. This program was expanded during 
1997 to ensure that relief was more readily available for rural 
physicians. Currently there are six replacement physicians 
employed by the program, and the possibility of expanding the 
program is being explored. 
 
We have alternate payments in primary health services. We 
support the development of the primary health services 
initiative and alternative payment models for physicians. These 

initiatives support the use of allied health professionals and 
enhance integration with community-based services. So you can 
see that we have a vast array of services and programs for rural 
physicians, and truly they are uptaking on these programs and 
are quite happy to have them and are using them quite well in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One area of 
concern that has been forwarded to myself is the three-year 
contract that physicians are required to sign when they come 
from out of country. This has become a hardship at least in one 
area that I’m aware of where the doctor wants to be able to sign 
a one-year contract and not a three-year contract, and it could 
possibly mean this community losing their doctor. Could I have 
your thoughts on this, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d just like to ask a point of clarification 
of the member from Weyburn. None of the programs that we 
find have a three-year commitment. Most of them are 18 
months, 12 months. So do you have an idea of which one 
you’re talking about? Which program? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — A letter that I’ve received from the health 
advisory board just says that there’s concern because they have 
a three-year . . . the doctor is to sign a three-year contract and 
he’s reluctant to do so. He’s new here to this country. He’s 
passed his examination, but he does not want to be tied to three 
years in case for some reason he decides he does not want to 
stay in Canada. And they are asking that he be given an 
opportunity to sign a one-year contract instead of a three-year 
contract. And my understanding from this letter, if they have 
their facts correct, is that that is currently possible in Alberta, 
Manitoba, and British Columbia. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. As far as we can tell, we have 
no program that requires a three-year commitment, so it was 
likely an arrangement with the district. And if you want to give 
us the information, we can probably see what we can do in this 
situation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I just have a 
couple of other questions before there’s some other members of 
the party that would like to question you. They’re isolated 
incidents. 
 
One is about family members looking after other family 
members in their home and what specific measures is the 
government looking at to recognize the importance of this care, 
and for people to be able to continue to do that without causing 
them financial hardship? Have you looked at anything through 
the current system or anything to accommodate this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We recently had a home care conference 
in Saskatoon in February and a lot of discussion did centre 
around caregivers and the burden that caregivers have. So there 
was a lot of talk about respite, caregiver education. The tax 
benefits to caregivers has been talked about but never has been 
acted on. It seems to be more the available respite beds, 
education and support in the community with programs that 
recognize what caregivers do. That seems to be more of a 
concern what has come out in our conversation with caregivers 
and with home care users. 
 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I just have one 
more question. I recently had a constituent who required long-term 
care and was having . . . had had financial difficulties and was 
going to find it very difficult to pay the fee even in public care. 
And she was advised by Social Services to seek a legal separation 
so that she could go into long-term care and receive assistance. Is 
this the direction that your government is taking? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Recently we announced a new initiative to 
look at what we call involuntary separation, so situations where 
one of a couple is in a nursing home, the other one is left at home. 
We’ve looked at . . . in the past it was taking the two incomes, 
combining the two incomes of the two spouses, and then dividing 
them in half, and then calculating that for the cost to the person 
that resides in long-term care. 
 
We recently announced a new initiative where we just would use 
the income of the resident in long-term care. And that would 
benefit some 900 families would be paying less. So we no longer 
will see that sort of a situation. And if that person is still in that 
situation, we should be hearing about it and give them that new 
information. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, if I understand you correctly 
then, a person can just use their personal income and not have to 
bring the two together and they do not have to seek involuntary 
separation in order to access this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We call it involuntary separation. What I 
thought you were suggesting is they would actually have to 
separate, like legally separate. We call this phenomena that it’s 
. . . that one of the couple goes into a home, we call that 
involuntary separation. And recognizing the hardship that that 
does cause some couples, we now have the ability for the 
couple . . . the person in the nursing home to only use that 
income and not have the combined income and divide it in half. 
 
You’re right. It was just called involuntary separation. The 
concept is still there, but the way it’s paid is not going to be as 
. . . it’s not going to harm the individuals anymore. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I just want to be very clear on this because this 
is a recent concern that was brought to me. They no longer have 
to be — involuntary or however you want to say it — they 
don’t have to be separated. They can just use their own income 
as the basis. Correct . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I just have one 
or two brief questions for the associate minister. I thank you for 
being here and for bringing your officials with you. 
 
The question I have is basically is what my constituents in 
Rosetown-Biggar would like to know. They would like to know 
for the fiscal year, the current fiscal year 2000-2001, is your 
department aware of any health care service reductions, 
eliminations, or closure of facilities in the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency? And that would include much of the Midwest 
Health District, a bit of Greenhead which serves the community 
of Biggar. 
 
So quite simply, are you aware or can you tell us of any service 

reduction, service elimination, or facility closures in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. As we’ve said before many 
times in the House, the Minister of Health has said that the 
health plans are now in from each district. We’re reviewing 
those and have a timeline of June to have taken a provincial 
look at them all and will be commenting, then, on the whole of 
the province. And it would be, I think, a mistake to single out 
one or two districts now to pre-empt that announcement. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, then, could the 
minister give me some indication of what date I would be made 
aware of what will be happening to health care in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said, we’re looking at June. I’m not 
sure what exact date in June but that’s what we’re targeting, to 
have the provincial review done of all the health plans and 
announce the either acceptance, rejection, or altering of those 
plans. And we’ll be announcing that in June. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister: I 
understand that the target was June 15. Are you ahead of 
schedule or behind schedule? Are we going to know before the 
House recesses or will we have to wait till July or August to 
find out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Well I’m happy to hear that the House is 
going to recess by June 15. Actually, we’re targeting June and it 
would probably be in the latter part of June. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, 
Madam Minister, and your officials. I just have a few questions, 
Madam Minister. And as you know, Madam Minister, I’m from 
the east side of the province and the East Central Health District 
is in my area. And I think there’s an awful lot of uncertainty in 
that health district because of the board being removed and a lot 
of questions that need to be answered out there. And I thought 
what better time than tonight, when you have the opportunity to 
talk to these people out there who may actually be watching, to 
see what is happening. 
 
Madam Minister, maybe we could start tonight by you 
explaining to us why the board was actually removed in the 
East Central Health District? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically the department, or the minister, 
received the resignation of the board Chair, Mary Anderson, 
and the district had some other resignations and had only two 
senior managers left of a six-member team so there was some 
management weaknesses there also. The ongoing deficits and 
debt faced by the districts — the debt load has equalled 27 per 
cent of its annual operating budget so it was time to make a 
decision of what to do with this district and what to do for the 
people in that district. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
I’m glad you brought up the deficit and the debt in that district 
because that was one of my next questions. What is the overall 
debt for the East Central Health District stand at today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The district currently has approval for a 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

line of credit of $13.5 million and that fluctuates at any given 
time of the month. But that’s their approved line of credit that 
they operate on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister, but 
correct me if I’m wrong, but the projected numbers that I had 
heard last year, before the board was dissolved, fired, or 
whatever you want to call it, was close to $20 million. Can you 
explain where the other $7 million disappeared? 
 
Or was that a number that I was not reading right at that point? 
That was the number that the past CEO of that health district, 
Mr. Jim Millar, told me would be there at this point in time with 
I believe it was 3 or $3.5 million deficit that would be built up 
after last year. Maybe my numbers were wrong, Madam 
Minster. Can you clarify that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The CEO would not have been aware of a 
$4 million operating grant that we gave to the district in March 
of this year which took it down from 17.5 to 13.5. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well we still seem to have a difference in 
our numbers, Madam Minister, but I’ll let that one sit for now. 
 
I think, Madam Minister, you can understand that the 
uncertainty and the frustrations out there, not only with the 
taxpayers in the province or the people that would like to use 
that hospital when the need arises, but also from the nurses, the 
doctors, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse), the staff in the care 
homes, home care workers and everyone else, because I believe 
that’s the only board in the province that has actually been 
removed to this point. 
 
And I think that uncertainty is grown now when we see 
examples like Living Sky where there’s projections of possibly 
hospital closures. And the Yorkton people in my area, in the 
Saltcoats constituency for that matter, and Canora-Pelly, and a 
number of the areas around there, have great concern. It’s areas 
that have far less debt than the East Central Health District has, 
are having to, in order to balance their books, projecting the 
possibility — and again, Madam Minister, I say the possibility 
— of having to close facilities such as Lanigan and others out 
there. 
 
What will happen in the Yorkton area? And, Madam Minister, I 
want to remind you . . . and you are aware of this as I am, but 
I’d like to get it on the record that the Yorkton hospital should 
be a well-oiled regional hospital that goes — and you know as 
well as I do — that goes far into Manitoba, a way up into at 
times as far as Hudson Bay. It goes down into my neighbouring 
constituency, passed the Qu’Appelle Valley, down to the 
Moosomin area, and comes west many miles, Madam Minister. 
 
That hospital, if it had the funding to provide the service that I 
feel is needed, and I think many out in that area do, could 
provide a great service to the people of this province when it 
comes to health care. What we see out there we saw last year 
with another projected accumulation of another $300 million 
added to the overall debt. 
 
What do you see this year, Madam Minister, for funding for that 
health region? Is that going to increase and will that health 
district, now that Sask Health I believe is actually running that 

area, what will we see out there? Do we have to have that $300 
million deficit disappear this year? And if we do you can 
imagine as well as I do the cuts that are going to have to take 
place out there. 
 
Maybe you could give us a broad overview of what’s going to 
happen to the East Central Health District because, Madam 
Minister, health care is a problem all over this province, but in 
my area because of the board being removed, I think it’s far 
greater than in any other area. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I just want to clarify — $300 million 
deficit you’re saying? You said $300 million several times. The 
district has a $300 million deficit . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No? Okay. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, we’re getting our 
numbers off a different book, but the numbers that I was gave 
by the CEO last year — and I believe I’m not the only one that 
got those numbers, Madam Minister — were in the area of 250 
million to 300 million more deficit that they were going to run 
in the East Central Health District. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — No, three million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Three million, Madam Minister, I’m sorry. 
I’m exaggerating to the degree that it’s not even believable and 
that’s really odd for me. Three million, Madam Minister, we’re 
talking. I was having a hard time thinking we’re that far off the 
page here and we can’t be. 
 
But 3 million, Madam Minister; the overall debt was 20 million. 
So let’s go back and start from square one and I’ll quit 
exaggerating and I’ll get down to the real facts. But I feel I was 
right when we . . . when I started these numbers, but I believe 
last year was another $3 million debt and I apologize for saying 
300 million. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I was hiding my chocolate bar. We’re 
working with the district to develop a long-term plan that aims 
both towards quality services and financial stability. This year’s 
budget for East Central is 5.04 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’m glad to hear that, Madam Minister, but 
I still . . . I think my concern is the same out there. If the books 
are balanced out there and we take inflation and everything else 
and put it in the picture, I think we’re going to have to see an 
awful lot of cuts in the East Central Health District. And I 
believe, Madam Minister, it’s something that’s the last thing we 
need in that area because all that’s going to do is push more 
people coming into the cities like Regina and even in some 
cases, into Saskatoon, which is not going to alleviate the 
problem in here. 
 
I think if we did the proper funding out there and took a look at 
what the problems have been in the Yorkton area, maybe an 
audit of the health care system would bring up things where we 
could have a money saving for an example. But Madam 
Minister, I’d like you to respond. Are there big cuts coming in 
the East Central Health District? Because I mean you should be 
more familiar with these than the other districts because you 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

actually have some input in what will really happen out there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The funding to East Central has risen 45 
per cent since ’93-94, and that doesn’t include the 5 per cent 
from this year’s budget. And as I answered the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, it would be premature to pre-empt the overall 
announcement in June of the provincial plan and the provincial 
overview of the districts’ health plans by announcing one or 
two districts here in this format. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And I’ll 
guess we’ll have to wait and see what comes out when . . . in 
June when all these things are brought out into the public eye. 
 
Madam Minister, where do we go with the health board in the 
East Central Health District? Will a new board be appointed or 
elected? Or are we going to sit there . . . how long is this going 
to sit there in the state it’s in right now? Or is that the direction 
that actually your government wants to head right now in 
removing the health boards? Or will we join the rest of the 
province again with a health board at some point in time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Once the district is in a stable position and 
has a long-term plan that we’re all working together with them 
— the long-term plan to reduce its debt — we do look forward 
to getting a new district health board in place. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I’d like to return to a subject 
that was raised by my colleague from Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
concerning the involuntary separation issue. I had a call in a 
somewhat post-state of panic from an elderly lady who was 
recommended to follow the procedure of involuntary separation to 
address the issue of what she would be paying for her husband’s 
care in a long-term care facility. And I asked her for her concerns 
and she said what it boils down to is, that I’ve lived with the guy 
for 60 years, I don’t plan to get rid of him that easy. 
 
So having listened to your answer and the questions earlier, I’m 
still not really clear on what happens here on the involuntary 
separation. If the involuntary separation designation form has no 
legal effect, nor any effect on other social safety net programs of 
either level of government, nor does it affect marital status, really 
what purpose does this form serve at all that can’t be recognized 
without such a form? Couldn’t a simple say-so on the part of the 
individual suffice as opposed to having them sign a form like this? 
The worry factor for senior citizens is substantial. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I am going to try this again because this is 
something that we are committed to, long-term relationships and 
recognize people’s . . . their commitment and also their fear of 
what might happen to them. Involuntary separation is a marital 
status designation for married couples who live in separate 
dwellings. It has nothing to do with real separation as we consider 
separation and divorce. This is, they live in separate dwellings for 
reasons beyond their control, like one spouse lives in a special care 
home and one in their own home. There is no recognition of 
involuntary separation in the existing care and rates regulations, 
so for married residents currently, the resident — as I was 
saying — the resident and the spouse’s income is combined. 
That was the old method of doing it. Now we recognize . . . 
they will just use the resident’s income. 
 
So this is a benefit to 900 couples that they will pay less and it 

changes nothing with their marital status. It’s just a term that we 
use. And it’s unfortunate. It does have a connotation for some 
people that somehow or other you are separated legally or as we 
determine, a separation in the marriage, of a normal marriage. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I’d like to ask the Minister then, in the case of a couple that 
have one income, how do you deal with that kind of a situation? 
You don’t have separate incomes for both spouses, you have 
one income. You divide it between the two? Is that how that 
kind of a situation would be dealt with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m not sure what specific case you’d be 
referring to, but to my knowledge all seniors have an income — 
the old age security — so there would be two incomes in a 
family. And the old age security would be the one . . . of the 
person that is going into the home, that would be what the 
income is . . . the resident fee is based on, that income. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
I’d like to further pursue that. If there is a situation where one 
spouse is eligible for government programs of that nature but 
the other spouse has no other form of income, I guess that’s the 
kind of anomaly we’re asking about in this particular situation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — In any situation, you have the option to 
choose which one benefits you more, so you would still be able 
to go in the old way, if that’s more beneficial, or take this new 
way if that would save you some money. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to change directions 
now in terms of my questioning. 
 
Madam Minister, when hospital closures or reductions of 
service are contemplated or proposed by a health district, does 
the distance to another full-service facility come into the 
equation at all, and if so, what distance — in miles or 
kilometres — is considered safe or optimal for saving lives? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Generally speaking, what we use is the 
term . . . when we talk about reasonable access to services, we 
basically look at 45 minutes to a facility that has in-patient 
services. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As you can understand, Madam Minister, 
distance is a big concern to me, given the fact that the 
constituency I serve is the largest constituency in the province, 
outside of the two Far North ones. And the constituents are 
acutely aware of the distance they have to travel to any health 
facility. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to . . . would also like to pursue that 
line of questioning in regards to available services in the 
Southwest Health District, most of which is in the Cypress Hills 
constituency, will experience a net shortfall of over $900,000 
projected for the upcoming year. And most of that shortfall I’m 
told is a result of negotiated settlements for staff in terms of 
wages and benefits. Now with one facility being restricted to a 
five-day-week service level to help balance the health district’s 
books, they’re cutting us pretty close to the bone already. And 
the facility that is being reduced or is going to experience 
reduced services is probably outside of the 45-minute time 
frame that you talked about. 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

So I guess what I’m wondering is, in view of the limitations that 
you recommend as minimal, would the district qualify for help 
from your government’s transition fund to maintain services on 
the weekend to hospitals or facilities that are threatened with 
closure to help balance their books? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I answer the exact question, I do 
want to clarify some information we gave earlier on the drug 
plan before we move into the next department’s estimates. 
 
When we talked about ambulance services, and I answered that 
in the North Sask Health pays for social services recipients, the 
total for the ’98-99 budget was 1.32 million that we spend there, 
and we do pay for emergency medical transportation by road 
and air ambulance. We do pay for that and that is in our budget 
in ’98-99 at 1.12 million. So we do have those figures to give 
you. 
 
Now my answer to the specific question from the member from 
Cypress is that the South West Health District . . . first of all I 
wanted to say the South West Health District received this year 
a 4.17 per cent increase in its budget. 
 
And when we’re looking . . . and we do recognize that some 
residents travel further than the 45 minutes, given some of the 
geographical difficulties and the geographical configurations we 
have in this province. That’s why when we have the health 
plans that have been submitted we’re looking at the provincial 
overview. So we can tell what impact will happen to people in 
the whole province when we look at these sorts of things. 
 
And in sparsely populated areas we’re looking at a very strong 
rural emergency service because it’s difficult to provide 
services in sparsely populated areas as well as difficult to 
provide staff in some of those areas. So we are looking at that 
when we consider that district’s health plan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — No further questions, I understand . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . One more? Well this won’t be actually a 
question. I appreciated the fact that you mentioned the 
45-minute limitation as being what you’re trying to achieve. 
Time limitations are significantly different in rural 
Saskatchewan right now than mileage because you can’t 
accomplish 45 miles in 45 minutes in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to pick up on some of these issues of importance to the 
rural area, but I understand that time has elapsed and we’ll leave 
it for another day. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I move the committee report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Social 
Services to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Dan Perrins, the deputy minister of the department. 

Seated behind Mr. Perrins is Bonnie Durnford, the assistant 
deputy minister. Seated behind me is Bob Wihlidal, the 
executive director of financial management. And seated towards 
the rear of the Chamber are Phil Walsh, the executive director 
of income support; Richard Hazel, the executive director of 
family and youth; Dorothea Warren, the associate executive 
director of family and youth; Deborah Bryck, the director of 
child day care; and Larry Moffatt, the executive director of 
community living. 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
begin by thanking the minister and his officials for being here 
tonight to discuss the estimates for the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to focus especially on the report 
recently released by the Children’s Advocate, and I hope that 
we can gain a better understanding as to the direction your 
department is taking in implementing these recommendations. 
On page 44 of this report, and I’ll quote: 
 

We had a baby in our care for two months and hadn’t 
received payment. When we called to ask about payment, 
the worker was relieved to know we had the baby because 
they didn’t know where he was. The file had only the birth 
certificate in it and no other information. 

 
Mr. Minister, how could this happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I understand that that 
particular quotation was an expression that was made at one of 
the public meetings convened by the Children’s Advocate. 
We’ve attempted to pursue the details of that for the Children’s 
Advocate, have not been able to do that successfully, and I 
would suggest if the member has a question with respect to a 
specific quotation such as that, then she should pursue that with 
the Children’s Advocate. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, this isn’t a library book or a set of 
keys we’re talking about. Under your administration we’re not 
only losing people to Alberta but we’re also losing them within 
your department. And again, how could it be possible for a 
child to literally be missing from your system for months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, this was a 
statement that was expressed at a public meeting which was 
convened by the Children’s Advocate. We have attempted to 
obtain the details of that just to see . . . to enable us to verify 
that information, to check into that. We’ve been unable to do so 
and I would suggest to the member that if she wants to get 
further details on that particular quotation, she should pursue 
that with the Children’s Advocate, in whose report that 
information is contained. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — As minister, is it not your job to contact the 
Children’s Advocate to find out? You’re the minister 
responsible. Is it not up to you to contact the Children’s 
Advocate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we have done so. And I 
would point out to the member that the Children’s Advocate, in 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

putting forward her report, encourages all of us to examine and 
deal with the substantive issues that she raises as opposed to 
dealing with specific quotations. Again we’re certainly in a 
position to answer the member’s questions with respect to the 
findings of the Children’s Advocate as far as compliance, for 
example, with practices and the like and the progress the 
department has made. 
 
But as to that particular quotation, I really can’t help the 
member and I would encourage her that if she’s interested in 
obtaining further information on that specific quotation, then 
she should ask the Children’s Advocate; because after all, this 
specific quotation is contained in the Children’s Advocate’s 
report. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, my interpretation is that you don’t 
firmly believe that this actually happened, so I will ask you this 
question: if it did happen, what is your department doing to 
make sure it doesn’t happen again? And if this isn’t the truth, 
what steps do you have in place so that this can’t happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I thank the member for her 
question because now she’s dealing more with the general 
substance of the Children’s Advocate’s report and the direction 
that we’re taking. 
 
And I might say at the outset, Mr. Chair, that this report of the 
Children’s Advocate, The Children and Youth in Care Review, 
is a report which follows hard on the heels of another report by 
the Children’s Advocate into the death of Karen Quill. And as a 
result of her review of that specific death, the Children’s 
Advocate issued a report and made a number of 
recommendations that we followed up on. 
 
Since that time, or at that time, we also asked the Children’s 
Advocate to do a more general, broad review of children in 
care, and she has now provided us with that report. 
 
I venture to say that if we were to do, or if the Children’s 
Advocate were to do a report such as this, if we were to ask her 
again to do a report in a year’s time or in two years time, that 
the general findings that she might have would be different than 
what would be contained in this report. 
 
Following on the heels of the Quill report, the department hired 
additional staff in the area of child welfare, and specifically 
front line staff and supervisory staff in the area of child 
protection. We also introduced what we feel were better 
practices in terms of how it is that the people in child protection 
work go about doing their work. We also, I believe, improved 
training for people in the area of child protection. 
 
But before that I guess you might say had a chance to mature 
and to be fully in operation, we have this other report on 
children in care which again, I think, caught the department in a 
period of transition. I am confident that in a year’s time we’ll be 
able to show further progress in this area. Having said that, we 
are at this point, reviewing the recommendations in the report 
and trying to determine what direction we should go as a 
department. 
 
There are various directions, I suppose, that one could take. We 
are reviewing what direction we should be taking in 

consultation with the Child Welfare League of America, and we 
are confident that early next spring that we will be able to report 
progress in these areas and also to be able to lay out in some 
detail the direction that we are taking. 
 
(2130) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, if in fact the situation that I asked 
earlier did happen, what sort of reprimand is given to the person 
responsible for that child? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the question is 
hypothetical. I’m not really in a position to answer that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you mean? What do you mean 
you’re not ready to answer that. You must have . . . 
 
Ms. Eagles: — You don’t have an answer for what happens to 
people that would be in a situation like this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, with the other public 
servants there are a range of measures that can be taken with 
respect to public servants who do not perform their jobs up to 
the expectations that are required or err in doing their jobs. And 
that ranges from reprimands and letters placed in personnel files 
to suspensions to, if it’s appropriate, terminations. There is a 
range of remedies that can be taken by the employer if an 
employee is not doing their work, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, the report is entitled 
Listen to Their Voices. As a parent who has raised two children, 
sometimes we forget that our kids do have a voice. And these 
children in the foster care program do not have the luxury of 
having two parents to talk to. Mr. Minister, on page 20 the report 
states that children have a right to speak. What is the procedure 
from your department to ensure that a child’s complaint is just not 
sloughed off but is seriously looked into? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, depending on the nature 
of the complaint, but certainly the starting point for any 
complaints by a child would be the social worker who is 
responsible for that child and that particular file. We have, 
during the course of the last number of years, outlined some 
very clear contact standards. And the policy is that caseworkers 
will maintain regular contact with children in care and their 
caregivers to ensure that all basic and special needs of the 
children are met, providing and obtaining relevant information 
related to case planning, providing treatment intervention to 
support both the child and the caregivers. 
 
And the minimum contact standards include: one, caseworkers 
must have personal contact with each child in care within two 
working days of placement unless they were the worker who 
placed the child, and each child in care must have personal 
contact with their worker a minimum of twice a month for the 
first two months of placement and every six weeks thereafter. A 
majority of these contacts must take place in the caregiver’s 
home, and when age appropriate, each child must be 
interviewed separately from the caregiver a minimum of once 
every six months. And caregiver resources must be seen a 
minimum of once every six months by the caseworker 
responsible for the resource. 
 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I will read here on 
page 20: 
 

As a child, I was asking for help because of abuse at my 
natural home for nine years. It would be investigated, and 
then they would listen to my parents who said, everything 
is all right. Children need to be listened to. 

 
So obviously the children aren’t being listening to, I mean, if 
they’re taking the parents’ word over the children all the time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, again it’s difficult to be 
able to react to that specific quotation. It appears that in this 
particular case — and when this might have happened is not 
really clear because this is now an adult talking about things 
that took place in the past — that this child asked for help and 
the department listened, according to this, and did investigate. 
But then talking to the parents, who said everything was all 
right . . . and I assume on that basis that the investigation was 
not carried forward. It’s difficult to know how to react to that 
specific quote without knowing any of the details or the 
circumstances, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, would you agree in a 
situation like that that perhaps contact should be made down the 
road to ensure that everything is in fact all right or if the kids in 
fact do have a valid complaint? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — No, Mr. Chair, we would agree 
that if a child does raise concerns such as that that it would be 
desirable to stay in touch with the child. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, this report has also done a very thorough job of 
making some recommendations that would assist your 
department, and I will just read a few of them. It says here, the 
recommendations 1.1, and that’s on page 22, The Child and 
Family Services Act be amended to include participation rights 
for children in care. This includes the right to be informed about 
their plans of care. An interpreter of language is a barrier to 
consulting with the child. And they should be informed about 
and assisted in contacting the Children’s Advocate, be 
consulted, and to express their views according to their abilities 
about significant decisions affecting them. And be informed 
about their rights and of the procedures available to them for 
enforcing their rights. 
 
Is your department considering . . . what is your department 
doing to actually consider implementing some of these? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, to a very great extent, 
the specific recommendation reflects desirable practices in the 
department. As to the question as . . . as to including that 
particular recommendation in the Act, that is something that we 
will have to consider. But again, it reflects what we consider to 
be desirable practices. And I would venture to say that our 
workers are acting in accordance with this. 
 
But again, including that in the Act is a specific 
recommendation that we will have to consider. 
 
(2145) 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister, regarding the 
training for social services workers, Mr. Minister, am I correct 
in understanding that the department has uniform rules and 
regulations that all case workers must adhere to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, Mr. Chair. To some extent I 
elaborated on that with respect to the contact standards, but 
generally speaking we had manuals that attempt to interpret our 
legislation for the workers and then training is based on that so 
that they can be clearly guided in the work that they do. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. We all 
acknowledge that the workloads for case workers is 
overwhelming. And there are instances where a child has not 
seen his or her worker in months. Mr. Minister, what is being 
done to assist these case workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, in the wake of the 
Quill report, in 1998 I believe it was, the department added 50 
new staff in the area of child protection, front-line workers and 
some supervisory staff because the lack of . . . or appropriate 
supervision was also identified as a concern. Those staff were 
added at that time. 
 
We also clarified our expectations of workers in terms of their 
practices, and we also improved training at that time so that 
workers heading into the field to do this work would be better 
trained. Those are the steps that we’ve taken, oh I’d say within 
the last year and a half to two years, in the wake of the Quill 
report. 
 
We are again examining the recommendations of the Children’s 
Advocate to see what implications it has for us as a department. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure you would 
agree with me that there is a shortage of caseworkers and the 
recommendation clearly states that the Department of Social 
Services needs more time and resources so these people can do 
their job properly and see that children are not harmed or 
neglected. Do you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, I guess it’s a 
question of how one would deploy those resources. We have at 
this point a model on which we base our practices and we 
deploy our resources. 
 
But the Children’s Advocate, in her introductory comments, 
also points out that her review team had unanimity on the issue 
that the department should be doing a better job of preventing 
children from coming into care in the first place; that it’s one 
thing to enhance the system that you have which investigates 
complaints from the community and from children and from 
others about abuse or neglect that is taking place. 
 
We do an investigation. On the basis of that investigation we 
may take children into care, place them in a foster home, and 
then we have procedures as we outlined — for example, contact 
standards to do follow-up for that, and then on the other hand 
try to see what we can do to repair what is going wrong in that 
family so that the child can ultimately be returned. 
 
But the Children’s Advocate, although she has a great number 
of recommendations based on her review of the system we 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

have, again in her introductory remarks says that what we really 
need to be doing is to find better ways to prevent children from 
coming into care in the first place. 
 
Now does that suggest that when we receive a report, for 
example, of neglect of a child, that we should change our 
practices to work with that family at that point to keep that 
family together, and so as to do a better job of preventing 
children from coming into care in the first instance but 
providing better support to that family at that point in time, as 
opposed to taking the child into care and improving our foster 
resources to be able to accommodate that? So those are some of 
the basic questions that the Children’s Advocate raises for us. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, I truly believe that children are the 
most precious thing in the world and we must do whatever we 
have to to make sure that they are raised in a safe, healthy 
environment. With that being said, in this report it said that 
many people, when asked why they became foster parents, said 
they did so because they simply loved children and they found 
it very rewarding. 
 
Regarding compensation, can you tell me how much a foster 
parent receives monetarily for a child? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, there’s a fair amount of 
information here with respect to payments but I’ll undertake to 
send a copy of this information across to the member. But the 
basic maintenance rates, for example, for an infant are $481.98 
per month, and the basic maintenance rate for a 12- to 
15-year-old is $504.31 per month. And then in the North, there 
is additional allowances that are made but in addition to that 
there is special needs and the like, and other skills for 
emergency receiving care in the like, but I’ll undertake to send a 
copy of this across to the member. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — It is my understanding that foster parents have to 
take money out of their own pockets if they want their foster 
child or children to partake in recreational activities, sports, 
entertainment. What is your department doing regarding 
recommendations as to foster parents being paid at an 
equivalent level to other out-of-home care providers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, foster care rates have 
been increased over the course of the years, and we have 
reviewed this continually with a view to keeping pace with 
inflation and to also ensure that there is some basis for 
comparison between foster care in Saskatchewan and what we 
pay and what other provinces pay. Suffice it to say that we are 
currently reviewing our rates to ensure that in the future that 
they will also be appropriate. As to the specific question of the 
recreational needs of children, we can review these on a per 
case basis as special needs and provide assistance as required. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve just had a chance 
to glance at this chart here. And the schedule fee here, that pretty 
well is what it would cost to raise a child or supply them with their 
needs. So the foster parents in fact don’t really get a wage for 
looking after these children, am I correct in assuming that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In addition to the basic maintenance 
rates, the member will also see that there are provisions for special 
needs. There is also a fee for service that in addition to basic 

maintenance, if children present physical or behavioural 
difficulties, the foster parent may receive a fee for service ranging 
from $100 to $500 per month. That’s in addition to the basic 
maintenance rate. Also, there is a fee of $100 per month per child 
that is paid to all approved practitioner level foster parents who 
have completed their training. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you think that the 
fees that you have outlined for me is an adequate wage for these 
caregivers? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — As I indicated earlier, Mr. Chair, 
there have been increases over the years. 
 
We have been sensitive to the needs of foster parents. We’ve 
worked closely with them. I guess it’s fair to say that we’re not 
always everything that other people would want us to be, but I 
think that we’ve been sensitive. We’ve tried to respond. And as 
I’ve indicated, we’re currently reviewing the rates. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it by your 
answer that that is a no, that you don’t think it is an adequate 
wage. 
 
I’m going to move on to something a little bit different here, 
Mr. Minister. A case has been brought to my attention where an 
elderly lady is receiving the basic allowance for social services 
of $195 a month and $40 a month for disability insurance. She 
owns her own home and is required to drive to Saskatoon at 
least twice a week for health care services, which your 
department pays her $18 a trip. 
 
Mr. Minister, this lady would like to put licence plates on her 
own vehicle so she can drive herself, because she cannot afford 
to plate her vehicle. And my question is: is there a policy in 
place that would allow her the necessary money so that she 
could plate her vehicle without selling any of her property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member raises an 
interesting question. I might say, as a matter of practice we do 
not licence vehicles. That would . . . to undertake to do so 
would present some, I think a number of requests that would be 
difficult for us. 
 
Having said that, there may well be one or two cases from time 
to time where in hindsight we might have been better off to 
licence a vehicle than to provide support for transportation. But 
as a matter of practice we do not licence vehicles, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — So if the information, Mr. Minister, was 
delivered to your office regarding this woman, would you agree 
to look into this case on a specific basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We’ll certainly look into it, Mr. 
Chair. I’ll ask my officials to do that. The difficulty for us is 
when you’re confronted with the request, for how long this 
might continue, but we’ll certainly take a look at the case that 
the member raises. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, as well another situation. A person 
has contacted my office and I apologize, I do not have all the 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

details. But this person is on social assistance and she has just 
gained employment — albeit part-time, as well as minimum 
wage. And it almost . . . according to this person it seems that 
she is being penalized for being productive and trying to get off 
of social assistance. 
 
And her initial report is that now that she is working on a 
part-time basis, and again for a minimum wage, Social Services 
has discontinued payment of her SaskPower and SaskEnergy, 
and she feels that is vital to her survival at this point. 
 
And she feels that monetarily she’d be better off to forget about 
entering the workforce and just to stay solely on social services. 
Could you give me your views on a situation like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, without knowing 
the details of the case, I don’t know if this, for example, is a 
single parent or a . . . the member is signifying yes. 
 
We have made substantial changes to our social assistance 
programs precisely with this type of case in mind. We wanted 
to ensure that there were incentives for parents to work and that 
they would always be better off working than remaining on 
social assistance. 
 
As a general rule we believe that is the case. What we’ve done 
is, one, is that even though a person might be on social 
assistance, because of the National Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, they still retain the benefit — that 
is their benefit whether they’re on social assistance or not on 
social assistance. 
 
In addition there too, that person may also qualify for family 
health benefits so that there will continue to be coverage for her 
child. So that if there are extraordinary medical expenses, health 
expenses, that by itself won’t trigger a need to fall back on 
social assistance where they might obtain that assistance. 
 
And finally we set into place the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement which is something that the person we speak of 
would have to apply for. And there’s a 1-800 number that he or 
she can call . . . she can call. Without knowing all of the details 
and the salary levels and so on, depending on a person’s 
circumstances a parent might receive up to $2,500, $2,600 per 
year from the child benefit, and approximately a further $2,000 
per year from the Saskatchewan employment supplement. And 
then of course whatever health benefits their children may 
require. 
 
So we’ve tried to provide significant financial incentive so that 
a family will always be better off working and supported in 
doing that, than simply to remain on social assistance. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do apologize. It 
was probably a bit unfair of me to question you on that without 
myself knowing all the facts, but I will get them and I will 
contact your office; but I do apologize for that. 
 
And with that I will turn it over to my colleague and at this time 
I would like to thank you for the time that you and your 
officials have given me this evening. And I’m sure I’ll have 
some more questions for you at another time, but thank you. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just doing a 
couple of follow-ups with regard to some of the questions that 
my colleague, the member from Estevan, was raising. And it’s 
an issue that we have discussed before but certainly I think I 
need a little more clarification on it. 
 
The member talked about when a child complains about abuse 
or neglect, it’s brought to the department’s attention. The 
question I have is the process that is followed to indeed 
determine that the complaint is a reasonable complaint where 
action must be taken, and the department would feel that maybe 
at the time, until they do further research, then maybe they 
should remove a child from the home. 
 
The concern I have is there are times, I’m sure, that social 
workers may find as they do further research into some of the 
accusations, that some of the accusations or complaints that 
have been brought forward have been made in anger, fits of 
anger, a child against a parent; especially if a parent sets down 
some guidelines and sets down some rules and a child rebels 
against those rules. And also situations where parents 
themselves may make accusations against the other spouse 
because of their anger over certain positions that one or the 
other spouse may have taken. And as a result, when an 
accusation comes forward, then of course the concern for the 
children and their safety comes into play. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the question I would have is, what are the 
safety features and the steps that are taken to ensure that proper 
attention is given that, number one, the workers don’t just walk 
in and remove children. Because one of the concerns raised by 
the Child Advocate is the fact that there is seen to be too many 
children in care and in some cases maybe children removed 
from the home too quickly. What steps are taken and what . . . 
how do workers really now begin the process of determining 
whether or not they should be actually removing a child from a 
home because this may be a situation that is volatile, or leaving 
the child in the home and trying to work with that family to 
address the concerns that have been raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member with 
his question points out the essential difficulty that our 
department faces and that social workers face. Even as we listen 
to one voice that expresses concern about having raised 
complaints with the department about abuse and that child 
being interviewed and the parents being interviewed and then, 
according to the child, that nothing is done. 
 
But now, in this case, the member points out the other end of 
that continuum, and that is to say children who might make 
allegations based on anger, that it might be an act of rebellion, 
that there’s also the issue of one parent trying, especially in 
custody matters, trying to make accusations about the 
child-raising practices of the other parent as a means of, I guess, 
trying to get some favour in the courts or in the court process 
that they may be involved in. That then becomes the essential 
difficulty for social workers, Mr. Chair. 
 
When we receive a complaint, we do an investigation. If there 
are immediate safety issues, then we must act. For example, if 
there’s a call and we find a child wandering the streets with no 
apparent caregiver, then obviously we need to act and we must 
ensure the safety of the child. If we enter into a home and it’s 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

obvious that the child has been abused or molested, then we 
must act to guarantee the safety of the child. 
 
(2215) 
 
But in any event, Mr. Chair, we undertake to do an 
investigation. And we speak to the child and we hear from the 
child. And if the allegations are based as simply as a matter of 
rebellion, then we might be able to find out from the child that 
there’s something else troubling that child apart from an 
allegation of abuse or neglect. We will undertake to interview 
the parents. The interviews might extend to the child’s school. 
It might extend to other professionals that the family has been 
involved with. 
 
Following our review of the situation, and if the child is in care, 
we have a period of seven days to complete that review and 
then to determine our next course of action. That course of 
action, in some cases, results in a voluntary . . . involuntary 
arrangement where the parents agree that that family may be 
experiencing a crisis and that in terms of working through their 
crisis it might be better if the child were to be taken into care by 
the Department of Social Services. 
 
In other instances, our review leads us to conclude that we 
should be going forward to the courts to apply for a form of 
guardianship — if you like — to take the children into our care 
and to ensure that they’re placed in a foster home for a period of 
months until we’re satisfied that the family situation has been 
resolved and, if appropriate, the child can be returned. But after 
a period of seven days, we’re obliged to make an application to 
the courts unless there’s been some earlier resolution and to be 
able to satisfy the courts that the action that we are proposing is 
the correct action. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that because 
I feel very strongly that we certainly need to have guidelines in 
place that are followed very stringently so that we do not put 
families really at risk. And I think that’s one of the points that 
the child advocate is bringing out and really trying to work with 
families rather than always removing children from the home. 
 
Another area that I think and I believe possibly your department 
is becoming more aware of . . . certainly it’s brought out in 
today’s paper: “Fetal alcohol problems cost taxpayers”. And I 
think there’s a growing concern. We had, some of my 
colleagues and I had the privilege of talking to a group in 
Saskatoon. They’re trying to reach out to a drug and alcohol 
problem within the inner city. But they pointed out the fact, too, 
that one of the concerns they have is there is a problem even 
coming that we really haven’t quite gotten into the middle of 
yet, but they are concerned about the fact that in the very near 
future — even the police are talking about it — that we’re 
going to be dealing with young people who have unfortunately 
during their formidable years while they’ve still been . . . before 
their birth, their parents or their mothers have been constantly 
on drugs and alcohol. As a result it’s affecting the mannerism 
then, the actions of the children. 
 
And this I think, Mr. Minister, is going to be something that is 
going to affect each and every one of us. It’s going to be a cost, 
as the headline indicates, it’s going to be an actual cost to the 
taxpayer. And just putting an individual behind bars isn’t going 

to address the problem that that person is facing. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I realize that this problem is something that 
basically over go . . . or it was within the realm of three 
different departments: Justice and Social Services and certainly 
Health care. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department is doing to 
raise this concern? Because there’s no doubt, I would believe 
that many of the workers out there right now in their dealing 
with young people and dealing with some of the concerns and 
the accusations that are coming forward and being brought to 
their attention, are finding out that they are actually beginning 
to deal with or are dealing with children who are exhibiting 
many of the problems that are arising of fetal alcohol syndrome. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, my question to you is, what is your 
department doing to begin to address this problem that could be 
a major problem in the future? But I’m not sure we can nip it in 
the bud because there’s probably too many young people out 
there already who are affected by it, but I would think if we 
begin . . . we are going to need to begin to tackle it and address 
this major problem so that young women realize the 
consequences of their actions if they proceed to drink and take 
drugs while they are pregnant. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my question to you is, what is your 
department doing to begin to address this concern, and working 
with other departments where this is an overlapping problem, in 
coming up with a long-range strategy and plan so that this 
doesn’t become a problem that consumes us in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chair, I agree entirely 
with the concerns that the member has expressed. This is a 
horrible problem for our society. I don’t know what to compare 
it to. The situations that you find are sometimes beyond 
comprehension and seem to be beyond treatment. 
 
As a department, we work with the Department of Health. The 
Department of Health is the lead for Saskatchewan in the area 
of fetal alcohol syndrome. We have formed a partnership with 
Alberta, Manitoba, and most recently joined by the Yukon, 
Northwest Territories, and Nunavut. The purpose of the 
partnership is development of a common strategy to address 
FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) and consider both the prevention 
of and support required to those affected by FAS, and to allow 
the jurisdictions to learn from another’s shared expertise and 
best practices and resource material. 
 
FAS presents us with two major challenges, broadly put. One is 
for the children that are born with FAS, to ensure that all the 
relevant departments and government agencies and also 
community agencies that have a role to play with children and 
later with adults, so that all those who come into contact with 
children who have fetal alcohol syndrome, and later adults, are 
in a better position to understand the nature of the condition and 
therefore be able to provide more appropriate resources and 
appropriate care or appropriate services, whatever that might be. 
 
Whether it’s in our department in trying to understand the 
problems that are raised by a child or whether it’s in education, 
in the area of special needs, we have a lot to do to educate 
ourselves and all of society about the conditions so that, one, we 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

can deal appropriately with the needs of those that have fetal 
alcohol syndrome. 
 
But there’s a more fundamental question, I believe, when you 
consider that fetal alcohol syndrome is 100 per cent 
preventable. And if it’s 100 per cent preventable, what can we 
do to prevent it so that we don’t have it happening. 
 
Again we are sharing our experiences with that of the other 
provinces. We are also at this time working with our partners in 
the other department to examine a broader, early childhood 
intervention strategy that might see us being able to provide 
more targeted intervention with moms who we suspect have 
alcohol or drug problems, and where there is a risk of bringing 
forth a child with fetal alcohol syndrome. We are very 
interested to see the steps that Manitoba has taken in a 
stop-FAS program. My discussions with their officials in 
Manitoba a few months ago leaves me encouraged that yes, 
there may be things that we can do to ensure that prevention is 
more effective in the future than it is today. 
 
But again the details and the specifics and the devil is always in 
the details as to how we go about doing that . . . is something 
that we’re trying to sort through now. But again I agree entirely 
with the member; this is a terrible problem for our society, and 
we must double our resolve to put an end to it or to do what we 
can to prevent it from taking place. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:27 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


