





























































Hansard: May 29, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1381 
 May 29, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House 
today to present a petition requesting the government retain 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present 
a petition on behalf of the people who are concerned about the 
health care in Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And this is signed by the good people from Lanigan and from 
Drake. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan who would like to see improved cellular 
telephone coverage in their area. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
towns of Cudworth and Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today for health care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Lanigan, 
Leroy, Viscount, and Alberta. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present this afternoon. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. The good folks of 
Lanigan signed this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people concerned about the future of the Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, of the 
community of Lanigan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the future of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, Spiritwood, 
Martensville, and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in the Lanigan and Watrous areas who, like the people in 
Swift Current, are concerned about the future of their hospital. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of 
Lanigan and Viscount. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Lanigan and Watrous 
who are concerned about the health care in their area. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And this is presented on behalf of people from Lanigan. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the future of health care in rural 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good people from 
Nokomis, Lanigan, and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I also have a petition to retain Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people of Lanigan and Watrous. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition with 
citizens concerned about health care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petitioners are from the Lanigan area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition to stop government funded 
pornography. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
discontinue the use of public monies for the funding of 
events that are pornographic in nature. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Birch Hills. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned with potential hospital 
closures. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petition is signed by the good people of Lanigan. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the citizens that signed this petition are from Lanigan and 
Jansen. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Lanigan and 
Guernsey, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Weekes: — I have a written question. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many union certification 
applications to the Labour Relations Board in ’99-2000 
were approved and how many were rejected; and also how 
many union decertification applications to the Labour 
Relations Board were approved in ’99-2000 and how many 
were rejected; and also for the previous for four years? 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Sask Water: which municipal drinking 
water supplies failed to meet with provincial standards in 
1999-2000? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, some 
special guests seated in your gallery. With my wife, Marlene, 
are her parents John and Johanna Vanderloos of North 
Battleford, and also with them are some special guests from the 
Netherlands, Arie and Truus Vanderloos from the Netherlands. 
I would ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly, the Consul-General of Mexico to Vancouver, Mrs. 
Guadalupe Albert. Kindly stand, thank you. 
 
Ms. Albert is on her first official visit to Saskatchewan. This 
morning she met with officials from the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development, president of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and was at luncheon with the deputy 
minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
This afternoon she’ll be meeting with the mayor of Regina, 
officials of Saskatchewan Ag and Food, and myself. Tomorrow 
she is meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, the director of the 
Language Institute at the University of Regina, and with 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership. 
 
In addition she will be opening the honorary consulate of 
Mexico in Saskatchewan. So it is a very, very full itinerary. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming her. She is of 
course accompanied by our own Irene Janz. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope I have 
the name right, but I too would like to join with the minister in 
welcoming our special guest from Mexico, Guadalupe Albert, if 
I heard correctly. Welcome to Saskatchewan. We’re very 
pleased to have you here and hope that you would come back 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have the pleasure of introducing a school 
group from my riding of Rosetown-Biggar, the Swanson 
Christian School, grade 7 to grade 9 students are sitting in your 
gallery up here. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Goossen. And I would ask all Assembly members to give them 
a warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today 
I’ll be moving second reading on The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Amendment Act, 2000. And some of 
the most affected stakeholders are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d like to introduce them to the Assembly if I 
could. 
 
From APEGS — that’s the Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan — I’d like to 
introduce, first of all, the president; that is Peter Van Vliet. He’s 
. . . There he is. 
 
Also, I don’t know if he’s with us yet, but also Art Opseth is the 
vice-president of APEGS. There we are. 
 
Myron Herasymuik, the Chair of APEGS legislation liaison 
committee. And Myron actually was formerly the head of 
operations with the Department of Highways and 
Transportation and has since retired from our department. 
Welcome, Myron. 
 
Also Dennis Paddock, executive director and registrar of 
APEGS. 
 
Now with us also from SASTT — that is the Saskatchewan 
association of science technologists and technicians — I believe 
we have James Hoffman, president of SASTT; Ron Smith, past 
president of SASTT; and Dan Crites, past president of SASTT 
as well. 
 
So if you would join with me, members, in welcoming these 
gentlemen to the Assembly today please. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to members of this 
Assembly, 22 grade 9 students from Weldon School in Bienfait. 
And they are accompanied by their teacher, Pat Fergusson, as 
well as chaperones Margaret Banulis and Lois Mann. 
 
And I ask everyone to join me in welcoming them and I look 
forward to chatting with them a little bit later on this afternoon. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 22 grade 8 
students from the Turtleford School. 
 
They’re sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I wish 
them . . . I’m going to be meeting with them later and so we’ll 
be discussing some of the issues. 
 
And I’d like to welcome their teacher, Carmela McNinch; their 
chaperones Cheryl Macnab, RoseLynn Gory, Dawn Simkins, 
Leonard Lundberg, and Doug Maddaford. 
 
Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Trans Canada Trail Relay 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 24, the Trans 
Canada Trail relay team travelled to Cypress Hills Provincial 
Park. Horseback riders, hikers, and two water carriers, Kody 
Francis and Gerald Bomersine from Maple Creek participated 
in this epic trek to bring water from the Pacific Ocean to 
Ottawa. And Maple Creek Boy Scouts and Cubs will be 
planting trees in the millennium grove at Cypress Park to 
commemorate this event as well. 
 
On May 25, Joan Hodgins of Eastend and Dennis and Debbie 
Aadland of Shaunavon continued the relay towards Fort Walsh. 
First Nations, Northwest Mounted Police, RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), and cowboys escorted the trekkers 
on arrival in Battle Creek. 
 
On May 26 and 27 respectively, I had the opportunity to 
participate at Trans Canada Trail ceremonies in the 
communities of Eastend and Shaunavon. Three water carriers 
were selected from Eastend. And I’d like to congratulate Robert 
Gebhardt, the Eastend VIP (very important person) who carried 
the water into Eastend, along with Heidi Scott and Thomas 
Bristow who participated in the relay from Eastend to 
Shaunavon. 
 
Six water carriers were chosen from the community of 
Shaunavon. And I’d like to acknowledge Shannon Poppy, 
Bernadette and Rick Schneider, Mike Halstead, Mike Greenlay, 
and Lisa Nelson for their participation in this historic event. 
 
The community of Shaunavon was pleased to host a 
performance by Saskatchewan Express as part of its relay 
ceremonies. 
 
And I’d like to acknowledge that there have been several 
Three-Century Club members from Cypress Hills constituency 
who have been honoured with plaques to be placed at one of the 
pavilions in either Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Unknown Soldier 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the time of World 
War I, Canada had a population of approximately eight million 
people. During that war more than 61,000 Canadians were 
killed. By comparison, for the Second World War, our 
population was eleven and a half million, and 42,000 Canadians 
lost their lives. 
 
If Canada came of age as a nation in the first war, as many have 
suggested and as I mentioned on the anniversary of the Battle of 
Vimy Ridge, then our adulthood was achieved at a terrible price 
— the price of those 61,000 lives lost before they had barely 
begun. 
 
Our personal sorrow, our collective gratitude, our national debt 
to those young people can never be properly expressed — one 
of the many injustices of war. But yesterday in Ottawa, 
Canadians from all provinces and all walks of life made a 

symbolic and significant gesture to them. 
 
The remains of one lone Canadian soldier, brought from a grave 
in France, was laid to rest at the National War Memorial in 
Ottawa. His coffin was sprinkled with dust of each of our 
provinces in Canada, including our own. 
 
This one Unknown Soldier is now the Canadian Unknown 
Soldier, representing all those lost men and women who died in 
devotion to their country and their families, and their belief in 
the value of our way of life. 
 
As our Governor General said, he is every soldier in all our 
wars. He is one real Canadian soldier; he’s a symbol of all 
Canadian soldiers. As such, his duty is finished. Ours is to 
ensure there be no more lost soldiers for him to represent. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Students Graduate 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise before you and my colleagues in this Assembly 
today to share with everyone the accomplishments of three 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in the 24-year history of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, three students have 
graduated from the fields of computer science and biology. 
Convocation ceremonies were held last Friday for Wilfred Bird, 
Alanah Woodland, and Stephanie Redman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wilfred Bird is currently working on a term 
project for the federal government. Alanah Woodland is 
presently considering three job offers. And Stephanie Redman 
is working as an environmental consultant in the oil and gas 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are tremendous accomplishments and I 
would ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating these 
three students. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maurice “Rocket” Richard 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend the province of Quebec lost an icon, and all 
Canadians a national hero. Maurice “Rocket” Richard passed 
away at the age of 78. 
 
Many knowledgeable fans all claim that, if he was not the 
greatest hockey player ever, he was in the top two or three. 
Gretzky might have more records, but the Rocket has more 
significant firsts. He was the first player to score 50 goals in 50 
games, the first to score 500 in a career, and for years was a 
leading playoff scorer. 
 
For years, Mr. Speaker, even for those of us who did not get to 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

see him play or listen to Foster Hewitt describe his play, he 
typified hockey and he symbolized our game when it was still 
identifiably a Canadian game. He is one of those handful of 
athletes who transcend their individual sport and inscribe 
themselves on the national psyche. He was that good at what he 
did. 
 
So from 4,000 kilometres from his home in Montreal, we share 
with his people their loss and their memory of a legend. 
 
M. le Président, je sais que je parle au nom de tous mes 
honourable collègues quand j’offre nos plus sincères 
condoléances à la famille de Maurice Richard, un grand 
Canadien de telle grande réputation et un Québecois fort 
respecté. Merci. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I know that I speak on behalf of all 
my hon. colleagues when I offer our most sincere condolences 
to the family of Maurice Richard, a great Canadian of such 
great reputation and a highly-respected Québecois. Thank you.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Graduates from Little Red River School 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
incredible event took place on the evening of Friday, the 26, at 
the Little Red River Indian Reserve in my constituency. Five 
grade 12 students were recognized for being the first students 
ever to graduate from the new Little Red River kindergarten to 
grade 12 school that was built just four years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this memorable occasion that I rise this 
afternoon. Myself and Chief Perry Bellegarde from the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations were pleased to 
have been a small part of this momentous occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a side note that elevates this event to 
historic status. For as recent as 10 years ago the percentage of 
students who achieved a grade 12 diploma was zero per cent — 
zero per cent, Mr. Speaker. Very unfortunate indeed. But 
through the efforts of many people at the Little Red River 
Indian Reserve, Mr. Speaker, this sad state of affairs has been 
successfully addressed. The community believe that, should 
they have their own school, educational successes will be 
achieved. And Friday their dream became a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
congratulating Verna Morin Ballantyne, Jolene Bird, Judy 
Halkett, Kate Halkett, and Jeff Badger on realizing their dreams 
and this first at Little Red River Indian Reserve. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Reduction in Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Cutbacks 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today 
to be able to announce a partial victory for Saskatchewan 
people who have asked for the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) and the federal government to reconsider their 
plan to make the national broadcasting company nothing more 

than another Toronto downtown entity. 
 
Our legislature was one of four which denounced their plans, 
and this morning Mr. Rabinovitch announced a compromise 
solution. He announced a 30-minute national broadcast which 
will be followed by a 30-minute local supper time broadcast out 
of here in Regina. 
 
We get half of what we asked for. And I think all Canadians 
across the country who came to the defence of local public 
programming deserve some of the credit. 
 
There are still many questions that need to be answered — local 
CBC staffers still do not know how many jobs will be lost here 
or nationally. At this point we know it’s not the 674 predicted 
by the National Post, but obviously it’ll be some. 
 
Guy Michaud, who was speaking on behalf of the CBC 
employees, said that they are happy the news show was not 
scrapped, but they still need to know what the corporation is 
going to do this fall after the Olympic coverage is done. 
 
Also we do not yet know what this announcement means for 
other local programming, although the CBC says it will 
improve children and youth programs. 
 
So, at best, we still have local representation, though truncated; 
at worst, we have a temporary reprieve. As Mr. Michaud says, 
with any luck in a couple of weeks we’ll know and we won’t 
have to read about it in the National Post first. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Uranium Mines Open 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is entering a 
new era of uranium mining. After years of exploration, 
construction, and investments, uranium mining production has 
now officially started in two new Saskatchewan locations — 
McArthur River and McClean Lake. 
 
These two new uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan will 
effectively secure Saskatchewan’s position as a dominant 
uranium producer in the world for decades to come. 
 
The new mines represent a very large, long-term investment in 
the future of uranium mining in this province. 
 
The mines also mean jobs for Saskatchewan people and, in 
particular, northern residents. There are now over 1,000 proud 
workers from Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, 
Wollaston, Fond-du-Lac, and other northern communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times for industry and the 
province, with Saskatchewan as a global leader in potash and 
uranium production. This province is strong and our future is 
bright due in large part to the contribution of the mining 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

Health Care Issues 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, last week’s western premiers’ conference 
produced some mildly interesting political fiction but not much 
else. And in your chorus of NDP (New Democratic Party) 
health care rhetoric about how Alberta is destroying medicare, 
you somehow overlooked the fact that Saskatchewan has been 
violating the Canada Health Act for years. You, in fact, are 
breaking the law. 
 
In case you hadn’t noticed, Saskatchewan has the longest 
waiting lists in Canada, and those lists are getting longer, thanks 
to your NDP government. 
 
Mr. Premier, isn’t it time to admit your government is violating 
the requirement of accessibility to health care, one of the five 
pillars of the Canada Health Act, by forcing Saskatchewan 
people onto the longest hospital waiting lists in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t surprise 
anybody in this House or in the province of Saskatchewan that 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, Leader of the 
Opposition, philosophically — as his members believe in 
privatized, two-tier health care system — they would want the 
province of Saskatchewan to adopt that which Alberta has 
adopted, namely Bill 11 which opens up the two tier. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition talks about the Canada Health 
Act, an old accusation first labelled, according to my 
documentation, back on March 20. And here’s a solution 
according to Broadcast News. I’m quoting from Broadcast 
News, Mr. Speaker, quote, “Hermanson (referring to the leader) 
says Ottawa should hold back on more cash.” 
 
That’s the first thing he says. We disagree. Ottawa needs to 
pump in more cash for health care. 
 
And then he goes on to say in the quotation, as I take my chair, 
quote, “until the provincial government completes an audit of 
the health care sector to see where savings could be made.” 
 
And they’re saying, right on. Health care isn’t a auditor’s 
account, it is the quality of health care for all people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It surprised me 
that the Premier doesn’t want to be a good steward of health 
care dollars. Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Premier. It’s unfortunate that while Saskatchewan’s health care 
system is reeling from nine years under his government, all we 
get from the Premier is a useless load of NDP health care 
rhetoric focused at Alberta. 
 
It’s a little sad that the NDP runs around Saskatchewan 
pretending to carry on the work of Tommy Douglas when your 
own government agencies — your own government agencies — 
are demonstrating a two-tier health care system that you have 

created. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Premier, that when Workers’ Compensation 
Board need someone diagnosed quickly, they sidestep the 
NDP’s long waiting list and they send them to Alberta? 
 
Why is it that when SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
wants to reduce the cost of handling no-fault insurance victims’ 
injuries, they jump the queue and send the victim to Alberta for 
a quick diagnosis or a treatment? 
 
Mr. Premier, isn’t that a two-tiered health care system? One 
system for the NDP government agencies and another one for 
the rest of us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what is a prescription 
for two-tier health care and the destruction of Canada’s 
medicare system? Is the situation which is adopted by the 
leadership of the Alliance Party, the candidate Mr. Stockwell 
Day, whose position is this: Ottawa give the money to the 
provinces unconditionally. No standards nationally. None 
whatsoever. Do whatever you want to do province by province. 
Stockwell Day says in Alberta you can have a two-tier system 
as Bill 11 recommends. 
 
That leadership of the Alliance Party is supported by the 
majority of the members of the Saskatchewan Party in 
Saskatchewan. The fastest way to destroy medicare in Canada 
is to plough the prescription of the leader of the Sask Party and 
the would-be leader of the Alliance Party. Not so long as I’m in 
this chair. Not so long as this coalition government is in defence 
of medicare in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier gets 
up in his chair and he points his finger and he raises his voice as 
though somehow that will prove that health care is all well and 
good in Saskatchewan when in fact it’s not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will have to forgive the people of 
Saskatchewan if they aren’t buying the Premier’s snake oil 
remedy any longer. 
 
Mr. Premier, whether you admit it or not, whether you like it or 
not, accessibility is a pillar of the Canada Health Act, and 
Saskatchewan people do not have accessibility when it comes to 
health care because the NDP have given Saskatchewan the 
longest waiting lists in the country. So people are being forced 
to go to Alberta for services they can’t get here at home. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you doing here at home in Saskatchewan 
to reduce waiting lists and address the two-tiered health care 
system that your government — your government — has 
created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party full well knows that in this budget 
that my colleague, the Minister of Finance, brought down, the 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

overall percentage increase for health care is at about 6 per cent. 
And the year before that, if my memory serves me correctly, it 
was about 8 per cent, and the year before that about 11 per cent 
in the face of federal government cutbacks. 
 
We need to do more not only for emergency waiting lists, but 
generally for health care. There’s no doubt about that. But what 
we’re committed to is the principle of publicly funded, 
single-payer, medicare . . . health care. That’s what we are 
unequivocally, we are adamantly in support of that proposition. 
 
What do those people opposite want? What they want to do is 
go to Bill 11 — two-tier, private for-profit health care. And I 
say never. It is not in the Canadian interests. It is not going to 
be sacrificed by this Legislative Assembly which gave birth to 
medicare in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Premier will 
stand up in this House and defend a system that’s failing until 
nobody’s left in Saskatchewan to use the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got another question for the Premier. No 
amount of NDP rhetoric will change the facts. And the fact is 
that your government has given Saskatchewan the longest 
waiting lists in the country. The fact is, thousands of 
Saskatchewan people are going to Alberta or going to the 
United States for medical services. 
 
Mr. Premier, your own government agencies have concluded 
that waiting lists are too long. SGI and Workers’ Compensation 
Board agencies are sending people . . . having them jump the 
queue and leaving the province for service because they’ve 
determined that your waiting lists are far too long. And it’s not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Premier, how many people have either fled Saskatchewan’s 
health system to seek treatment outside the province last year, 
or were sent outside the province for treatment by SGI or the 
Workers’ Compensation Board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. I think all members of 
this Assembly and the public of Saskatchewan will note with 
considerable interest, although I might say not with . . . with not 
much surprise, the tone of the questions in question period as 
contrasted by what the Saskatchewan Party campaigned on in 
the last provincial election. 
 
Now the tone of the questions would have us believe that 
they’re concerned about waiting lists . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The tone of their questions would have us believe that somehow 
they’re genuinely worried about waiting lists, emergency room 
problems — those we have to deal with. 
 
But what does their platform say? Their platform says that if 
they had won this election on September 16, 1999, they would 

have frozen health care for five years. They would have had the 
increases to health care tied to the rate of inflation, which means 
no growth — five years. And he would have us believe that 
under that platform they’d be able to deal with health care 
waiting lists and emergency rooms. 
 
That’s nonsense, Mr. Speaker. That’s a prescription for 
two-tier, American-style, Alabama-South health care. That’s 
their position; it’s not ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Speaker, health care in this province is in a crisis. 
Let me give you an example. Mr. Speaker, Annie Lavalley went 
to her doctor last fall experiencing lower abdominal pain. An 
ultrasound turned up spots on her liver so she underwent testing 
procedures in Estevan. 
 
She was put on medication for a virus and an ulcer. The pain 
continued until finally after another short hospital stay in March 
and efforts of another doctor, Ms. Lavalley was seen by a 
specialist in Regina on April 12. That was the day that Ms. 
Lavalley was told she had a cancerous tumour growing on her 
bowel, which had spread to her liver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve raised cases like this before. People are 
dying because of long waiting lists to see specialists and 
undergoing tests. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to react and begin the 
process of repairing our health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
specific case identified, clearly I don’t have the details of that. 
And every one of us knows that this is a very serious situation 
and our hearts have to go out in support of this person. 
 
But let’s leave the name out of the picture for the moment. Let’s 
talk about the alternative solutions. And the member who gets 
up to ask this question, in the Weyburn Review of October 20, 
1999, this is her solution. Quote: 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. “I think 
it should be an option. Why should we continue down the 
path when people are being driven out of the province to 
look for health care. Why are we not looking at having 
privatized care in Saskatchewan?” 
 

That is what she said. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, since we’re debating policy here, 
contrast their position which is to privatize it like the Americans 
and like the Albertans do, versus our policy and that is to 
strengthen it and to build it and make it the best medicare 
system that it can possibly be in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of the NDP is long 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

waiting lists; the policy of the Saskatchewan Party is to find a 
solution so people in this province actually get care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you a little more detail 
about Ms. Lavalley’s case because it is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Ms. 
Lavalley’s case is very troubling. She was diagnosed with 
cancer on April 12. But this time it was too late to perform 
surgery. 
 
Her family has gone back to the doctor in Estevan, who 
performed the original tests last fall, to see why the tumour was 
not detected. He has indicated that the only scope for use in 
Estevan is not long enough to thoroughly examine adult 
patients. So not only is this a case of a woman who had to wait 
too long for proper testing, but she is the victim of a hospital 
not having the proper equipment to perform that test. 
 
Madam Minister, how can people have confidence that they 
will receive adequate and timely treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister will talk about the details of the individual case, if 
that’s required. I don’t think it’s proper for the legislature to do 
that but that’s fair enough. 
 
We’re talking about policy here, and the Saskatchewan Party 
and the member who asked the question, Saskatchewan Party 
— I read you the quote — talks about privatization of health 
care services. That is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — She’s talking about privatization. That 
is her approach. That is the approach of the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. Privatization . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, these are her words, not my words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the argument is that Ms. Lavalley’s case is going to be 
somehow helped if we turn the clock all the way back to 1961, 
’62 when we had privatized health care — the very option that 
they’re advocating. 
 
And when we had privatized health care the situations 
advocated and described by the member were legion. That’s the 
reason why Saskatchewan invented publicly funded, single-tier 
medicare. And that’s why we’re going to defend it, 
notwithstanding their attempts to privatize it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister 
of Health. What the people of this province want is health care 
— timely, adequate health care — not to hang on to a system 
that is failing them and not working. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this story that I’m talking about gets even worse. 
Ms. Lavalley’s daughter Gail was so distraught over her 
mother’s treatment in the health care system that she wrote me a 
letter which I forwarded to the Minister of Health. 
 
The minister replied, but her staff sent that letter to a Regina 
woman completely unrelated to this issue. When I finally 
received the letter, Mr. Speaker, the minister wrote that she was 
sorry to hear of Ms. Lavalley’s passing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable. This lady is very ill, but she is 
very much alive. 
 
Madam Minister, how carefully was her health concern 
reviewed in your office? Mr. Speaker, the minister’s only 
advice to the daughter is that she contact the college of 
physicians and surgeons and the health district with her 
concerns. 
 
This response shows a complete lack of respect for people 
caught in an unresponsive health care system. 
 
Madam Minister, your answer is always to pass the buck. But 
what are you going to do to help people who need help today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Associate Minister 
of Health will do all that she can under the powers of the 
Department of Health that is reasonable and proper, lawful to 
do, to take a look at the case that the member from Weyburn 
raises. 
 
I’ve already talked about the quotations — her words, not mine 
— about privatization. There’s a clear, black and white 
delineation of where we stand here. 
 
But even the Saskatoon StarPhoenix in reviewing the platforms 
leading up to the election September of 1999, in answer to this 
example of the kind of medicare, says this about their position, 
about their position. It says, quote: 
 

For instance, (referring to the Sask Party) it has no plans to 
address concerns in health care. There is no prescription to 
cure the bed closures, surgical waiting lists, nursing 
shortages. All they will do is hire an ombudsman to whom 
people can complain. 

 
To which now the Leader of the Sask Party has added, the 
Texas style or Alabama North, Alabama South style audit of the 
savings in the health care system. 
 
Well that may be their approach, but it won’t help Ms. 
Lavalley’s or those kinds of cases. Publicly funded medicare is 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard several times now 
that the government intends to undertake a review of the health 
care system in this province. This is long overdue. 
 
But in the meantime, people all across this province are waiting 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

for medical tests. Tests which may mean the difference between 
life and death. While you are doing this review of the health 
care system, the system will continue to deteriorate. The 
waiting lists will continue to grow. 
 
There has to be action now — alternatives for people who 
cannot afford to wait and who cannot afford to travel out of 
province for testing. We are talking about people who might not 
get a second chance. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you going to do to provide adequate, 
accessible health care today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is stunning, stunning, 
how they can overlook their words. 
 
I have given to you on March 20, 2000 a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, the question was 
heard without . . . with little or no interruption. Kindly allow the 
answer to be heard similarly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying that it is 
breathtakingly stunning to me, it’s absolutely incomprehensible 
that as early as March 20, 2000, according to Broadcast News 
— not my report but Broadcast News — here’s what the Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party said. I repeat again, quote: 
“Hermanson says Ottawa should hold back . . . (money).” Hold 
back money. 
 
Now this member gets up and says, what are you going to do? 
Not to hold back money, but to add more money. What does her 
leader say? Her leader says to Ottawa, which has already cut 
back to 13 cents, cut back even more, don’t give them money. 
And she would have us believe that she cares for the sick and 
the elderly and those who are ill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely wrong and it’s shameful. Their 
stated position is to tell Ottawa to penalize Saskatchewan and 
all the provinces further. No way. We need Ottawa to get to the 
plate, start funding and start defending medicare. And that’s 
what the NDP is doing right now in Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accreditation of Pathology Program at University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago the general pathology program at 
the College of Medicine at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) came close to losing its accreditation. The Royal 
College of Physicians began looking into the program and it 
was hoped with their approval that the program would retain its 
accreditation. 
 
A decision from the Royal College was expected this month. 
But now we hear this decision has been put off until October. 
 

Mr. Minister, were you aware of this? And if so, why is this 
review taking so long? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s question 
has to do with the response from the University of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m sure that the members of the 
appropriate bodies of the University of Saskatchewan are doing 
everything that they can to respond, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they will . . . it will be responded to in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the crisis in health . . . 
that we have a crisis in health care in Saskatchewan. And 
maintaining top-quality education programs to train doctors, 
nurses, and specialists in this province is vital to the future of 
health care. Last week we heard about the shortage of 
radiologists and the trouble we have recruiting people in this 
area of expertise. And now the uncertainty continues with the 
pathology program. 
 
The government . . . this government should be doing 
everything it can to ensure the basics for training health care 
professionals to work in the health care system are in place. 
And that means ensuring excellent standards for post-secondary 
education in the College of Medicine. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is the pathology program at the College of 
Medicine in question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the real question here is what 
is the integrity of that question coming from that body over 
there. Mr. Speaker, in the last election let us remind ourselves 
the position of that group over there about both . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is not surprising that when 
you want to start talking about their record and their position 
that their response is volume without substance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that in the last election when they talked about health 
care, what do they talk about doing for health care? Nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. When they talked post-secondary education, Mr. 
Speaker, they sat on their tongues. What do they have to say 
about post-secondary education? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one side of this House that is committed to 
both health care and improving the training for health care; I 
refer specifically to the NEPS (Nursing Education Program of 
Saskatchewan) program, Mr. Speaker, and others. It is 
committed to health care and post-secondary education on this 
side, Mr. Speaker, but over there it is in volume nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Crime 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official opposition 
does hope that there are some political pathologists around 
because in a few years we’re going to need them to study the 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

remains of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Minister, Statistics Canada is reporting today that 
Saskatchewan has the second-highest youth court case rate in 
Canada. In fact Saskatchewan’s rate is almost twice the national 
average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan communities have been 
complaining for many years about high rates of youth crime, 
and when young offenders are apprehended, both police and 
residents complain that the courts do not handle youth crime 
and violence appropriately. 
 
To the Minister, Mr. Speaker, people expect their government 
to act. Why is it that Saskatchewan continues to struggle with 
high rates of youth crime and the second highest youth court 
case rates in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite had read 
the full report, he would have learned that in fact youth crime in 
Saskatchewan is reduced by 11 per cent over this period, which 
is, Mr. Speaker, three times, three times, Mr. Speaker, the 
national average. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said, youth crime in Saskatchewan is reduced by 11 per 
cent over this period, three times the national average, Mr. 
Speaker, and that applies also to Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me just compare what this government 
has done with what that party would have done if they had the 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over there, over there, Mr. Speaker, nothing for 
crime in the last election platform, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
quarter of a million dollars, Mr. Speaker, in community 
organizations for crime prevention. We have SHOCAP (serious 
and habitual youth offender comprehensive action program) 
money, Mr. Speaker. We have 25 more police officers, Mr. 
Speaker, to deal with crime. That’s compared, Mr. Speaker, to 
nothing on that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, only this NDP-Liberal coalition 
government could claim victory in being second to dead last in 
the entire country, Mr. Speaker, because that’s where we rate in 
terms of youth court cases. 
 
Mr. Minister, Statistics Canada information shows that what we 
are doing in Saskatchewan with regard to youth crime is not 
working. And after nine years in government it’s also clear that 
the NDP doesn’t have any of the answers. 
 
Later today the Saskatchewan Party will be introducing The 

Justice System Review Act. This legislation was a result and a 
complete review of Saskatchewan’s justice system to identify 
problems in the system and recommend solutions. The 
legislation would also require that complete reviews of the 
Justice system in our province take place every five years. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the NDP government support our legislation 
to review and fix the problems plaguing Saskatchewan’s justice 
system? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just remind 
the member opposite what this government has done to deal 
with crime in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite there say that this government has done nothing. They 
should look at themselves, Mr. Speaker, because it is they who 
said they would do nothing. 
 
We had, Mr. Speaker, $4.75 million for example, just in 
policing alone in this last year. We have, Mr. Speaker, 
continued crackdowns in the SHOCAP program which 
Saskatchewan people by three to one say is a great program. 
Mr. Speaker, we have serious crime units in Regina and 
Saskatoon. We have $350,000 for Aboriginal organizations to 
stop the cycle of family violence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the list goes on and on and on. But, Mr. Speaker, what 
would they have done. They would have done absolutely 
nothing, as their program shows. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 216 — The Justice System Review Act 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 216, 
The Justice System Review Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 74, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 
Act, 2000, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 75, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 
Act, 2000 (No. 2), be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day. Last 
Thursday the member for Prince Albert Carlton raised a point 
of order regarding certain comments made by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers during the second reading debate of Bill 
No. 1, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999. 
 
At the time the member for Saskatchewan Rivers was invited to 
clarify his comments. However, after reviewing the record, I 
wish to reiterate the tenor of my earlier statements. 
 
On several occasions during this debate, the allegation was 
made that Bill No. 1 would permit the government to seize farm 
property, revoke loan guarantees, and take other punitive action 
against individuals and organizations who might withdraw their 
support for the government or cancel their membership in the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
It is not the role of the Speaker to research the accuracy of what 
is spoken in debate. Rather it is up to the individual members to 
challenge the opinions of their colleagues through interventions 
of their own. 
 
Once again I remind you that members are responsible for the 
words that they choose to use. Their words may be enthusiastic, 
as the member for Saskatchewan Rivers noted last week. But 
that enthusiasm must be tempered by honest beliefs and an 
absence of insinuations and aspersions levelled against 
colleagues. 
 
Since the start of this legislature I’ve made several rulings in 
which I have reminded members of the practice of this 
Assembly and the rules governing debates. I call upon 
members, all hon. members, to put forward their views 
forcefully, but to do so in a manner in which the character and 
motives of their colleagues are not called into question. 
 
During the course of his comments, the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers alleged, on page 1347 of Hansard, that 
the government was using its budget to, I quote, “. . .steal back 
that money” that belonged to various farming groups. 
 
Then on page 1349, the allegation was made that students were 
being bribed to remain in Saskatchewan. These comments, hon. 
members, are unparliamentary and similar to those which I 
addressed in my statement on May 12. 
 
Even though they may have been directed at the government 
generally, individual members on the government side found 
them personally offensive. 
 
I would therefore ask the member for Saskatchewan Rivers to 
withdraw these comments and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I unequivocally withdraw the 
remarks that this government has stolen money from farmers, 
and that they have bribed the students. I’m sorry. 
 
The Speaker: — And withdraw those remarks and apologize. 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the hon. member. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we will table the questions . . . 
response to question 146. And with leave, 147 and 148 as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 146, 147, and 148 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Engineering and Geoscience Professions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of an Act to amend The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Act. This Act, Mr. Speaker, contains 
the first set of substantive amendments to The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Act that was passed in this Assembly in 
1996. Members may recall that the then minister of Highways 
and Transportation indicated that the 1996 legislation was phase 
1 in the process to update engineering legislation in this 
province. 
 
In 1996, the law was changed to update professions dealing 
with representation on the professional association’s governing 
council, discipline, and fine levels. In 1996, the minister 
indicated we had not updated the scope of practice that is the 
statutory provision describing the activity to be performed by 
members of a self-governing profession. 
 
We did not provide a new scope of practice in the 1996 Bill as 
we received many representations from groups concerned that 
any new scope of practice might unduly interfere in their ability 
to carry out their jobs. 
 
Since 1996 the government has overseen what we have referred 
to as phase 2 of the update to the legislation respecting 
professional engineers and the professional geoscientists in the 
province. The most affected group, The Association of 
Professional Engineers and Geoscientists, APEGS, has worked 
tirelessly with other stakeholders in trying to build a consensus 
on a new scope of practice. 
 
APEGS has conducted serious negotiations with representatives 
of the natural scientists, architects, land surveyors, 
technologists, computer scientists, and others. I am advised the 
discussions, from the most part, were very well . . . went very 
well, I should say, with these other groups. APEGS, the 
Saskatchewan association of science technologists and 
technicians, the Saskatchewan Association of Architects, and 
the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association are in general 
support of the legislation. 
 
Since 1996, the phase 2 discussions were affected by the 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

Assembly’s passage in 1997 of The Saskatchewan Applied 
Science Technologists and Technicians Act. That Act included 
a consequential amendment to The Engineering and Geoscience 
Professions Act. As a result of the representation from APEGS 
and architects and the land surveyors, the government deferred 
proclamation of the consequential amendment. 
 
The government wanted phase 2 discussions to continue. 
However the government must decide on the status of the 
consequential amendment. In the Bill before the House, 
members will note that there is a change in the section of the 
Act that outlines who is exempt from the legislation. 
 
We will retain the present exemptions for the architects, land 
surveyors, prospectors, community planners, agrologists, 
persons working on their own residence, and work on projects 
valued at less than $30,000. As well we will retain the general 
exemption for persons practising their profession, trade, or 
calling. 
 
(1430) 
 
To treat everyone consistently, we will be proclaiming the 1997 
consequential amendment respecting technologists who are 
governed by The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists 
and Technicians Act. 
 
I ask other professions to understand that the exemption is 
limited. Only technologists who are under The Saskatchewan 
Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act are 
exempted from The Engineering and Geoscience Professions 
Act. All other technologists in Saskatchewan will continue to be 
prohibited from doing anything that can be considered to be the 
practice of professional engineering. 
 
The amendment to section 28 of the EGPA (The Engineering 
and Geoscience Professions Act) clarifies that the exemptions 
continue to apply to all people as long as they don’t practise 
professional or professional geoscience. 
 
This amendment reflects the hard work of the Association of 
Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. And 
in June 1999, department officials received an indication of 
general consensus with affected groups. The consensus was to 
use, as a new scope of practice, a provision first passed in 
Manitoba in 1998. This new provision reflects an understanding 
resulting from discussions at the national level between 
engineers, natural scientists, and other affected stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present Bill incorporates a definition of 
practice of professional engineering that is much more in 
keeping with the modern world of work than the existing 
definition. The new definition removes what had been a lengthy 
list of works or processes. 
 
I am confident that as users of the new definition become 
accustomed to using it, there will be a wide degree of 
acceptance. The present Bill will also make one other relatively 
minor amendment to the Act. 
 
To comply with provisions in the agreement on internal trade, 
the Bill provides APEGS with the authority to register as full 
members, people who are members of comparable associations 

in other provinces. And as usual, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly 
be pleased to answer any questions during the committee stage. 
 
I therefore move second reading of The Engineering and 
Geoscience Professions Amendment Act, 2000. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to rise to enter the debate on the second reading of 
the Bill introduced by the minister this afternoon, on The 
Engineering and Geoscience Professions Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined in his comments, this Bill 
is a continuation of work that was initiated by a review of the 
legislation leading up to proposed amendments in 1996 that was 
indicated as phase 1. And certainly we on the official opposition 
side very much support the concept of making periodic reviews 
of professional associations’ enabling legislation so that the 
associations and all the professions remain in a current position 
in regard to an ever changing world of regulation and 
competition and adaptation in the marketplace and in the world. 
 
And certainly a group of people as important to the building, 
literally, of this province as this association, it’s very important 
to have their legislation reviewed from time to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we have been encouraged over the last few 
years by the fact that the department has indeed conducted itself 
in a way of negotiation and dialogue with the affected agencies 
and groups within the professional engineers and geoscience 
professions, because it’s important that it tries very much to 
bring all of them under the scope of practice and the 
professional conduct that’s required to operate a professional 
association in an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, as is our practice, our opposition caucus 
makes an attempt once legislation is being introduced in the 
House, to consult as widely as we can with the affected people 
that we can identify to see if indeed this legislation has been the 
result of negotiation, the result of discussion, and is being 
supported by the people that it’s going to have a major impact 
on. 
 
And as you can appreciate in this instance, because there are a 
number of groups, as the minister indicated, some of which are 
being exempted and others of which are coming under current 
regulations compatible with other jurisdictions in the country, 
we certainly require some time for these individuals to 
communicate with us their responses and their concerns, if there 
are any, about the proposed legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to let that work continue, I would 
like to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Summary Offences 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The summary offences legislation prescribes the procedure for 
administering the charging of offences created by provincial 
legislation. It also prescribes the court’s powers and duties 
respecting provincial offences and the enforcement of fines 
resulting from conviction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pursuant to this legislation approximately 130,000 
tickets are issued each year for contravention of provincial 
regulatory statutes. Most of these tickets are for offences 
relating to driving. However, a broad range of activities are 
regulated and can lead to offences. Some examples are the sale 
and use of alcohol, fishing and hunting, the use of provincial 
parks facilities, corporate behaviour regulated by The Securities 
Act, 1988, and the safety of the environment. 
 
The legislation is used on a daily basis by peace officers, court 
staff, judges, and municipalities. It’s changed periodically to 
respond to requests for additional clarity or to deal with new 
issues that have arisen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important proposed amendments 
will specifically authorize non-renewal of driver’s licences of 
people who have outstanding fines for Criminal Code driving 
offences. This amendment will provide a significant incentive 
for people to pay their Criminal Code driving fines. 
 
Another amendment will provide that summary offence tickets 
are not court records for the purposes of The Archives Act. That 
Act requires that court records not be transferred or destroyed 
for 25 years. And during the past 25 years the average number 
of tickets issued has been as high as 200,000 in some years, and 
as a result, storage of tickets has become a problem at court 
houses as space is limited. 
 
Court staff around the province spend days every year packing 
boxes of tickets to be sent off to off-site storage. And SGI, Mr. 
Speaker, have retained conviction information on traffic 
offences for five years. Ticket information has also been 
maintained by microfiche, and since 1975, electronically. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this information will continue to be kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important amendment will facilitate the 
use of red light cameras to obtain evidence of the offence of a 
failure to stop at a red light. As all members will know, many 
unnecessary and sometimes tragic motor vehicle accidents 
occur at intersections because motorists fail to stop at red lights. 
 
A pilot project by the Regina Police Service has provided ample 
evidence of the frequency of this dangerous offence. Currently 
all tickets must be personally served. In all but exceptional 
cases, on-the-spot service occurs. If red light cameras are to be 
used, the photo obtained will show the vehicle’s licence plate 
and the vehicle owner is charged with the offence. In these 
circumstances the requirement to find and personally serve the 
owner discourages the police from using this method of 
enforcing life-saving traffic rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new provision will allow regulations to be 
made providing for service by mail of tickets resulting from red 
light camera information. 
 

Another amendment to the Act will adopt the appropriate 
Criminal Code search and seizure provisions. Many 
Saskatchewan statutes have special search and seizure 
provisions. However, there are some statutes with offence 
provisions that do not authorize searches such as The Passenger 
and Freight Elevator Act. As well, some statutes have 
insufficient search and seizure provisions. An amendment will 
fill the gaps that currently exist in this area. 
 
The common law permits a search and seizure in these cases. 
However, Mr. Speaker, clear legislative authority is preferable 
to having to make this argument in court to allow evidence of 
an offence to be accepted by the court. Manitoba is the only 
other province that doesn’t include provision for search and 
seizure in its provincial offences procedural legislation, and that 
province is currently considering this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 and to make a 
consequential amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to rise and enter in the debate about the second reading 
about the legislation that was introduced by the minister, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, there are quite a 
comprehensive number of issues that are being dealt with in 
terms of an update of this provincial legislation. And certainly I 
am pleased to . . . it’s interesting to hear that the weight load of 
provincial tickets is something in the magnitude of 130,000 per 
year and can be as high, I believe the minister said, as 200,000 a 
year. And so it makes a very onerous task of accumulating and 
storing up to potentially 800 to some thousand records in the 
court system. 
 
And I’m pleased to inform the Assembly that I’ve contributed 
very little to that bulk of ticket weight that is weighing down 
the system. I am reminded by some of my colleagues that they 
say they wish they could say the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems as if, from the minister’s comments, that 
most of these issues are very commonsensical issues that simply 
make sense. 
 
In terms of the issue of forcing compliance about outstanding 
tickets and things of that nature, as I understand it from the 
minister’s comments, that the potential of having your licence, 
your driver’s license suspended is going to be linked in some 
way to outstanding tickets. 
 
I would imagine that there is some discretion or some 
reasonable safety factor built into that, that if some person is 
delinquent in some short period of time on a ticket, that surely 
that would not be enough reason to have a major suspension of 
a driver’s license. 
 
And of course for many people the issue of a driver’s license is 
not a luxury — it’s a very important necessity. And I would 
hope that the legislation does have some provisions for 
discretion in that regard. 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

As well the minister indicated that the legislation also makes it 
possible to expedite the serving of tickets that would be a result 
of red light violations that are caught by means of cameras. 
Instead of having the system requiring a personal serving of a 
notice or a ticket, that that ticket could be served in the mail. 
 
And I certainly want to share the minister’s concern about the 
issue of people running red lights, amber lights, and red lights 
in the city and right across this province. It seems that there is 
almost on a monthly basis a headline in the newspapers that 
show that there is a very serious collision on an intersection 
because people indeed are running red lights. And so I think 
that if this whole process is a reasonable step in order to 
minimize those violations, I think it has important benefits that 
are worthy of consideration. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated that there were 
some changes to the search and seizure provisions of the 
legislation in order to make this more feasible and more 
compliant with the realities of law enforcement in today’s 
world, and that Saskatchewan is certainly one of the provinces 
considering it, as well as Manitoba who is considering it as 
well, and one of the last, as I understood the minister to say, to 
update the search and seizure provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I must say that on first blush this legislation 
seems to indeed make very logical common sense. We certainly 
are in the process of communicating with people in the legal 
profession and law enforcement about their perception on this 
legislation. We look forward to their reply and will then be in a 
position to be more specific and more detailed in terms of our 
comments on this legislation. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December of 1997, the steering committee on 
the abuse of adults in vulnerable circumstances, a group made 
up of representatives of community agencies and provincial 
government departments, presented its report and 
recommendations to the ministers of Justice, Health, Social 
Services, Labour, and Municipal Government. The 
recommendations of the committee followed extensive 
community consultations respecting the abuse of adults in 
vulnerable circumstances. 
 
(1445) 
 
In response to that report, this government introduced 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Evidence Act in 1998, aimed 
at facilitating the participation of vulnerable adults in the justice 
system. 
 
The steering committee also made a number of 

recommendations respecting adult guardianship. And in 
response to these recommendations, a legislation working 
committee was formed in May of 1998. The mandate of this 
committee is to produce draft legislation in the area of 
vulnerable adults and guardianship. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the legislation working committee has completed stage one of 
its work. 
 
I’d like to extend my gratitude to the many hard-working 
community agencies represented on this committee. We 
appreciate their helpful comments and suggestions on ways to 
further protect vulnerable adults. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the legislation working committee has 
recommended that The Dependent Adults Act be replaced by 
The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. This Act 
includes provisions for the appointment of a personal or 
property co-decision-maker for an adult who requires assistance 
in decision making but does not need full guardianship services. 
 
In situations where a guardian is needed, the Act continues to 
provide for the appointment of a personal or property guardian. 
The Act respects the autonomy of adults by recognizing their 
rights to receive the least restrictive intervention possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act also includes provision for the 
appointment of temporary personal or property guardians in 
emergency situations. These persons will protect the adult or his 
or her assets until a guardianship application could be made 
under the Act. To protect against financial abuse, the Act 
requires that co-decision-makers and guardians provide annual 
accountings to the public trustees. 
 
The Act also includes procedural protections for vulnerable 
adults who may be the subject of applications under the Act. 
For example, the Act ensures that all interested persons are 
served with an application for the appointment of a 
decision-maker or guardian. And it provides that a statement of 
objection may be filed by interested persons who disagree with 
the application. It provides that the public trustee review all 
applications for orders under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I’d like to thank the legislation working 
committee and congratulate them for a job well done. 
 
I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act respecting Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s with pleasure that I rise to respond to the 
minister’s initiation of second reading debate on The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this Act is really at the essence of what we as 
legislators and as a society should be all about. 
 
Someone has said that a mark of true leadership and true 
legislative process is given by how much and how well we do 
legislation that looks after the most vulnerable and the weakest 
people in our society. And I think that by reviewing legislation 
in regard to vulnerable adults, that this is a very noble and 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

worthwhile effort that is being made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do believe that a review has been appropriate 
and there has been some changes. As our society and any 
society begins to understand more and more about the needs of 
vulnerable adults, we need to understand that not all vulnerable 
adults require the same level of support — where either they’re 
totally able to operate independent, as independent adults 
completely responsible for all decisions; or completely under 
the jurisdiction of a guardianship process; that indeed as the 
minister outlined that there are cases where there is some level 
of co-decision-making that a vulnerable adult may need. 
 
And that this legislation foresees the possibility of providing 
that in an appropriate way, and we think that there is certainly 
merit in that regard. Mr. Speaker, as well I think that there has 
to be a review and appropriate legislation to make sure that 
where it is appropriate that the provincial jurisdiction — the 
state itself — has an appropriate relationship with vulnerable 
adults that are in need of support in a way that’s in their best 
interest. And we always have to keep that in mind. 
 
It’s an important issue. It’s a very sensitive issue. And we 
certainly have further work to do in terms of communicating 
with people who have worked very hard, as the minister 
indicated, in bringing these recommendations together. And we 
certainly look forward to finalizing some of the information 
communications that we’ve been having. And in order to let 
that happen I would move that we now adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my 
comments, I’ll be moving the second reading of The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Saskatchewan contains some of the most diverse and unique 
ecosystems in the world. Our lush prairie grasslands, productive 
wetlands, productive . . . (inaudible) . . . park lands, and 
wilderness forests and lakes in the North are renowned for their 
beauty and abundance of wildlife. 
 
Like most parts of the world, human impact has resulted in 
significant changes to our natural landscape. Consequently 
many species of mammals, birds, plants, and insects have 
declined in numbers. The presence of animals and plants in 
their natural habitat add to our appreciation and enjoyment of 
this great province. 
 
How well we sustain native species indicates how well we are 
managing the province’s ecosystems. Soil, air and water 
quality, habitat biological diversity, and human activities are all 
interrelated. When species decline or are at risk, it likely means 
that the rest of the ecosystem, including ourselves, are also at 
risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s wildlife resource is shared by the 
people of Saskatchewan. In order that citizens of this province 
may obtain maximum benefit from, and at the same time protect 
this valuable resource, we have legislation and regulations 

under The Wildlife Act. 
 
This Act provides provincial authority and control over the 
province’s wildlife resources. In 1997 Saskatchewan 
proclaimed new endangered species legislation to protect 
species at risk provincially. And last year, we passed 
regulations to protect an initial 15 species. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I will highlight the major features of this 
amendment to The Wildlife Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will align legislation to protect species at 
risk with the requirements of the National Accord for the 
Protection of Species at Risk in Canada. Saskatchewan is 
committed to the principles of the accord which was signed 
with the federal government in 1996. And this shows that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is committed to meeting its 
responsibilities in endangered species protection. 
 
The proposed amendments will remove vulnerable species from 
the designated species category. This will allow for the 
continued comprehensive protection of threatened, endangered, 
and extirpated species. 
 
At the same time the amendments will allow SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) to 
establish management plans for some species that are sensitive 
to human activities but don’t require the protection levels 
established for threatened, endangered, and extirpated species. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment being debated in the legislature 
today also deals with two new enforcement provisions under the 
Act which will improve wildlife offence enforcement 
provisions in wildlife, trafficking, and vehicle seizure areas. 
 
This amendment will enable the department to prosecute for 
possession of wildlife for the purpose of trafficking without 
having to wait until the trafficking offence has actually 
occurred. This is similar to drug enforcement legislation as well 
as wildlife legislation in other jurisdictions. 
 
This amendment allows for the forfeiture of designated wildlife 
species upon conviction of offences under the Act. This 
provision also clarifies that boats are included within the 
existing provision which accommodates forfeiture of vehicles in 
certain named offences. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment deals with 
administrative housekeeping. This amendment removes all 
references to big game damage fund licence and to the fund 
itself. The fund was discontinued in 1998 when the federal and 
provincial governments provided full funding of the big game 
damage compensation program. 
 
The proposed wildlife Act amendments better reflect the value 
the province places on its wildlife and all the resources in the 
forest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, conservation is a high priority with Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, and we are amending 
this legislation to recognize the value of our natural resources 
and to enable adequate protection of these resources — our 
wildlife resources. They are one of the greatest natural assets of 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

this province and we need to work together to ensure that they 
are managed in a sustainable fashion. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to protection 
and responsible management of wildlife population and public 
access to wildlife resources. The Act recognizes the importance 
of a strong partnership between provincial and local 
governments, First Nations, and stakeholders in working 
together to manage our wildlife resource. 
 
The Act will ensure Saskatchewan’s unique and valuable 
wildlife resource will be managed and protected for the people 
of Saskatchewan today and tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker it’s with pleasure that I would make comment 
on the Bill introduced by the minister in second reading, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time of year when everything in 
nature seems to be budding forth, it’s a time for all of us in this 
province to I think appreciate the beauty of our ecosystems and 
all of the diverse wildlife and the many things that are going on 
in our province. 
 
If you take a stroll around these grounds you watch the Canada 
geese doing their nesting procedures and it’s always an 
amazement to me every spring. When you look at daycare, I 
think the Canada geese outside of the legislature have indeed 
brought that to a new science in terms of daycare; because you 
see three or four of the adult geese and they’ve got 50 or so of 
the little guys — all different sizes — and seem to be doing a 
good job while everybody else is sort of out there visiting and 
complaining about the sorry state of affairs in this province like 
everyone else is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was interesting to listen to the minister 
talk about the importance of sustaining native species in this 
province. And I think that it goes without saying that that is 
really important. 
 
However, I think that there also is a caution because many 
times we hear across the province where the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management, when they get too 
much authority and control, tend to exercise it in a little bit of a 
heavy-handed method. And I certainly would like to serve 
notice that we do have those concerns; that balance always has 
to be maintained between the need of having the appropriate 
legislative authority in order to do the job that everyone agrees 
is important and becoming an entity onto itself where you make 
arbitrary decisions that have no basis in reality or, more 
importantly, in common sense. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is very little argument ever when 
there is clearly identified species that are at risk in terms of the 
environment, or in terms of maintaining those populations into 

the future; that it is important that all of us do our part in order 
to mitigate the damage that is created about some of these 
species. 
 
However, I think we also have to recognize that there are 
practical limitations that have to happen, and it also is a 
dangerous process when you start meddling with the natural 
cycles of life. And too often many well-intentioned 
interventions have resulted not only in the defence of a certain 
species, but in the creation of an imbalance that has actually 
resulted in a great deal of damage being done to other species, 
even though initially it was the intent of the people to do the 
right thing. And so it’s always important in these issues to make 
sure that common sense and balance is arrived at in terms of 
deciding appropriate actions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well I think it is important to note that 
this legislation also provides for a more appropriate vehicle to 
dealing with people in regard to trafficking of wildlife species. 
And I think the minister does make a valid point about saying 
that there has to be updated enforcement tools so that people 
who are seriously violating not only the spirit but the intent of 
any legislation, and are actually doing a great disservice to the 
wildlife by trafficking in endangered species for whatever 
personal gain they may arrive at, I think it’s important that the 
department has the appropriate tools in order to deal with those 
issues. 
 
And finally, the minister mentions that there are some 
administrative matters that are to be cleaned up as a result of the 
big game damage fund being taken over and it’s no longer 
appropriate to have this type of thing in current legislation. And 
certainly we have no objection to that. 
 
At this time of year . . . (inaudible) . . . it seems that a great many 
people want to comment about issues surrounding . . . the whole 
issue surrounding the environment and wildlife and we 
certainly welcome those comments and look forward to hearing 
more of them. 
 
And so in the meantime, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in order to allow this to happen, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Wildlife Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my 
comments I will be moving the second reading of The Wildlife 
Act Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to the bilingual wildlife Act 1998 are 
being made by a bilingual amendment Bill — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2000 — and these amendments include 
further amendments to the unilingual fisheries Act, 1994. 
 
Because The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000 proposes 
amendments mainly to the wild species at risk provisions, 
consequential amendments are required to the existing sections 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

which afford wild fish species at risk the protection of 
designated species. 
 
In 1997 Saskatchewan proclaimed new endangered species 
legislation to protect species at risk provincially. Mr. Speaker, 
this Act is a consequential change to The Fisheries Act, 
(Saskatchewan) 1994. Mr. Speaker, conservation is a high 
priority with Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management and our wildlife resources are one of the greatest 
natural assets of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this legislation Bill No. 53, The Wildlife Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 is very much similar to 
the previous legislation in terms of its general intent and scope 
of bringing the wildlife legislation into a more current position 
with the view of conserving particularly fishery species, as the 
minister outlined, arising out of amendments to the 1994 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the comments that I made on the previous 
legislation in principle apply to this one as well. We certainly 
look forward to comments from people, stakeholders, and 
people affected. So at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again after 
my comments, I’ll be moving the second reading of The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000. The Forest 
Resources Management Act now just one year old has fulfilled 
its purpose to bring our forest legislation into the 21st century 
by providing an administrative framework to support a new way 
of managing our forest ecosystem. 
 
The Act ensures that our forest resources are managed in a way 
that is in the best interests for the people of Saskatchewan. The 
amendments being debated in the legislature today improve the 
ability of the government to act to protect the province’s 
interests in two specific situations. 
 
Number one is an important role for government in the 
management of our forests in its ability to determine who has 
authorization to harvest forest products and how much by 
granting licences to various types. Right now, the Act gives the 
government the authority to decide to whom licences are issued 
and to review the potential impacts when these licences are 
transferred directly. 
 
The proposed amendment strengthens this ability by ensuring 
that the province continues to have a say in who owns and 
controls forest licences no matter how a change is brought 
about, whether resulting from corporate mergers, 
amalgamations, or the purchase of controlling interest in 
licence-holding companies. The amendments ensure that the 
minister has the final consent on changes which may affect the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 

In reference to the second amendment in wild rice, there are 
about 200 active wild rice producers in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan has become the dominant region in Canada for 
wild rice production and accounts for an average of 63 per cent 
of Canada’s production. In 1999, Saskatchewan grew 5.8 
million pounds of wild rice worth $4 million going directly to 
producers. 
 
From an economic development perspective, the wild rice 
industry has been a great success for northern Saskatchewan. 
Permit and licence fees were set low to encourage maximum 
participation by northern residents. In spite of the low fees there 
are wild rice producers who are harvesting wild rice while they 
are in arrears on their fee payment and who do not hold a permit 
or licence to harvest. 
 
The current legislation does not provide government with the 
authority to manage and dispose of wild rice crops in these 
circumstances. This is extremely unfair to wild rice producers 
who pay their fees. 
 
The Wild Rice Council has urged the government to address 
this inequity, and the proposed amendments to The Forest 
Resources Management Act seeks to do just that. The 
amendment will allow Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management to better enforce wild rice licences and 
would ensure that all growers are treated fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two amendments that I talked about today will 
enhance the ability of the government to protect and manage the 
province’s important forest resources for the benefit of all of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure that I join in the debate for the 
moving of the second reading of The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the whole initiative that the 
government seems to announce and reannounce in regard to the 
forestry initiatives is certainly something that is very important 
to many people in this province. And at the very heart of many 
of the discussions and debates that occur, is the issue of the 
forest licences and transfer of those licences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know in my constituency, which certainly 
borders the forest area, I have a good number of people who 
come to my constituency on occasion and raise concerns about 
how the licences are held, are people actually exercising those 
licences, and are there opportunities for new people in the 
industry to acquire some licence in order to get some timber in 
order to maintain industries and businesses that they have 
established. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while it’s important to look after the major players 
and the major industry components in the forestry sector, I think 
people have to understand that there are very many small 
operators who operate small saw mills, who have planing mills, 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

and who actually have taken it a step further in terms of 
providing value-added construction within those areas. 
 
And I can think of companies that do things as major contracts 
for freight pallet construction, for specified mouldings and 
things of that nature, and finish work of carpenters and finger 
joint work, and those kinds of things. And many of those people 
require — all of them in fact require an adequate supply of raw 
material in order to carry on their businesses. And I think the 
whole issue of the forest licence issue speaks to that in a very 
important way. 
 
And I trust that the amendments that the minister is proposing 
will address some of those issues in light of the fact we 
recognize that major players are important to the development 
of proper harvesting of our forest. But there also has to be a 
place for the small, independent operators to have an adequate 
resource or access to the resource so they also can grow their 
family businesses in many instances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, I think it is important that there has to 
be proper balance put into the whole forestry management 
process so that we are not exercising in an irresponsible way so 
that we are depleting our forest resource without an appropriate 
level of reforestation. Because I think everyone recognizes in 
principle that it’s important to replenish the harvesting that goes 
on. And sometimes I get a little nervous about the numbers — 
that we aren’t doing an adequate job of that in order to 
safeguard our industry into the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also is important, I think, to look at 
another industry which I frankly was quite surprised to see 
under The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 
2000, and that’s the industry of the development of the wild rice 
industry in this province. 
 
And certainly, you know, I think Saskatchewan is recognized 
not only in this country but around the world for the quality of 
the wild rice that is supplied. And as the eating habits and the 
sophistication of people’s eating habits are changing over the 
years, I think that there is a tremendous opportunity for growth 
potential in this important area. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, both of these issues are very 
important issues wrapped under the proposed legislation of The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000. And we 
certainly look forward to our discussions ongoing with 
stakeholders and industry people. And in order to facilitate 
those discussions I would move that we now adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 6 — The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 
afternoon to rise to speak about Bill No. 6, An Act to amend the 
Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 
 
And just a quick comment, Mr. Speaker. It is not because that I 
have any desire for brutal punishment, but I enjoy speaking in 
the House. And I certainly am going to enjoy speaking about 
this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it certainly is important that we take care of those 
who cannot take care of themselves. After all we’re talking 
about some of society’s most vulnerable people. At the same 
time we must recognize and respect the rights of individuals, 
Mr. Speaker, no matter who that person is. 
 
It is interesting to note that if someone has been declared 
incompetent by either a psychiatrist or a judge, or on the other 
side of the coin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, someone who has been 
declared competent by either a psychiatrist or judge under the 
proposed amendments, that decision is not considered binding. 
 
And why not, Mr. Deputy Speaker? How high up the judicial 
ladder do we have to go? We see no need to keep pressing the 
issue. Somewhere along the line we’ve got to allow our judges, 
Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to make a decision without having 
to worry all the time about whether their decision is going to be 
upheld or whether they’re going to be overturned. 
 
After all, in many court cases, the decision of a judge is 
considered binding, Mr. Speaker. And so why not in the case of 
those who are judged to be mentally disordered and need 
protection of someone or have been declared to be competent 
again, why can the process not be stopped there? 
 
Under this proposed legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to amend 
this Act, the decision that is rendered can be appealed to the 
Court of Queen’s Bench either by a psychiatrist, a family 
member, or another individual who may be involved. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this must be very worrisome for someone 
who has gone through the process, the court process, has been 
declared incompetent and required a trustee, and then declared 
competent and then knowing that the decision is not binding . . . 
is binding and all of a sudden has to spend the next few days 
and months worrying about who is going to appeal the decision. 
And especially, Mr. Speaker, it should be considered very 
worrisome that any individual who is involved can appeal this 
decision. In fact, it seems that anyone can appeal any decision 
just because he or she doesn’t agree with it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now somewhere along the line we’re going 
to have to allow judges the opportunity to make a decision and 
all of us having to accept that. And for any individual to just 
step forward and say, oh no, I don’t agree with that, Mr. 
Speaker, is very worrisome indeed. 
 
(1515) 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we need to worry about in this case, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if financial fraud is being committed, then 
that person has the opportunity to actually prolong the case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re worrying about the rights of 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

individuals, here we have an Act being brought forth that is 
actually going to restrict the rights of those who have been first 
declared incompetent . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Simply by 
appealing the case, this throws things to the next level where a 
medical or a psychiatric exam, or both, can be ordered. The . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I invite members that wish to 
engage in a private conversation to do so outside of the 
Chambers. For the moment, the hon. member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers has the floor. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He or she 
really does not have a choice in the matter. Again, are their 
rights being recognized or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are they even 
being respected? After all, if someone has been declared 
competent, then are we still recognizing that, are they 
incompetent yet? Well somewhere along the line, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re going to have to accept that a judge has made a 
decision, and where people in society, and certainly those 
whose rights are in question, need to be recognized that they are 
competent. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t end there. 
Based upon the decision of a Court of Queen’s Bench, 
competency or incompetency can or will be declared, and if 
someone doesn’t agree with that decision it can be appealed to 
the Court of Appeal. Mr. Deputy Speaker, how far can these 
cases carry on? And who really loses and who really wins in 
these situations? 
 
We can tell you: the loser is the individual, the family who is 
trying to have someone declared competent, and society who is 
paying the bills for someone who’s been declared incompetent. 
The winner is someone who is trying to tie up the court system 
and may be, Mr. Speaker, in a worrisome case, may be under 
investigation for fraud in these cases. 
 
What happens during this time when all the appeals and exams 
are going on? Who’s taking care of things? And really, if 
financial fraud is being committed, then does this give the 
perpetrators extra time to basically continue what they’ve been 
doing? 
 
This is very worrisome, Mr. Deputy Speaker. After all, we need 
to be worried as society and as members of this House about 
those people that we represent and those people that we also 
represent have been declared competent by . . . we want to be 
very careful. 
 
Be sure of this, Mr. Speaker, they have been declared 
competent by a very competent judge and, all of a sudden, the 
appeal case starts and it starts to be dragged out and dragged out 
and dragged out. While we acknowledge that there may be 
cases of financial abuse going on, we’re wondering about the 
true extent of this type of abuse. How widespread is it? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, is there real abuse or is there just some 
abuse cases? Now we know that the odd abuse case does take 
place. But in these cases where, when we’re going into one 

appeal after another just so that we can protect the rights of 
those who may be — and I use the term judiciously — may be 
perpetuating the abuse, then is that serving the rights of the 
individual and the rights of society to any great extent? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to know how much 
evidence there is that this is prevalent in this province. It seems 
that expediency is a major concern with everything these days, 
but with the amendments set forth in this Bill, the ability to 
continue appealing a decision on an individual’s competency 
will drag these cases on for months, perhaps even years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, is this necessary? Does it respect the rights of the 
individual? And more importantly, if financial abuse is taking 
place, won’t it just continue? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have no way of finding out 
because as long as someone who had been declared competent 
by the courts at one level, and the decision is being appealed at 
another level, we have no real avenue to find out. And it doesn’t 
really stop the abuse until we stop the appellate decision 
making. 
 
Are there are contingencies in place that would address 
financial abuse if there were multiple appeals. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we don’t see that in this Bill. Who should have the 
authority to run someone’s financial affairs if there is suspected 
financial abuse? 
 
And these issues need to be addressed in this Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Certainly it should not be the person suspected of 
doing the financial abuse. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
someone is declared competent by a judge at the original level, 
then if there is an appeal, maybe what this government should 
be looking at having in Bills such as this amendment Act, is the 
right for a judge to be able to appoint a trustee to replace in that 
situation. 
 
And given the current state of our health care system, how easy 
will it be to get medical or a psychiatric exam. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve heard it several times in this House, and it was 
addressed at length again today in question period, about the 
long waiting lists — sometimes as much as 18 months in certain 
situations. Well if we’re going to have a medical or a 
psychiatric exam, or sometimes both, then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is it going to be that someone who has first been 
declared competent, have that decision appealed, and then 
having to go through the degrading continuance of a medical or 
psychiatric exam, or both, then how long is this going to drag 
on? Will someone have to wait for the exam weeks, months or 
years, even, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what if the individual, and his or her family, has to travel 
for all these court appeals, medical examinations, psychiatric 
examinations? They’ll have to stay somewhere; they have to eat 
in restaurants. Who’s going to cover these expenses, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re often covered 
by the family or by the individual in question. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that will put great financial hardships upon the family 
and the individual. 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

And of course, we’re talking about the appeals. We’ve talked 
about repeated . . . we have to talk about repeated court 
appearances. This means the cost of handling one particular 
case that could be quite large, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is in itself a government-imposed form of financial abuse 
because now we’re dealing with taxpayer dollars. The taxpayer, 
financially strapped already in this province to the point of no 
return over the past decade, wants the government to be prudent 
in its financial affairs. Should these cases drag on for months, 
there’s a very good chance that we would see large amounts of 
money being spent to cover off appeal hearings and court costs. 
These cases also add to an already overburdened court system. 
 
Now we already realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government wanted to look at closing some court houses in this 
province, and when they examined the issue for the first time, 
after they made the decision to close the court houses, they 
realized that the burden on the court system in this province 
would not be able to handle the closure of those court houses. 
So instead we’re bringing a Bill forward, that we’re debating 
again today, that looks at burdening our court system even 
further. 
 
So how is this government going to be able to talk about closing 
court houses in the future and then bring even more 
burdensome court cases forward to be looked at by the court 
system? 
 
We have no reason to believe that these appeals will be treated 
any differently; therefore we can only assume that it would take 
a considerable amount of time before a person’s competency 
hearing could be heard before a court. 
 
Consulted in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were a chief 
psychiatrist, official representatives, and Chairs of the review 
panels from all eight mental health regions. Regional directors 
for mental health were also consulted. This group basically 
covers off the psychiatric and the liability and immunity clause 
of the Bill, but we’re wondering about the legal aspects of this 
Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Was the law society consulted? And we’ll need to find that out 
when we get into committee eventually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
How much of their input was actually sought? 
 
There’s no doubt that the law society would be able to provide 
much input and would be able to offer suggestions as to how 
efficient this Bill will really be. They are the ones who know 
the court system inside and out. They would know how best to 
handle these types of cases and would be able to speak, at 
length, of the time these cases would potentially take. 
 
More importantly, this group would be able to speak at length 
about the cost to the individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and their 
families. They would also be able to speak on the toll a court 
case takes on everyone’s mental, physical, and financial health. 
 
We also wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if people who have gone 
through this type of situation were consulted. Who was talked 
to. Somehow we don’t think that those people who have been 
through the system, have been declared competent, have been 
ever talked to as to about how it would react to them when such 

a Bill would be brought forth that their judgments could be 
appealed and dragged on even further so that they would remain 
inside a system that is already overburdened. 
 
It’s as if, with so many of these similar situations, it is a policy 
of this government to push ahead with things without really 
considering who will be most affected and what the 
implications will be. 
 
We doubt that the families of the individuals who have gone 
through . . . who are asked for their input — this group would 
have some interesting points of reference I’m sure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Their suggestions and ideas should have been 
welcomed. After all it is the people that these Bills will be 
affecting the most, and it is the people that we represent that we 
should be talking to. 
 
This Bill does not recognize or respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the rights of the individual, nor does it ensure that the judicial 
system will recognize or respect those rights. With this Bill we 
see two things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One is that a group of 
people have made sure that they will be protected from liability 
and immunity — a typical NDP cover-up amendment. We’ve 
seen this done many times before. 
 
The second thing that we see with this Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, gives someone the opportunity to drag another person 
through court for who knows how long — a person who already 
has enough problems of their own. If there is a financial abuse 
occurring, then this will simply prolong it and in fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will even encourage it. 
 
This Bill does not recognize what all legislation of this nature 
would do, and that’s protect and ultimately respect the rights of 
the individual. And given that, we’re going to have a great deal 
of trouble trying to support this Bill. And I’d ask at this time, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 7 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to add a few comments if I could regarding this particular 
. . . the amendment to this Act. 
 
One of the things that I was . . . I noticed in here was in fact that 
there was some housekeeping items, some cleaning up in terms 
of the vocabulary and an explanation and trying to get it in line 
with what is acceptable for both the students that are involved 
in this and also the institutions that will be using this legislation 
for finances. And I have to commend the minister for trying to 
make those amendments fit in with the reality of the world as 
we know it this year. 
 
Now I think the ability to support students and put student-aid 
funding in place is very critical. I’m very concerned that the 
students that we have in this province have the opportunity to 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

continue to remain in this province after they’ve had their 
training and have gone through both the university and 
post-secondary training, whatever their choice may be. 
 
I think it’s not only critical for this province, it’s critical for our 
economy. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the critic for Economic 
Development I see education as a very integral part of economic 
development in this province; one of the tools that we should be 
using, encouraging, and making sure that the opportunities are 
there for these people as they conclude their training, both 
post-secondary, university, or job training. 
 
(1530) 
 
I guess the concern that I have though, I think, is to make sure 
that in order to retain these people that we’ve spent a great deal 
of time and money in educating, that we give them the 
opportunity to remain here. And I guess that’s where I have 
some concern with not only the amendments that were put 
forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but also the intent behind some 
of the education philosophy that I’ve witnessed over this last 
little while. 
 
I noticed that, when it comes to financing of education 
generally and our post-secondary education specifically, I 
noticed that even though there was a great commitment from 
this particular government that programs in fact have been 
cancelled, for summer employment for instance, to allow these 
students to repay some of the loans that they have incurred 
during this time of their training. 
 
I think that’s very unfortunate, not only for the students because 
those programs are important not only to the students but also to 
the employers. It gives the employers an opportunity to, with a 
little assistance, be able to offer . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
thank the member from Lloydminster for allowing . . . granting 
leave. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through 
you to the other members of the Assembly, a group of Cubs that 
come from my hometown of Cupar. They are seated in the east 
gallery. They’re the First Cupar Cub Pack, led by their leader, Ms. 
Betty Smith, more commonly known as Akela. 
 
She’s been doing that . . . doing this type of job for many, many 
years. I don’t think it’s a job; I think it’s a labour of love. And she 
has today with her a number of chaperones helping with the young 
Cubs. They are her husband John L. Smith, Sandra Meyers, 
Sharon Flaman, Albert Micklik, and Suzzane Chernick, and Helen 
Kovach. And I’d ask the members to welcome them. Thank you. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Amendment Act, 1999 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wanted to 
continue discussing the problem of the cancelled summer 
employment program because I think, as I was mentioning, it’s 
very critical. Both the students that have acquired a great deal of 
debt during their training, to be able to find employment readily 
. . . ready employment and also employment for the summer that 
pertains particularly to their work study. And the program that was 
in place offered a great deal of assistance in allowing these 
students to do that. 
 
And it gave the employer an opportunity as well, to be able to 
offer guidance and mentorship, and also to be able to evaluate the 
potential of these students in their work experience. 
 
And so I feel it’s quite unfortunate that that particular program was 
cancelled because I think it was, as I mentioned, of great value. 
 
We need a lot of incentives to retain these people. They have 
accomplished a great deal and also there has been a great deal of 
investment into these people by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
And these people, these students, I feel need some kind of an 
assistance, some kind of an incentive to remain here in this 
province. After all, it is a very good province. It has a lot of 
potential. And we need those kind of people to remain here to 
be able to do that. And retaining those students and 
post-secondary trained people are very, very important. 
 
And if the intent of the amendments are for that, I certainly 
would applaud that. But there are these concerns that I have 
difficulty trying to square with the intent as outlined by the hon. 
minister in his amendments but also the action of this 
government in cancelling programs such as this. 
 
To have these students stay in Saskatchewan, as I mentioned, 
would be very important. And one of the things that, I think, 
would be much more beneficial than offering free tuition in the 
first year of post-secondary training, which was offered by this 
government in their election campaign which I think was not 
very well thought through. I think ultimately we should be 
trying to encourage these students to stay after their graduation, 
after they’ve made the commitment to be able to handle the 
course, to get the education, to satisfy their own objectives and 
their own training, and to give them an incentive, probably 
through a tax incentive of some kind, whether it’s a recognition 
in the first year or two of some of their student loan obligations 
against their taxable, there are several ways that we could do 
that. But the incentive is after they have proved that they can be 
there. 
 
To allow them to remain in school is certainly the responsibility 
of all of us as taxpayers. And such things as the millennium 
scholarship fund that was offered in conjunction with the 
federal government, I feel was a . . . maybe a step in the right 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

direction. However, it would seem that this scholarship fund, in 
my view, seems to be misdirected again. 
 
The millennium scholarship fund was taken and applied to 
tuitions on a global basis with the incentive of trying to remove 
all of the . . . to reduce at least the tuitions that students find 
themselves confronted with, rather than focusing particularly on 
the students that have already achieved a significant debt load 
through student funding, which my understanding was the real 
reason for the millennium scholarship fund. So those things are 
the problems that I have with these particular amendments. 
 
And I would like to refer to some interesting material that I was 
just reading about. In fact I’ve been . . . I was at a luncheon just 
today where the speaker was talking about some of the 
incentives that we have to put in place here in this province. He 
agreed that education is a very vital part of the future of this 
province. Without proper education, and education tailored to 
the exact needs of what is here, we are doomed to be less 
competitive than anybody . . . any of our neighbours. 
 
We’ve often referred to Alberta. He referred mainly to some of 
the competitiveness in the United States with what goes on here 
in Canada and particular in this province. Because, after all, 
there’s a great number of our graduates leaving this province, 
not only to other provinces but into the United States as well. 
 
Now the problem that we found here in this province, and it was 
highlighted in this particular discussion today, was that the 
taxation problems in this . . . not only in this province but in 
Canada generally, makes it non-competitive with the United 
States, which draws a great number of our students. 
 
The disposable income gap per capita, and that’s based on 
material right up to 1998, shows that the disposable income per 
capita gap is certainly increasing. Certainly a disincentive when 
students are leaving the post-secondary training, looking for 
employment, and finding that there is more in terms of 
disposable income to offer them in other jurisdictions, whether 
it’s in Canada or in the United States. I think that’s a real 
problem. 
 
Another problem that I noticed when we were looking through 
the amendments was the cancellation of the interest-free portion 
of the student loan repayment program as highlighted in the 
latest budget. I think it’s just another indication that that is a 
disincentive that students will look at and say, why would I 
want to be part of that when there’s other opportunities 
elsewhere? 
 
This interest-free status was allowed for students I believe on a 
six-month grace period in order to find gainful employment 
once they left university. That has been taken away, and now 
that is another incentive to have our students probably look for 
professional opportunity elsewhere than here at home. 
 
One of the positive things that the budget did talk about, 
however, was a small dollar tax credit for graduating students. 
And I think any move in that direction is a very positive move. 
However, I noticed that the dollar was rather insignificant. I 
think it was $350 or so in tax credits. And from the comments 
that I have heard from students graduating, they find that is not 
nearly enough of an incentive to sway them in their decision as 

to where they want to apply for work. 
 
Those are the parts of the amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I had trouble with. I want to spend a little bit more time and 
I want to confer with some other students in this particular area, 
so at this time I would move adjournment on this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — The 
Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is my pleasure today to stand to speak to Bill No. 10, 
An Act to amend The Department of Health Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, currently The Department of Health Act 
has an agreement that provides for people from other provinces 
to come to Saskatchewan and to receive medical care here if it’s 
required and not provided for in their own province of course. 
And if someone . . . conversely, if someone from Saskatchewan 
requires treatment in another province, they will receive it there, 
and then compensation for those services is later paid to that 
province or territory. 
 
The measures of reimbursement are currently outlined in two 
Acts — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act and 
The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. And so the purpose of 
the Department of Health Bill, with the existing Bill, is to 
consolidate recovery methods for financial compensation into 
one Act, The Department of Health Act. 
 
It appears that what is proposed in the amendment to The 
Department of Health Act is that where payments are received 
from other provinces those payments be reported as a refund to 
the health budget rather than being reported as new revenue. 
And it appears also that what is proposed is that the process also 
applies when insurance companies repay health costs as part of 
a liability claim. And so this is all really that we can see and 
possibly those two items are the point of this amendment. 
 
However, we have to note as we have studied both of these Acts 
and . . . or rather the current Act and the amendment that’s 
proposed, that a reciprocity agreement is already in place. And 
to our knowledge, there have been very few problems with that 
current agreement as to payments received from other 
provinces. And we’re wondering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the 
proposed amendment is all about. 
 
If there’s no significant change, what could the real purpose of 
this Bill be. And we do have some suspicions, always, because 
when a Bill is brought to the Table such as this, and we have so 
many very important matters outstanding in the province 
regarding health and the reception of services by our citizens as 
well as others throughout Canada, we really question why the 
minister would bring this kind of a Bill to the Table. 
 
(1545) 
 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

The principle of accessibility as outlined in the Canada Health 
Act is one of the principles being addressed in this Bill. And the 
Sask Party maintains, and has always maintained, that 
accessibility to quality health care is paramount for all residents 
of the province. And we’ve somewhat come to expect that we 
will be able to access medical treatment wherever we might be. 
 
Those expectations have been dimmed in the last few years 
under the NDP administration. But as a part of their reciprocity 
agreement that exists between provinces, if someone currently 
visiting from another province needs treatment here in 
Saskatchewan, that treatment will be provided. And that is what 
has been expected also in the past. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nearly $2,000 is spent 
annually on an individual, or any individual under the medicare 
coverage. That’s the cost for one person for seeing doctors and 
specialists in this province, receiving treatments or enduring 
hospital stays, and doing whatever else may be necessary to 
ensure their health. 
 
Accessibility in the province for Saskatchewan people and 
people from other provinces over the last decade has become a 
very real concern. Our leader, Saskatchewan Party leader, has 
mentioned that today, certainly in question period, and made 
some very fine points about recognizing and helping the 
government of the day recognize that we in fact do not have 
accessibility to any measure as compared to what we did have 
before. That is becoming a real concern. 
 
Increasingly there are large numbers of residents that are very 
frustrated with the extremely long waiting lists and the lack of 
front-line services. And many of these people have on their own 
decided to seek treatment elsewhere in other provinces or in the 
US (United States). But of course, they pay all of their own 
expenses from their own pocket. There are no refunds for them 
on travel or food or lodging and so on. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given our currently overloaded 
health care system, there is also an increasingly large number of 
residents who have to be transferred or referred to other 
provinces to receive medical treatment, and they are referred to 
other provinces and other jurisdictions by their doctors. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these treatments should be 
available in our own province of Saskatchewan. That is what 
we want when we talk about accessibility. That is what we have 
come to believe we should have. And that is why the taxpayers 
are paying such exorbitant taxes here. If they could get the 
services they require, I think they would reconsider the fact that 
taxes are overwhelming. But at least they would like to have 
those services accessible to them when they need them. 
 
So we have to ask where is the accessibility for the residents of 
Saskatchewan? We don’t have it. Saskatchewan people should 
not be forced into spending unnecessary time away from their 
homes and work, just to receive medical care that by all 
accounts should be accessible right here with a minimal amount 
of expense and inconvenience. 
 
Waiting lists for standard medical procedures have progressed 
to the point that we wonder about the medical validity of them 
any more. So much time has elapsed from the time they first 

needed the treatment until they’re finally able to get it, that one 
wonders whether or not the requirement is still valid. 
 
We have heard from many concerned residents who are on 
extremely long waiting lists for really crucial diagnostic 
assessments such as MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) and 
CT (computerized axial tomography) scans. In fact, even when 
we have the equipment here in the province, we may not 
necessarily have the staff — such is the state of health. 
 
Recently bone densimeter equipment was shut down in 
Saskatoon because there was no technicians available to run it. 
The waiting time for this is at least one year. Again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, accessibility is an issue and this demonstrates it. There 
is no equipment or very, very little that we are in need of — 
certainly insufficient equipment — we have a lack of staff, no 
money. People in this province are being forced to wait 
endlessly to access basic health care services. 
 
In this age of technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, medical 
advancements, and access to information, it is very difficult for 
anyone to fully comprehend why Saskatchewan has the health 
care problems that it has. 
 
Now the dictionary’s definition of reciprocity is mutual action, 
a principle of practice of give and take. Yet when we look at 
some of the government’s own ideas of reciprocity here in this 
province, we are deeply concerned with the direction the 
government is taking with health care in the province. 
 
Seven years ago the NDP introduced us to the wellness model. 
Local health districts were set up to administer and maintain 
local health services. The health districts were to be responsive 
to the needs of their communities and responsible to the public 
they represented. Ultimately we were supposed to have better 
health care. 
 
But, seven years later, nearly two-thirds of the 32 health 
districts in the province are in deficit situations. Without 
sufficient funding, and lack of commitment from this NDP 
government, how could health districts be expected to survive? 
By their own admissions they have had . . . they’ve had to make 
some very, very tough decisions in recent years — decisions 
that have ultimately affected the very people that health districts 
were set up to serve. 
 
Health care for residents across the province is in deplorable 
condition — front-line services are suffering; waiting lists are 
growing; doctors and nurses are leaving the province in droves; 
beds, operating rooms, and surgical units have closed. And the 
president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association says that 
access to care is a big problem to the point where it is 
compromising the ability of a doctor to provide quality patient 
care; professional integrity is threatened. And so this is a great 
concern to the doctors of the province. 
 
Surgery waiting lists in the two main access centres of Regina 
and Saskatoon continue to grow despite the NDP spending $12 
million last year to address the backlog. 
 
What has been more difficult for rural residents is that the 
closure of hospitals across the province, many of them — 63 in 
total since 1993 and that number continues to grow — one of 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

those hospitals, the Plains hospital, went $50 million over 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rural residents are gravely concerned these days. They are 
wondering what is going to be happening even to the existing 
services they have. On one hand they hear that their hospitals 
are arbitrarily going to be closed, and the next moment they are 
hearing that they don’t have adequate response systems for 
emergency service providers to even respond to emergency 
situations between communities. And so many of the people in 
rural Saskatchewan are really wondering what the state of the 
health system is going to end up like for them. 
 
Many of these rural residents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have seen 
their hospitals being converted into health facilities. Often the 
only services that are available to them any more are between 
the hours of 8 in the morning to 5 p.m. in the evening on 
weekdays. There is no acute care and there is no extended stay 
for treatment there. 
 
In fact rural areas have been treated very, very shabbily by this 
government in many respects. Rural residents now have to 
travel many miles just to see a doctor; hundreds of miles to see 
a specialist or receive treatment. 
 
More recently, we heard that health districts were told to submit 
their upcoming fiscal operating plans to the Minister of Health, 
and they were told that no public consultation was to take place. 
And if it did, health board members would have to risk being 
replaced by publicly appointed administrators. The minister 
said that she would approve, reject, or modify these operating 
plans. 
 
Given the current lack of funding and commitment to the 
viability of our health districts, how could board members be 
expected to work under this government-imposed gag order? 
What they have come to realize is, why should they? Because 
heavy-handed and constrictive tactics by the NDP minister 
toward board members has really restricted them in the freedom 
that they know they should have to do their jobs in an 
accountable fashion. 
 
They were elected or appointed to represent the public, and if 
there are to be services cut, they feel . . . or staff laid off or a 
hospital closed, they feel the communities that they are serving 
and that are affected by this should have a right to know, and 
they are asking that this government allow them to be open, 
honest, and upfront. They don’t believe that this is too much to 
ask. 
 
However, they have been issued a gag order and they feel that 
they are simply not being trusted and they do not have the 
autonomy to represent their people properly. They resent this 
kind of control by the Minister of Health and they resent that 
they cannot be open and accountable. These people must feel 
terribly when they are under these kind of restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other issues that has come into play 
recently is the accessibility to different drugs that would help 
many people in the province with their health problems. 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of Alzheimer patients 
in Canada. Aricept is a drug that has been proven to reduce the 
debilitating effects of the disease. The makers of this drug have 

a 12-week trial program in place at no cost to the province. 
 
But even given those facts, and following recent reports 
attesting to the effectiveness of Aricept, and Aricept is . . . 
remains inaccessible for Alzheimer’s patients and their families 
here in Saskatchewan. One has to question, why is this 
government refusing to help people in such a common sense 
fashion? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Exelon is another drug that has been approved for 
use in treating Alzheimer’s. Again there is trial program in 
place at no cost to the province. Again the Formulary 
Committee seems to be dragging its heels on making a decision. 
What will it take for Alzheimer’s patients and their families to 
access some much needed and proven treatment? 
 
There can be no doubt that we are all paying the price, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for the NDP’s version of so-called health care. 
Where’s our reciprocity? What do we get out of this give and 
take principle? 
 
When the NDP closed the Plains hospital, they laid off 600 
nurses. They were told — they were told — a number of years 
ago that a nursing shortage was imminent. But they either chose 
to ignore this or they thought the matter would probably resolve 
itself. 
 
Last spring’s nurses’ strike saw the province’s contingent of 
exhausted nurses protest working conditions here in this 
province. And what was the NDP’s version of reciprocity for 
our nurses? The NDP legislated them back to work, and to add 
insult to injury, declared the strike illegal and forced them to 
pay a fine. 
 
Nursing recruitment and retention issues have now reached a 
critical point, and even with the recent announcement by the 
government that will allow nurses to retrain and re-enter the 
workforce, we have on this side of the House some doubt that 
this will have the effect the government thinks it will. 
 
The nursing profession’s governing bodies will tell you that 
recruitment and retention are two very important issues, and 
that immediate action must be taken. And while we 
acknowledge that there might be a large pool of educationally 
qualified nurses in the province that might take up the 
government’s offer — at least the government thinks they will 
— there is no guarantee that these nurses will come back to 
work in a system that devalues them and the importance of their 
work. 
 
Nurses are burnt-out. They are burnt-out from much of the 
imposition of mandatory overtime, no vacations, lack of 
recognition. Those are just a few of the many issues facing 
nurses right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one has to question, 
why would a nurse that’s left the profession want to come back 
to more of the same? 
 
In this budget we learned that there was a hundred and fifty 
million dollars being allocated in the newly formed Health 
Transition Fund. What are the government’s plans for this 
money? Well, we have come to know that part of it will be used 
to cover off some of the outstanding deficits faced by some of 
the health districts as recently indicated by the $26 million that 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

was quietly dispersed to the Regina and Saskatoon health 
districts. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all the problems that the 
government is facing in health care, we were hoping that this 
government would have had a vision, a plan, or some idea about 
how this money could be best spent. Presently the only 
indication that we have is that it will be undoubtedly be going 
towards paying off deficits and paying down debts. There is not 
a great deal of vision with just that simple use of our money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyday we learn of people’s experiences within 
our crumbling health care system. Everyday members on this 
side of the House are presented with more stories, more 
frustrations from people throughout our constituencies and 
throughout the province. People that will not go to their NDP 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for help simply 
because they are not getting a response from them. We hear of 
this everyday. People are more than concerned; they are 
frustrated and they are angry. 
 
(1600) 
 
There have been reports and reviews that we’ve had. We have 
had investigations and we’ve had numerous recommendations. 
Serious issues with serious implications, but it necessitates 
serious action — not more reviews . . . or investigations rather. 
Yet with all the report and the recent investigations into health 
care, nothing seems to have changed. Things remain the same. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, where is the reciprocity for people who have 
paid the price for the current state of health care in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has been calling for an independent, 
complete, and comprehensive review, independent review, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of health care for nearly two years. To simply 
keep throwing money at health care, which has been the NDP’s 
answer, remains to be a non-answer. It is not an answer. We 
need to have a comprehensive, independent review. That is 
what the people of the province are calling for and that is the 
only way we are going to find out just exactly what is going 
wrong and how to rectify the situation. 
 
In fact, the government now has finally admitted that a review 
of health care is needed, that health care in this province has hit 
the wall and is on the ropes. So we give them credit for finally 
admitting that, albeit it seems very late in admission and we 
wish that they would have done this a while back and taken our 
lead on this matter. 
 
Now after months of waiting we hear that their plans are 
underway to establish a review commission and that its mandate 
and terms will be released very shortly. We can only hope, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this will be a truly, truly independent 
review — one that operates at arm’s-length from the 
government. 
 
We acknowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that accessibility in its 
truest form allows residents in Saskatchewan to access medical 
care outside of the province and that residents from other 
provinces can access medical treatment here in Saskatchewan. 
But there are still many issues that need to be addressed 

regarding accessibility for Saskatchewan residents. Obviously it 
is still a problem and this Bill, this amendment that we have on 
the Table, does nothing to address the many other problems. 
 
In all honesty, when it comes to reciprocity agreements and 
payment between provinces, we are not aware of any major 
concerns. It would seem that the current agreement that is in 
place is working quite nicely. Given that, why the need for 
amending this current legislation? We continue to ask that. 
 
We believe that the government should be more concerned with 
taking care of other more pressing issues first. If they were to 
address these very critical issues, then wouldn’t reciprocity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, take care of itself? 
 
We can’t help but wonder that the government, by amending 
legislation, isn’t preparing for the reality that more and more 
residents will have to be treated in other provinces — even the 
United States — simply because the health care system here in 
this province cannot accommodate the large numbers of people 
waiting for health services. 
 
The Minister of Health has referred to this as a housekeeping 
duty. If that is so, then why isn’t she taking care of the other 
items first, other items that should be on her list first. 
Addressing the issue of lack of front-line services, for example, 
would seem to be to me more urgent than amending an Act that 
by all accounts still works and will not speed up or change our 
residents of the province access to health care. 
 
Once again, it’s the government making sure that they’re 
getting paid for services rendered which is fine, but they’re 
forgetting about the people who need those services most. And 
that is what the Saskatchewan Party opposition is mostly 
concerned about. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate 
for further consideration. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
And it’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly: deputy 
minister Brent Cotter, communications director Gord Sisson, Al 
Hilton, Paul Osborne, and Ernie Lawton, and Glen Benedict, 
and Michael Jackson from protocol in the back. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I too would like to 
thank the minister’s officials for being with us here today, and 
certainly thank the minister for being here today. I didn’t get an 
opportunity the last time the minister was sitting in estimates 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

for Indian and Metis affairs to . . . I didn’t have the opportunity 
to speak with him at that time so I’m especially happy today to 
be able to address some issues that I have to the minister. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, today was a very historic day for 
First Nations people in our province. It was reported in today’s 
paper that the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) along with both of the federal and provincial 
governments, have signed a framework agreement that will 
eventually lead to a province-wide self-government for the First 
Nations people, and I think this is a really good news 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that the province of 
Saskatchewan has been greatly involved in these negotiations. 
The time frame that has been established is 2002, and so I’m 
just wondering if it’s by the year 2002 at that time that all that 
you are expecting, that all of the terms will have been worked 
out and completed? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you. And may I say at the 
outset, at the risk of digressing, that I want to express my thanks 
to the member for Humboldt for the support she gave our 
department and myself personally at the time of the debate over 
the Aboriginal employment development contracts with Dr. Jim 
Pankiw, the Member of Parliament. 
 
And I thought it was indeed very progressive that she on behalf 
of her party, expressed the same views as the views that we 
hold on this side of the House that it is essential that we do 
more to end the marginalization of our Aboriginal people and 
bring them into full participation into the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in view of the fact that we were under great pressure and 
criticism from the Member of Parliament on that, I very much 
appreciated the expression of the member for Humboldt that we 
were on the right track. 
 
With that though, I would advise the hon. member that the 
current round of negotiations on self-government relate to 
education and child and family services. 
 
We have committed to an 18-month time frame, and the 
negotiating position of the province is, first, voluntary 
jurisdiction for off-reserve which means basically that a First 
Nations person living off-reserve would have the option of his 
case, his or her case, being dealt with according to First Nations 
government or according to the provincial department. So it 
would be an option. And secondly, the paramountcy of 
provincial law in the event of conflict. 
 
Other items may be added to the agenda, but for now the two 
items which are being specifically negotiated are education and 
child and family service. The reason we have committed to 18 
months is that we all are anxious that we not get involved in 
never-ending discussions that simply don’t lead anywhere. 
 
And as the hon. member will be aware, there has been concern 
expressed from time to time that on Aboriginal issues we’re 
getting involved in negotiations and discussions that don’t 
actually lead to something. And we’re committed to these 
discussions actually leading to conclusions. 

And in that regard, as the member made note, this past weekend 
we actually completed the specific tax loss compensation issue. 
So we’re actually bringing the negotiation to a successful 
conclusion; we’re not just sitting around talking about things 
that never happen. 
 
So in terms of your question, will we finish it all within 18 
months, we believe that’s a realistic time frame. But perhaps 
more to the point, we think it’s important to set these deadlines 
to give the message that we’re not just sitting around a table to 
talk and talk and talk; we actually are committed to positive 
results. We think we can. 
 
If we turn out to have made good progress but we haven’t quite 
wrapped everything up in 18 months, I wouldn’t view that as 
the end of the world. But nonetheless it is important to say that 
we indicate that these negotiations are not just wandering 
around and going nowhere. They’re actually supposed to and 
will produce results. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
past, I as well as you know and realize that there have been 
some . . . the First Nations people have taken responsibility and 
jurisdiction for education and social services certainly 
on-reserve. And there have been many, for instance, child care 
cases where they have been taking care of that on-reserve and 
the bands have been somewhat responsible for on-reserve. 
 
So the difference now in the negotiations that are taking place 
for the next 18 months then, from what you’re saying, you’re 
telling me that there . . . I hear you saying, at least I think I hear 
you saying that there is going to be an option for people, 
whether they will receive services from the provincial 
government if they should be off-reserve, or if they want to 
receive services from on-reserve, they will be able to have that 
option. Could you just comment please, Mr. Minister, and let 
me know if I’m hearing this correctly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member 
basically sees it correctly. I think it has to be said that when I 
gave the position, that is the opening negotiating position of the 
province, I can’t obviously speak to where exactly we will end 
up. 
 
But I think it is important to note that as a result of the recent 
Supreme Court of Canada decision in Corbiere, that stressed 
that a band member who lives off-reserve is still nonetheless a 
band member, and has a right to a voice in his or her home band 
government. And it also stresses the portability of band 
membership and First Nations status. 
 
(1615) 
 
So that is part of the mix that we have to consider, what is the 
appropriate delivery service both from a constitutional legal 
standpoint, but also from a practical standpoint. And we believe 
that a good starting point would be to say that if, say, there is a 
custody dispute, that the parties would have the right to say they 
wished this to be determined under the structures of their band, 
as opposed to under our court and Department of Social 
Services. 
 
I’d also like to say that key in these negotiations will be the 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

principle of financial accountability, accountability back to First 
Nations citizens. And I say that also connects with the recent 
Supreme Court of Canada decision that band members have a 
right to a say and to accountability even if they live off-reserve. 
 
And secondly, again because the Corbiere decision, it is our 
position that the federal government remains financially 
responsible for services even for those members who are living 
off-reserve. The situation that we have been evolving into the 
past number of years is that while the federal government 
accepts that under the constitution they have full financial 
responsibility on-reserve, they have been increasingly 
diminishing the responsibility they take for off-reserve 
programs. 
 
We believe that first of all, under the constitution, Indians and 
Eskimos of course fall under the federal jurisdiction. Secondly, 
that that has been reinforced by the Corbiere decision, that this 
Aboriginal status continues for off-reserve citizens. And 
therefore as we look to the development of new and innovative 
programs in education, child and family services, and other 
areas — health — that the federal government should be asked 
to continue with its responsibility on behalf of Aboriginal 
persons. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 
refer you back to your statement that for instance if there was a 
custody situation where there was some determination having to 
be made by the parties in question about whether or not they 
were going to access services to deal with this custody issue, 
off-reserve or on-reserve, how practical does that seem to you? 
 
For instance if off-reserve parents were living in Saskatoon and 
they determine that they wanted to have an on-reserve justice 
system take care of their situation, like the proximity, the 
availability to get back and forth for one thing, the ability to 
know in fact who is going to be facilitating this whole process 
for them, I just . . . I’m having difficulty understanding what 
benefit that would be. 
 
It seems to me that it would be more advantageous to people 
that are living off-reserve to know that they are able to access 
courts and to have people of their own ethnic background 
helping them to deal with the situation and deliberating with 
them, than to say to them well, if you don’t want to have this 
kind of service provided for you off-reserve, you can go back to 
reserve. I mean it just doesn’t seem very practical to me, 
because oftentimes people don’t have transportation or the 
resources to be running back and forth for a court case like that 
to be taken care of. 
 
So you know, I can understand it if there is more accountability 
asked for of the federal government to ensure that funding for 
services for off-reserve Indians is provided to them in a more 
expedient fashion. 
 
And I can also see that if the province of Saskatchewan was 
really concerned, as I believe you are, about the services 
provided to off-reserve Indians, that you would knock on the 
Prime Minister’s door and simply mention to him that maybe he 
should cut some of his bureaucracy and have payments more 
directed to the Aboriginal people themselves who provide these 
services. 

So if you could just give me a little bit more of a clarification, I 
guess, Mr. Minister, on what the advantages or how you see the 
work that you’re undertaking here, or even how the FSIN see 
that this is going to work out very practically, I would 
appreciate some comment on that. Because I can’t, I can’t 
understand what changes are taking place according to what 
you’ve said that would be of benefit to First Nations people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that while 
the issue of efficiency is certainly something that will be of 
paramount concern here, I would like to point out though that 
this is not something dramatic or novel, as the member might 
think. This is the way present things presently work in the 
Yukon; they work in Alaska, in a number of US states, and 
increasingly, where we are evolving in Canada. 
 
So the issue would be, for instance, in the case of a child 
apprehension that occurs in the city, who should intervene and 
who can best provide the services necessary for the child and 
for the family? And that would be determined, I think, in large 
measure as to whether a strong and real connection exists 
between the home reserve or otherwise. And that is why I spoke 
of an optional jurisdiction. 
 
It would also be a question of agreements entered into by the 
provincial government, the Department of Social Services, and 
the home reserves. Those actually are already in place now in 
Saskatchewan so that when a First Nations child comes into 
care, there will be contact with the home reserve to see what is 
the best option here to work with the family or to find an 
alternate home for the child. 
 
The point that we have already left behind, mercifully, the 
situation where the Department of Social Services simply 
moves in and takes an Aboriginal child and puts that child into 
a white foster home with no contact with the home reserve, this 
will formalize it. 
 
It’s a little . . . I’m not trying to duck the question but it’s a little 
bit difficult for me to be too specific for the simple reason that 
we’re moving into negotiations and what will be the end result 
of those negotiations is not of course totally obvious. But 
nonetheless it’s an area that we’re already in. It’s an area that 
other states and provinces and territories are in. And I’m 
convinced that there are efficiencies to be gained by this. 
 
But what is more important, what is most important of all, is 
that we find solutions that will work for families and work for 
children because it will be appropriate for those children. And 
we’re very much aware that in times past the adoption and 
foster services . . . services of our provinces oftentimes did not 
work very well for First Nations children. And we believe that 
by working co-operatively with the FSIN, with band 
governments, that we can find solutions that work for people. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I travel throughout 
the province and hear from all people in this province, and even 
as I’ve spoken to FSIN people, members of their council, there 
seems to be some question I guess about what the term 
self-government really means to many people. And it has been 
an outstanding question that I’m not sure that anyone has 
defined in a very clear way. 
 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

And in coming to this common table agreement now and, you 
know, reaching this milestone, I’m wondering whether or not 
during all of your talks and discussions, whether you have for 
us today in the Assembly and for the people of Saskatchewan a 
definition of self-government as has been discussed by the First 
Nations people, as well as the provincial and federal 
governments, so that all people in this country can be clear of 
what it is that they’re to expect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that’s 
a very important question. And again I’m certainly not trying to 
duck it. But I have to at the outset say that we are embarked on 
a voyage that we don’t know entirely where it will lead us. But 
one never does. 
 
But having said that, I want to say that First Nations people 
were self-governing before European contact, and they 
managed. And with the European contact and the imposition of 
the new society, we took over control of their lives to an extent 
that frankly we as non-Aboriginals would find intolerable. The 
question of where will our children go to school was not a 
parental decision but one made by the government and the 
churches. 
 
In my lifetime, in the North Battleford area, rations as opposed 
. . . were given out, and you didn’t even do your own grocery 
shopping. The government would decide what groceries you 
would have. So we have to get away from that. 
 
The provincial government has recognized the inherent right of 
self-governing, and we defined the inherent right of 
self-government as the authority over aspects of First Nations 
people’s lives most significant to First Nations identity. It is 
self-reliance; it is self-government. It is inherent right in those 
areas which are integral to the identity of First Nations peoples. 
 
And I think that is something that all of us can see the value and 
importance of. It is an attempt to undo some of the historic 
mistakes of the past. However if I may anticipate some of what 
you may have been implying, does this mean that the laws of 
Canada will not apply? 
 
In that regard you may have heard Bob Mitchell on radio this 
morning, now as the FSIN negotiator — of course a former 
minister of Justice of this province — who made it quite clear 
that in self-government that the Criminal Code of Canada 
would apply, that there is still one law. 
 
So I think I can put the hon. member’s mind at rest on that score 
of what he was talking about, was that service delivery can be 
accommodated and can be done in ways that is respectful of 
cultural differences and respectful of community differences. 
And this is where we are moving. But I want to tell you that the 
provincial government has endorsed the inherent right of 
self-government. We have endorsed the right of First Nations 
people to have authority over those aspects of their lives which 
are inherent and integral to their identity. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
enjoyed your short commentary on the history that’s behind us 
but that impacted very greatly on the lives of Aboriginal people, 
particularly Indian and Metis people in this province. And I am 
of the belief that many of those people underwent the 

equivalence of apartheid. And I think that what you’re saying is 
that. And I think that all people of Saskatchewan have to 
recognize that. 
 
But what the Indian people are asking for right now is, yes, 
they’re asking for authority to determine their own kind of 
services from and for their own people. They’re also asking that 
they’re able to own and manage their own operations without 
interference from provincial government, but with the 
consideration of provincial government. 
 
(1630) 
 
And so they want responsibility. They’re willing to take 
responsibility. And there are many aspects of this responsibility 
that have been brought to my attention, that I’ve been told that 
the government is not willing to look at and that the federal 
government isn’t very accountable for. 
 
I have heard statements such as, you know by the time, for 
instance, even the funding that comes from the federal 
government gets down to the actual people, to the bands, it’s a 
minuscule amount of the amount that has been allotted by the 
federal government. And so there’s obviously a problem of 
perpetuating a large bureaucracy that seems to be more . . . 
benefiting more from this system than the actual First Nations 
people are. 
 
And so I would hope that some of the responsibility, speaking 
of responsibility, that the federal government and the provincial 
would take, is to maybe breakdown some of those bureaucratic 
barriers that stunt the kind of money that comes down, that 
would be there and available for First Nations people to use. 
Because truly there is a little bit of prejudice and injustice going 
on in this province as far as people’s conception or 
understanding of how much money First Nations people are 
getting from the federal government. And the very fact is it 
sounds like a great big sum, but by the time it siphons down, 
there isn’t all that terribly much. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve also heard, and there certainly could be 
some validity to this, that there has been, I guess, misuse of 
some of the funds that have come down and that it hasn’t been 
appropriated out to the grassroots people very well. And I know 
that that kind of accountability is being brought into question 
and it is of great concern to people throughout the province. 
 
So I feel that there again is where someone such as yourself, as 
the minister responsible for this, could make sure that we have 
effective and efficient and accountable governance in place in 
respect to how monies are being allocated and how funds are 
being used, and to make sure that there is integrity and justice in 
the judicial use of the funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are hundreds of thousands of acres of land 
and already millions of dollars that have been disbursed to 
make up for the lost tax revenues to municipalities and school 
divisions because of land claim settlements. So I’m just 
wondering if there will . . . In view of the fact that there are 
going to be, I presume, about 300,000 acres of land to be put 
into reserve status now to deal with the department’s 
responsibility to end up having reimbursement to municipalities 
and school divisions for lost revenue due to this land claim 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

situation, I was wondering whether or not, Mr. Minister, that 
there is going to be more cheques being cut now in order to deal 
with this or is it pretty well finished? 
 
I’d like to know what direction you could give me in answering 
to those questions that many of my constituents have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I think I may be working backwards on 
the hon. member’s questions. 
 
But first of all in order to understand this area, it’s important to 
appreciate that there’s a difference between what we call treaty 
land entitlement and what we call specific claims. 
 
Treaty land entitlement, as I understand it, refers to the formula 
at the time of the treaties whereby land will be set aside on a per 
capita basis for the band members and was never set aside. So 
now here approximately 130 years later that’s being done. So 
that’s the entitlement we call it. 
 
And under treaty land entitlement, some 712,000 acres have 
been transferred, and those 712,000 acres have also resulted in 
approximately $32 million being given to local government. 
And that $32 million is, as the member has correctly said, is for 
tax loss compensation — the fact that that land will no longer 
be subject to municipal and school division taxes. 
 
And that money is to be put in a trust fund so that it will be 
self-generating in terms of providing the municipality and the 
school divisions with permanent income for the lands that they 
used to have available for taxation but will no longer have 
available. 
 
So that’s treaty land entitlement, and it refers to land, according 
to the formula on the treaties, that was supposed to have been 
given but was not. 
 
Specific claims is a smaller concept and somewhat different. 
Specific claims refers to that land which was in reserve status 
and in the early days of the last century was sold or transferred 
— usually improperly, usually with the collusion of dishonest 
Indian agents. And now that is being reversed. And in that case 
we are talking about approximately 300,000 acres. So that is 
land that was in reserve status a hundred years ago. It left 
reserve status through improper means. It’s now being returned 
to reserve status. 
 
And that has resulted . . . that has triggered a payment to local 
governments of $4.1 million. And that it what I was doing in 
Government House on Saturday — this preceding Saturday. It 
was $4.1 million that was turned over to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, and Saskatchewan Conservation and 
Development Association as their compensation for specific 
claims. 
 
Now for the rest of the member’s question on accountability. I 
can only say that the member is absolutely right that if this is 
going to be successful, accountability has to be built into it. 
 
First of all though, it is important for us to note that direct 
payments to First Nations governments are federal. I was 
pleased last Saturday that FSIN Chief Perry Bellegarde spoke 

about the possibility of a First Nations ombudsman. And we 
believe that it is key — although this is basically federal money 
— it is key that if these new self-government negotiations are 
going to be successful, part and parcel has to be the 
environment and the mechanisms for fiscal accountability. 
 
But I would say that because of self-government and because of 
the mistakes and the failures of the past, we again recognize that 
the accountability that is going to succeed is for the 
accountability to be to First Nations people themselves, so that 
they have a right to a say and to be satisfied that the funds are 
expended in the most effective manner possible. 
 
And the savings that could come about for us as a province, I 
would suggest, would be very sizeable if we are successful as a 
province in ending the marginalization of our Aboriginal people 
so that they participate in the economy, they are able to 
participate in the economy in the same percentages as other 
residents of the province; and that they do not require access to 
services on any greater percentage than other residents of the 
province. 
 
The current savings to Saskatchewan are estimated to be 
something in excess of $1 billion per year. And of course, that’s 
out of a total budget of the province of a bit over 5 billion. So 
you can see it is indeed a very significant figure. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You make so many 
points. I’m not quite sure where do we start. But the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood has got a couple of questions 
pertaining to the allotment of land —I guess it’s land claims — 
and the funding that goes along with it, as well as the amount of 
money that will be issued to the municipalities in compensation. 
So I would just turn the questioning over to the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister. 
Dealing with . . . I listened with interest as the minister was 
explaining payments that have been made under the treaty land 
entitlement Act, or program, and the specific land claims 
settlement. 
 
I noticed that . . . I believe the minister mentioned that under 
treaty land entitlement there was 712,000 acres either have been 
transferred or will be transferred, and compensation paid to 
local government totalled . . . or $32 million. 
 
Yet under specific land claims, there’s approximately 300,000 
acres that will be involved in this particular agreement and yet 
the funding is only $4.1 million — quite a difference in level of 
funding. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could explain the difference in 
level of funding between those two agreements, and the 
make-up of the payments in each program as to who . . . which 
. . . where the money came from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member. 
The formula for treaty land entitlement — and that is land that 
was never in reserve status but under the formula of the treaties 
is now going into reserve status — it was agreed through 
negotiation with the federal government that the compensation 
would be paid at the rate of 22.5 of prevailing local government 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2000 

taxes. And that is the 32 million that is now going to trust funds 
for local government. 
 
Now in the case of specific claims — that is land that was in 
reserve status, was fraudulently taken out of reserve status — 
the federal government refused to compensate at that rate of 
22.5. And I guess the first point I have to make is this is all 
federal government money — none of it is provincial. So the 
tax loss compensation on both files is totally funded by the 
federal government, both the 32 million for treaty land 
entitlement and the 4.1 million for specific claims. 
 
(1645) 
 
The point, I think, that the federal government adopted here was 
that frankly under specific claims we’re talking about land that 
should have never, ever have been part of the municipal tax 
base because it was fraudulently removed from reserve status. 
So the federal government took the position that it was on a 
different formula, different position, because we’re talking in 
the case of specific claims to land that should never, ever have 
been part of an RM (rural municipality). 
 
And that is why the federal government came up with a 
different formula. That formula has been accepted by SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), by SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), and 
Saskatchewan Conservation Development Association. As 
you’re aware, they were at Government House on Saturday to 
receive their cheques and to indicate their satisfaction with the 
conclusion of this agreement. 
 
Another reason why we think that this tax loss compensation 
will be very important, is that it paves the road to good relations 
between the new reserve lands and their neighbours in the 
adjoining municipalities. 
 
And by closing the book on the tax loss compensation matter 
we have also, I say, created the proper environment for good 
relations between band governments and local governments. 
And that was certainly underlined and underscored at 
Government House on Saturday when SARM and SSTA 
indicated their satisfaction with the negotiations and with the 
money they received. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the minister indicated that 
local government SARM and SSTA were at the signing and that 
they supposedly were happy with the deal. I wonder whether 
they are totally happy with the agreement that has been signed. 
 
The federal government puts forth the argument that specific 
land claims deal with land that was originally a part of a reserve 
and should have never been part of a municipality. But the fact 
is, when the settlements are arrived at, quite often land that was 
lost by an Indian band, the Indian band is funded and then they 
go and purchase land in another municipality, and the land that 
the band originally lost still remains part of a second 
municipality. 
 
So the funding, if the federal government and the provincial 
government by signing the agreement accepts the premise that 
you can fund specific land claims at a lower rate than you can 
fund treaty land entitlement claims, I think there is some error 

in that thinking. 
 
Because as I had indicated, quite often the land that is replaced 
is in another municipality and so the RM in which the land is 
purchased is suffering a loss . . . or will suffer, I believe, a loss 
in taxes later on down the road. 
 
Now I wonder if the minister could indicate at 15 times the 
previous year’s taxes, at that level of funding, how long will 
local governments be able to recover taxes comparable to the 
time prior to which the land was purchased by an Indian band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — First of all by way of background, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities has 
commenced a lawsuit for tax loss compensation. They’ve 
settled it, they signed, and they expressed publicly their 
satisfaction. 
 
So if I may say to the hon. member opposite, we think that this 
has set the proper environment for good relations between the 
municipality and the adjoining new reserves. And please, 
please, please, don’t try to ruin that. 
 
We have some difficulties to work through in this province. 
This is one difficulty we did work through. We achieved a 
result to the satisfaction of all citizens of this province. SARM 
signed on the dotted line. SSTA signed on the dotted line. The 
lawsuit was concluded. The statements made by the heads of 
those associations were positive. 
 
So please, please, please, don’t try to turn this into a negative 
story that will set a negative environment between the new 
reserves and their adjoining municipalities because that wasn’t 
the atmosphere on Saturday. That’s not the atmosphere I want. I 
hope it’s not the atmosphere you want. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I listened with 
interest to the minister’s statement. I don’t think we want to 
upset the apple cart on this side of the House. 
 
But what we are concerned is we have individual RMs that are 
coming to us and saying that with this compensation package of 
15 times the previous year’s taxes, that within a number of 
years there will be some significant tax losses to the RMs, and 
they’re very concerned about it. And they’ve expressed that to 
the executive of SARM. And I believe . . . and SARM is very 
aware of that. 
 
But I believe that SARM was bargaining from a position of 
weakness because the previous offer was five times the 
assessment. SARM had no ability to negotiate with the federal 
government. They left that in the hands of the province. And so 
therefore certainly they signed the agreement because 15 times 
is a whole lot better than five times. 
 
But it’s still not 22.5 times, which was the figure under the 
treaty land entitlement agreement that was determined that 
would sustain income from . . . to local government at 80 per 
cent of their previous tax income, and which everyone was 
quite satisfied with. 
 
So I guess my question to the minister is: if the provincial 
government negotiated this deal on behalf of local government, 



May 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

are they prepared to supplement the monies paid to local 
government so that they don’t in the future suffer a reduction in 
. . . a significant reduction in taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I don’t know if I should turn up my 
hearing aid, Mr. Chairman — I don’t think I believe what I just 
heard. 
 
This money is federal money — $4.1 million. SARM has been 
wanting a settlement for 13 years. The province of 
Saskatchewan was only a participant to the extent that we tried 
to facilitate negotiation and we were very anxious that there be 
a resolution, an agreement which everyone could sign on to and 
be content with. That’s what happened on Saturday — $4.1 
million, solely from the federal government. SARM signed; 
SARM expressed satisfaction; SARM ended its lawsuit. And 
the money was all federal. So everybody signed and expressed 
satisfaction. 
 
Now the hon. member is saying what is Saskatchewan going to 
pony up. And behind that appears to be — and I hope I’m 
wrong — but appears to be the veiled threat that if millions of 
dollars aren’t ponied up here, which were never asked for and 
never contemplated or offered, nor were we ever part of 
negotiations, we were a facilitator, but there seems to be there 
— and I hope I’m wrong — there seems to be the veiled threat 
that they will be out trying to stir up feelings of the rural 
municipalities that they have not been fairly treated 
notwithstanding the fact the rural municipalities say they were 
fairly treated. They’ll be out there trying to convince the rural 
municipalities that they were not fairly treated and they should 
not have good relations with their new neighbours on the 
reserves. 
 
And I just say, don’t go there. That is wrong. That is wrong, 
that is bad social policy; but it is also contrary to SARM. I 
mean SARM told us they wanted this settled for 13 years. We 
got a settlement they say they’re happy with. They say that they 
are satisfied, that the land going into specific claims, which is 
land that should never have been alienated from the reserves in 
the first place . . . This is a good news story. This is a good 
news story. 
 
We are closing the book on an historic irritant, from both sides. 
From the First Nations side, land is being returned to reserve 
status that was fraudulently removed from reserve status. 
 
From the local government side, they are being compensated 
for tax loss for land they at one time had taxation access to, but 
frankly, never should have. Because it was never suppose to be 
in municipalities to begin with. 
 
Now you raise the question of well what if land was 
fraudulently taken out of the reserve and given to one 
municipality but now the compensation comes from a totally 
different municipality? Well that’s an important point. And in 
that regard, it has to be said there will be no confiscation of 
lands; that all lands that go into reserve status will be on the 
basis of willing seller/willing buyer. So there is no thought of 
expropriation or confiscation going on here. 
 
The reserve will select land they want and try and arrive at a 
completely consensual, voluntary sale agreement. So it’s 

willing buyer/willing seller throughout — no confiscation, no 
expropriation. 
 
It is the municipality which will have land go into reserve status 
which then has the right to access this trust monies — say a 
total of $4.1 million. So only those municipalities which 
actually lose land will be able to access the trust funds. 
 
How long will it last? Well obviously that depends on the 
prudence of the investments made and a number of other 
factors. But the idea is that SARM will invest the money and 
the proceeds therefrom will generate the income to self-sustain 
the tax loss. But in any event, it is SARM that will control and 
SSTA that will control that trust fund. There are three trust 
funds. So those trust funds will be controlled by the local 
government authorities themselves. 
 
And I just want to conclude with this: the spirit in Government 
House on Saturday was so positive. There were smiles on the 
faces of the vice-president of SSTA; there were smiles on the 
face of Sinclair Harrison. And they said yes, we like this. Don’t 
try and turn this into another way to corrode the social 
environment of this province for cheap politics. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


