





























































Hansard: June 29, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2297 
 June 29, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who would like to see their fuel tax reduced by 10 cents a litre. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from many 
places throughout our province. Some of those places are St. 
Louis, Melfort, and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to nursing home fee increases. And the petition says 
that residents of nursing homes are there out of necessity. It 
goes on to say: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the wonderful 
community of Biggar. 
 
And I’m happy to present them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today, asking the government not to change paved highways to 
gravel. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
set aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back 
to gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in funding and implementing other alternatives. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina and 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned about plans to turn paved 
highways back to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Wynyard, Briercrest, Ogema, Pangman, and 
that’s it. Thank you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
switch was legitimate. It wasn’t meant to confuse you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf of youth of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the harmful effects of tobacco. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass legislation to protect 
children from tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed from folks in my constituency — Estevan, 
Bienfait, North Portal, and Macoun. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people who wish to retain medical services in Cupar, 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the Cupar 
Health Care Centre remains open and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed exclusively by people 
from the great community of Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of concerned citizens about cellular service. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Cudworth, Nipawin, Melfort, 
Bruno, and Vonda. 
 
I so present. 
 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition opposed to forced municipal amalgamation. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from every corner of the 
province and pretty well every community in the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin reconstruction of Highway 
47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction of No. 1 
Highway. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the communities of 
Corning, Glenavon, Regina, Stoughton, Indian Head, Corinne, 
Windthorst, Peebles, Estevan, Macklin, Young, Weyburn, 
Creelman, and Fillmore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a few 
petitions I’d like to present. I’d like to read them all regarding 
converting paved highways back to gravel roads. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel; commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments; and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions are signed from people in the Bengough, 
Milestone, Indian Head areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition from citizens in the Hafford area concerned about the 
future of their hospitals. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

Signed by the good people from the towns of Hafford, Blaine 
Lake, and also the RMs (rural municipalities) of Blaine Lake 
and Redberry Lake. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures are from all the major cities and communities spread 
out through the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens who are concerned about hospital closures. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the communities of Drake and 
Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition regarding 
cellular service in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
And this petition is signed by many, many people from the 
Duval, Govan area as well as Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition by members of the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the lack of enthusiasm 
for their issues from the Provincial Ombudsman. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That we the undersigned, being taxpayers, Metis citizens 
and their supporters, do hereby seek leave to petition the 
government to establish an office of the Metis 
Ombudsman. And that the Metis Ombudsman have the 
power to receive and act on the complaints of Metis 
citizens in Saskatchewan against their government. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people 
from Prince Albert, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf 
of citizens concerned about medical services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Centre remains open and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
high price of fuel: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the good citizens of 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Leoville, and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the health care in Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the folks of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

The passage of legislation to protect children from tobacco 
use; 
 
Repealing the provision of the personal injury benefits in 
the automobile insurance Act; 
 
The amalgamation of municipalities; 

Cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, Cudworth, 
and Lake Alma; 
 
Ensuring the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
A ban of smoking in public places and workplaces; 
 
Rescinding large increases in nursing home fees; and 
 
The reconstruction of Highway 47. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s fair to 
say on this day, Mr. Speaker, that as we gather for our 
deliberations in the Assembly, that we have in the gallery here 
an observer from literally the other side of the world. 
 
We have a Rotary exchange student from Australia, Mr. 
Speaker, who is in the gallery. Her name is Emma Briggs, and 
I’ll ask her to stand. I see she’s seated in the gallery beside a 
member of the Moose Jaw Rotary . . . Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Rotary Club. 
 
As the members will know there are many clubs, Rotary Clubs, 
in Saskatchewan that sponsor exchange students and also host 
exchange students from other parts of the world. It proves to be 
a wonderful experience in leadership training for people from 
our country as well as other countries here. 
 
And Emma has been living in Moose Jaw for nearly a year now 
and attending school there and will be returning home soon. I’d 
ask all hon. members to show her a welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan and say “good on you.” 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I take 
pleasure in introducing to you and through you to the Assembly 
a very courageous young gentleman and his mother, John 
Melenchuk and his mother Beatrice, in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
These people are part of the grassroots Metis of Saskatchewan 
and they have been calling on the minister responsible for some 
time to look into allegations of unfairness and in the electoral 
process and so on. 
 
So I ask all the members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these two fine people to our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly a person sitting in your gallery, who’s my 
secretary, Shirley Richardson. And I’d like to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that today is Shirley’s last day of work — and that’s 
not because the Legislative Assembly is at its stage in the 
proceedings, it’s because Shirley is retiring. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Shirley actually started 
working in the private sector 47 years ago, which is hard to 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

believe looking at Shirley, but it’s true. And she spent half of 
her life working in the private sector and half of her life 
working in the public sector. And she started with the province 
in 1969. And she has been working for ministers of the Crown 
since approximately 1971. She worked first for John 
Brockelbank, the minister of Government Services, then for 
Gordon Snyder, who was the minister of Labour, then for 
Norman Vickar, who was the minister of Economic 
Development. 
 
Then Shirley worked at SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) for a brief period until 1982, at 
which point she began to work for the private sector — she, 
along with many of her friends, I think. 
 
She was there in the private sector for a number of years, and 
she returned to the legislature in 1993 to work for Bob Pringle, 
when he was minister of Social Services. And when I was 
appointed to the cabinet in 1995, I’m very happy to say that 
Shirley came to work for me and has been the source of a great 
deal of guidance and advice, which I’ve appreciated very much. 
 
Well I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a person that’s 
worked for the public sector for quite some time in a very 
senior capacity. She’s very competent, she’s very efficient, 
she’s very professional in every way, very committed to her 
job. 
 
And I know all members will want to join with me in wishing 
Shirley the very best in her retirement, for many years of happy 
retirement with much health and happiness with her partner, 
Kal, and her grandchildren and family. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to the 
members of the Assembly and also in your gallery, it’s a 
pleasure for me to introduce Denise Batters in your gallery. She 
is a lawyer here in Regina, and a good friend, and a good source 
of advice with my duties in the caucus here. And some of us 
need all the help we can get, Mr. Speaker. So that’s very much 
appreciated. 
 
And I just ask all members to join with me in welcoming her to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 
gallery I’d like people to join me in welcoming people that I 
deal with in my portfolio. And if they would stand when I 
introduce them. Greg Zaba, iron worker international union; 
Bert Royer, iron workers, Local 771; Stan Shearer, IBEW 
(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers), Local 2038. 
 
And in the opposite gallery here, the west gallery, John 
Peterson, operating engineers, Local 1870. 
 
So if you would join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to welcome Denise Batters here today. Denise is 
married to a former constituent of mine, Dave. So I extend my 
welcome to you as well, Denise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to be able to introduce to you and through you to the 
rest of this House, a friend, constituent, hard worker, now 
assistant business manager for the IBEW, Ron Hitchcock who 
is seated up in the west gallery. 
 
I’d like you to welcome Ron to this . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
also my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly two very important workers in our 
caucus office. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Carolyn 
Rebeyka, our chief of staff, and Gail Fehr, our director of 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s their job to make those of us on this row look 
good and they do a very good job of that and I just, on behalf of 
all of us, want to thank them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Economic Facts and Figures 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. Good news to ponder as we 
travel home. 
 
As we prepare for the holiday weekend and for some 
summertime in our constituencies, here’s a quick primer of 
good news facts and figures for those who believe in 
Saskatchewan. In the face of doom and gloomers that continue 
to claim that the earth is flat and the sky is falling, there is 
differences, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First fact. Employment, May to May, last year over this year, up 
by 14,600 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Employment from January to May, year over 
year, up 13,100 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Average weekly earnings in Saskatchewan, April 
last year over April this year, up 2.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Wholesale trade up 23 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Retail trade up 3.9 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. New motor vehicle sales, April over 
April, up 10.1 per cent. 
 
And to be fair, and to be fair, Mr. Speaker, here’s a negative 
stat: Employment Insurance recipients in Saskatchewan, April 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

over April, down 10.2 per cent. We can’t win them all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker: more jobs, unemployment 
down, FarmGro open in Regina, AGM Garment in Saskatoon, 
10 million more for Flexi-Coil, working people like our 
legislation. The rain has stopped and the sun is shining . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, the member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No-fault Insurance Victims Group 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I handed 
in 1,000 names on a set of petitions from the victims of no fault, 
added to a previous 3,000 that have been handed in. The group, 
victims of no fault, is a growing group and they have esteemed 
people joining their concern on a daily basis. 
 
They have held a number of meetings throughout the province. 
They started off with one in Saskatoon and one in Regina. The 
meetings have had verbatim reports made of those, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would like to table those today for the members 
of the legislature, please. 
 

Ups and Downs for Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Thomson: — This may well be my last opportunity to 
bring good news. But I want to say this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — For this session. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — For this session. But I want to say this. This 
session has been marked by several things going up and several 
things going down. And I think the members opposite often 
have a hard time remembering this. So let’s review. 
 
Jobs, up. Unemployment, down. Economy, up. Taxes, down. 
Hope, up. Pessimism, down. This is pretty straightforward stuff. 
You’d think that they would understand on the opposite side. 
 
When we’re talking about the way up, we’re talking about a 
way up for people. I say look up, Mr. Speaker, look way, way 
up. Because that’s where this province is heading. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opposition’s View of Government Record 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday I had the opportunity to speak to a group of grade 5 
students from Naicam who were visiting the legislature. They 
asked me a lot of questions and then I asked them a couple of 
questions. 
 
At one point I asked the class who could name the parties in the 
legislature. One little boy put up his hand and he said, the 
Saskatchewan Party. And then another little guy said, then we 
have the demolition government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I started to correct him until I thought about it. 
And then I thought, you know, you’ve hit the nail right on the 
head. The government has demolished the highways, they’ve 
demolished the health care system, they’ve demolished the 
business climate, they’ve demolished agriculture, and they’ve 
certainly demolished the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this truly is a demolition government. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think I’ll ever look across the floor without 
thinking of those words again — the demolition government. 
 
This province will continue to have a demolition government 
until they are demolished by the voters in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourist Attractions in Moose Jaw 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Summer is upon us 
and many people are thinking of planning their holidays. Well if 
you’re looking for some summer excitement, try Moose Jaw. 
Moose Jaw can boast having the most interesting tourist 
attractions in Saskatchewan and even in Canada. 
 
After visiting the Temple Garden Mineral Spa, which is known 
for its soothing and healing waters, take a little trip to the past 
in the newly refurbished and reopened tunnels of Moose Jaw. 
These tunnels were part of Moose Jaw’s Chicago connection 
during the Roaring Twenties. The connection originated when 
American gangsters would ride CP (Canadian Pacific) rail to 
Moose Jaw to beat the heat of prohibition. Here, tourists will be 
able to discover the secret world of Al Capone. 
 
Besides learning of the Chicago connection, people can learn of 
the challenges faced by Chinese immigrants when they first 
settled the West. And next year the tourists can look forward to 
the opening of our third tour — the River Street Amphitheatre 
— which will bring history live to the stage. 
 
But besides the tunnels of Moose Jaw, tourists can also take in 
the Saskatchewan Air Show at 15 Wing on July 8 and 9, or the 
Legends of the Road Baseball Tour on July 11 and 12. And 
later in July, come on back for the Festival of Words which runs 
for five days at the end of July. The festival includes concert 
performances, plays, readings, workshops, and a Battle of 
Books and the War of Words. 
 
As you can see, there is a lot to do in Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Climax Citizens Patch Highway 18 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, more good news for the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
People in southwestern Saskatchewan, specifically in Wood 
River and Cypress Hills, have taken the government’s job on of 
doing their own roads. Yesterday 150 men and women showed 
up in the Climax area to begin the work of patching Highway 
18, which under this administration it’s turned into a disgrace 
just like thousands of other kilometres of highway in this 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

province. Together these people patched 83 kilometres of 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while these people should be congratulated for 
their initiative in stepping in where this government continues 
to fail them, we must reiterate that events like this should not 
have to take place. 
 
Last week in this House the government voted against accepting 
the state of the highways as their responsibility and now they 
are proving it by forcing residents of this province, who pay 
higher taxes than nearly anyone else in the country, to fix their 
own highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a disgrace, and one that I’m sure people 
throughout the province will remember at the time of the next 
election. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Settlers in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This province, which is 
the best in which to live in all of Canada, was built with the 
hard work of many pioneers and First Nations peoples. They 
laid the foundation for this great society in which we live — an 
innovative, caring, and compassionate society. 
 
This past Saturday, I had the pleasure of attending a historic 
gathering in Saskatoon in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Meewasin to honour one of these pioneering families. The 
occasion was held to dedicate a monument to the first family to 
permanently settle in Saskatoon, the Carl and Julia Kusch 
family. 
 
The Kusch family arrived in what is now Saskatoon in the 
spring of 1883. They originally homesteaded on what is now 
the property of the Erindale Alliance Church, where the 
monument is now located. They farmed the land for many years 
and in 1983 the family was recognized by the provincial 
government for continuously farming the homestead for 100 
years. 
 
Their dedication to their home community is evident in the 
Kusch family’s donation of land. Those familiar with Saskatoon 
will be interested to know that the Woodlawn Cemetery and St. 
Paul’s Cathedral are located on land donated by the Kusch 
family. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, I want to express gratitude for the 
work done by the first settlers of this province. And I want to 
congratulate the Kusch family for their continued dedication to 
the city which their predecessors helped to build. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Bantam Girls Fastball Team 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the DQ Blizzards bantam girls 
fastball team from Weyburn will represent Zone 1 at the 2000 
Saskatchewan Games in Yorkton later this summer. The 
Blizzards went through the tournament last weekend 
undefeated. They have three outstanding pitchers: Nicole Bryns, 

Susan Bobbitt, and Brett Watson, and combined with powerful 
hitters at the plate, they have a great chance to be the victors at 
the games in Yorkton. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the girls and their coaches, Mike 
MacInnis, and Dave Unrau on a great season so far. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what makes this even sweeter is that the Dairy Queen 
in Weyburn are the proud sponsors of the DQ Blizzards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fraser Institute Report 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some 
questions for the Premier of the demolition government. Mr. 
Speaker, this session began three months ago today with this 
government once again demolishing family income by raising 
taxes. Every family in Saskatchewan was hoping for a tax cut, 
instead the demolition government raised the PST (provincial 
sales tax) by $160 million. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Fraser Institute has just announced that 
tomorrow will be tax freedom day in Canada. Our tax freedom 
day in Saskatchewan doesn’t arrive until July the 6th. The third 
latest tax freedom day in the country. 
 
Mr. Premier, why did your demolition government raise taxes 
instead of cutting taxes? Why do we have to have one of the 
very last tax freedom days in the entire country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for that question, and say to the hon. 
member opposite that there are at least two or three things 
faulty with the Fraser Institute’s analysis. 
 
One can have some respect for the Fraser Institute, I suppose, 
but I have found it, Mr. Speaker, not to be exactly the most 
unbiased observer and analyst of NDP finances. 
 
One of the biggest difficulties in the analysis of the Fraser 
Institute has always been on freedom day — the calculation of 
the interest payments which we have to pay every year through 
our tax dollars thanks to nearly 10 years of your administration. 
And if you make those adjustments, Mr. Speaker — make those 
adjustments — and you take into account as well resource 
revenues calculations, you’ll find that we have made 
tremendous progress in reducing tax freedom day. 
 
This province is being stronger built and forward looking today 
than ever before in our history. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s look at 
the past. When the NDP took office tax freedom day was the 
June 15. Now it’s July the 6. That means that every taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan works three more weeks just to pay their taxes to 
this demolition government. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers work over half a year just to pay their 
taxes — Mr. Speaker, that is tragic. 
 
Mr. Premier in Manitoba tax freedom day is June 27; in Alberta 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

tax freedom day is June 19 — over two weeks earlier than here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
But here in Saskatchewan our demolition government continues 
to raise taxes, and Saskatchewan families continue to pay over 
half their income to the government. 
 
Mr. Premier, why should Saskatchewan families have to pay 
over half of their income to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I said that the Fraser 
Institute, with the greatest of respect to it, and the Leader of the 
Opposition has some — how shall I describe it? — rather 
unorthodox methodology in arriving at tax freedom day. 
 
For example, in this report that the Leader of the Opposition 
cites, what’s the best place in Canada according to the Fraser 
Institute? Would it be, for example, Ontario? No. No. It’s 
Newfoundland, Canada. Why? Newfoundland, Canada — why? 
Because Newfoundland has the lowest average income in 
Canada. Is that what you want us to work towards — judging 
the Fraser Institute? 
 
You know Alberta’s ranked . . . Alberta, Alberta, get this, Mr. 
Speaker — Alberta, according to the Fraser Institute, is ranked 
fifth behind all four of the Maritime provinces. Now here’s how 
it works. 
 
The institute says that royalties collected are part of the taxes 
paid by Saskatchewan families. Can you believe it? That’s a 
falsehood; there’re not. They’re paid by the oil companies. So 
by its solution, don’t tax the oil companies . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I can’t believe that the Premier would 
have the nerve to start talking about gasoline because he taxes 
the hide off Saskatchewan people — there, both in royalties and 
the tax at the pumps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family income isn’t the only thing that’s being 
destroyed by this demolition government. They are also 
demolishing the health care system — bed closures, hospital 
closures, doctor shortages, nursing shortages, and the longest 
surgical waiting list in Canada. That’s the record of this 
demolition government. 
 
And every day in this House, the Premier gets up and blathers 
on about 1962. The Premier . . . Mr. Premier, let’s start talking 
about 1993. That’s when you closed 52 hospitals, and that’s 
when you brought in your wellness model that was suppose to 
save health care. Instead, Mr. Premier, you have destroyed 
health care. And all we have to look forward to is more bed 
closures, more hospital closures, and even longer waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Premier, instead of talking about 1962, why don’t you talk 
about your record of destroying health care system now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here we go again, and I 

love this debate. Those people opposite attack us for health 
care, all the while believing in a two-tier, privatized health care 
system. The member from Weyburn, the member from Estevan, 
the members over there who support Mr. Stockwell Day. 
 
Do you know what Mr. Stockwell Day wants to do? He wants 
Ottawa to give the money to the provinces without any 
conditions. That means no national standards. That means 
two-tier system of health care. That’s what they want us to do. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we launched the Fyke 
report review on health care, we have renewed our commitment 
ever since 1991, ever since 1962, to build the best single-payer, 
publicly funded health care system in Canada. That’s the 
difference between us and them. We have to save medicare — 
they want to destroy medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
under the Premier’s government we have seen health care 
deteriorate in Saskatchewan to where it’s the worst in the 
country. He can’t point the finger at anybody else any more. 
He’s got to shoulder the blame himself. Not only is health care 
falling apart, but highways in this province are falling apart 
under his watch. 
 
The Premier said that he got the message from the Wood River 
by-election, but he has not reversed his plan to gravel highways. 
He has no plan for fixing the highways in this province. It’s just 
one more area of failure for this demolition government. 
 
Mr. Premier, three years ago your government started talking 
about its 10-year plan to fix highways. But three years into that 
plan, and you’ll have to agree with this, highways are in worse 
shape than they’ve ever been. Many are not even safe to drive 
on, and you’re turning them back to gravel. 
 
Mr. Premier, why are you and your demolition government 
destroying Saskatchewan’s highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here we go again, the 
same old stock question by those people opposite. And here is 
the answer, Mr. Speaker — first question was on taxes, second 
was on health care, third is on highways — I quote from The 
StarPhoenix editorial of yesterday. Quote — this is my answer 
to you, sir: 
 

Whichever political party promises to deliver it all (by) is 
playing voters for patsies. Any voter who believes that 
turfing out the current government will, overnight, get all 
(the) highways magically paved, rural hospitals reopened, 
waiting lists zapped . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order. I want to thank hon. members for 
allowing the question to have been heard. I would like to thank 
you also to allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’ll finish off, Mr. Speaker, by saying 
any political party that says you can get: 

 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

. . . rural hospitals reopened . . . waiting lists zapped, farm 
supports ratcheted up and taxes slashed is practising a form 
of self-delusion not seen since the heady days of Grant 
Devine. 
 

That’s what you’re practising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Personal Health Information 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Madam Minister, the national CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) television show, Undercurrents, 
recently aired a program about a provincial government 
experiment undertaken in Ontario. It was to gather health data 
from residents of one community. 
 
It was revealed during this program that this project was based 
on what was already happening in Saskatchewan. It was 
reported that in Saskatchewan, the government gathers 
everyone’s health and drug records and then offers that data for 
sale to drug companies and health market researchers. 
 
Madam Minister, has the Department of Health ever sold the 
provincial database of personal health and drug records or 
portions thereof, and if so, to whom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that 
Saskatchewan Health does not sell personal health information 
from any of its databases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the CBC Undercurrents program 
mentioned several times the practice of the province of 
Saskatchewan to sell the health information of our residents to 
other companies. Yet the minister is denying this; or perhaps 
like the minister of Gaming, she doesn’t know what’s going on 
in her department. 
 
Madam Minister, if the Saskatchewan Health or the NDP 
government is not selling our personal data health information, 
why is this fact commonly stated in Ontario by their 
government officials? Why did a national CBC news program 
openly talk about it? And why would you not answer our 
written questions submitted to you earlier this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member is that Saskatchewan Health does respond to requests 
from researchers and will compile edited, aggregated 
information for researchers for approved health research in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. But we do not sell personal health 
information from our databases. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, why would you not answer 
the written question then, if you’re not selling the information? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the CBC story, a lot of the controversy 

surrounding the issue of the Ontario provincial government 
gathering personal health data information and then selling it 
involved the concerns of people that confidentiality might be 
breached. People were very uncomfortable with the idea of 
where their personal health information might end up and the 
idea it might even be sold at all. 
 
I am confident that people here in Saskatchewan will have 
much the same concerns when they find out that the 
Department of Health or other agencies sell their health data. 
 
Madam Minister, what safeguards are there in place that will 
ensure the confidentiality of the records of the people of 
Saskatchewan regarding health criteria? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member is that the questions that she asked will be tabled. The 
answers to those questions will be tabled in the legislature after 
question period. 
 
What I can tell the member is that any data that is provided is 
provided in an aggregated or a summarized, non-identifiable 
way to protect confidentiality. And what the member is doing 
and continuing to do is to create alarm and fear, because she’s 
trying to undermine our publicly funded and publicly 
administered health system. 
 
She of all members of the legislature, now that we have the 
member from Wood River, they want to destroy public 
medicare in this country. And she is doing nothing more than 
fearmongering and asking silly questions when she knows no 
one’s confidential medical record has been shared or ever will 
be shared, except by the former Devine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
Political Contributions 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this morning you 
finally admitted the taxpayers’ money has been funnelled from 
SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) to the NDP. 
According to the NDP news release, the NDP received at least 
$8,000 in cash from SIGA since 1997. 
 
But the news release doesn’t talk about the thousands and 
thousands of dollars in prizes provided by SIGA to NDP 
fundraising events. And the news release doesn’t talk about the 
money that was funnelled from SIGA to individual NDP MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for fundraising events 
and sponsorships. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor has clearly stated that all 
casino gambling profits in Saskatchewan are taxpayers’ money. 
And now you are admitting casino profits are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the hon. member to 
kindly go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . funnelled from SIGA to the NDP. 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

Mr. Premier, do you think it’s appropriate for taxpayers’ money 
to be funnelled from SIGA to the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, any money which SIGA 
through its casino operations accumulates, after validly justified 
and properly accounted expenditures, which are the subject of, 
as I speak, an intensive review carried out by the appropriate 
authorities involved with Justice, as the Minister of Gaming has 
indicated, those are then to be divided in accordance to the 
formula. 
 
Question of sponsorships, whether they relate to leaders’ 
dinners or golf tournaments, are part and parcel of a legitimate 
part of doing business if they’re legitimately recorded and 
legitimately itemized. 
 
That the accountant will decide, and that the accounting process 
will decide. And it’s no different for SIGA than it is for the 
Royal Bank, or for Hollinger, or for anybody else coming to 
anybody . . . contribute. No difference whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another question for the Premier. Well, for at least for the next 
few weeks you’re the Premier of Saskatchewan. You are also 
the Leader of the NDP. And today you have admitted that 
taxpayers’ money . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Hon. members, may we 
continue with question period, please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Premier, if you’d like four 
more years, you can always come and run in Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Today you have admitted the taxpayers’ money has been 
funnelled from SIGA to the NDP, but you’re refusing to give 
the taxpayers’ money back. According to your news release, the 
NDP won’t give $8,000 in taxpayers’ money back unless the 
Provincial Auditor tells you to do it. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor has already said all casino 
gambling profits are property of Saskatchewan taxpayers. Will 
you do the right thing and immediately return every penny of 
taxpayers’ money you and the NDP have received from SIGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, when a person goes to a 
casino and decides to invest or gamble — call it however you 
will — that is an individual choice. That is not a tax. That is in 
the consequence of the operation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much. And, Mr. 
Speaker, after properly accounted expenses, after properly 
accounted expenses, whatever there is left over must be paid 

according to formula. 
 
This is no different than any of the corporations which . . . who 
have shareholders, which have shareholders, come to sponsor 
the dinners of the Leader of the Opposition, after their expenses 
for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They simply 
do not want to hear the truth or the answer. This is no different 
that anybody else. They would deny this to SIGA. 
 
Now I am saying to this House, Mr. Speaker, and I’m saying to 
the people of Saskatchewan: there will be a complete and full 
audit of all of these expenditures as related. That is underway as 
I speak. In due course that audit will decide what should or 
should not be done. 
 
Let’s not prejudge. Let’s see what the outcome of the audit and 
the circumstances are. And for our part, as we revealed today, if 
remedial action is required — if — we will take it forthwith. 
Right now, that is not called for. There has been full revelation 
by us, and I call on them to do the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think one of 
the things I should point out to the Premier is, is that when 
people are gambling in those casinos he referred to they are 
using government-owned machines. The Government of 
Saskatchewan owns those machines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question for the Premier. We have been 
informed that you received as much as $15,000 in prizes from 
SIGA for your NDP fundraising golf tournaments in Saskatoon 
in 1998 and 1999. We have also been informed that SIGA 
provided a similar amount of prizes for your 2000 NDP 
fundraising golf tournament in Saskatoon, but that you had the 
good sense to return those prizes. 
 
Mr. Premier, what was the value of all the prizes that SIGA 
donated to your NDP fundraising golf tournaments in 1998 and 
1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the Provincial 
Secretary of the New Democratic Party to tell the president of 
the New Democratic Party what the facts were with respect to 
SIGA prizes as the member has indicated with respect to 1998 
and 1999. I’m told that as far as the provincial New Democratic 
Party is concerned, which sponsors the Romanow scramble golf 
tournaments, those figures which were reported today are the 
correct figures to the best of the knowledge of the party and the 
records reveal. 
 
That’s the answer to the member. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, another 
question for the Premier. Mr. Premier, you aren’t the only NDP 
MLA that has been getting money or fundraising prizes from 
SIGA. We have been informed the Deputy Premier also 
received thousands of dollars worth of prizes from SIGA for 
NDP fundraising golf tournaments in 1998, 1999, and 2000. 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor says the money SIGA used 
to buy these prizes with was taxpayers’ money. And it appears 
that you and the Deputy Premier used the prizes from SIGA to 
raise money for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan? How much money in cash and prizes have NDP 
MLAs received from SIGA? How much money and prizes has 
the NDP Party received from SIGA? And will you commit 
today that every dime of taxpayers’ money that was funnelled 
from SIGA to the NDP and NDP MLAs will be repaid 
immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, notice how this 
Saskatchewan Party operates and this one-term MLA from 
Carrot River operates. He starts his questions on the basis of 
what the provincial New Democratic Party . . . on the Romanow 
scramble tournaments received by way of prizes. I give him the 
answer. Then he shifts over to what about other individual 
MLA constituencies and their prizes. 
 
And I say to him, as I said earlier, that every NDP MLA, by 
way of a prize or sponsorship in a golf tournament — if after 
the audits are completed and it is indicated were not made 
correctly — will be returned. The reality of the matter is that 
there have been no prizes, I’m informed, made to the Deputy 
Premier in Regina Elphinstone. Instead they simply yell. They 
will not accept those facts. They are told, they are told, they are 
told — tell us who told you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s time to fess up and the question is 
very, very simple. Did SIGA donate prizes to your NDP 
fundraising golf tournaments in Saskatoon in 1998 and 1999? 
And if so, what was the value of those prizes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my answer remains the 
same. The information that I have received from the provincial 
secretary of the NDP and the president is as reported publicly to 
the journalists and to the House today by myself and the 
members opposite. That is the situation. If there . . . It’s 
reported, and they know what’s there. It is exactly $8,000 over 
the four years or the three years of the operations that were 
involved, including the sponsorships of the fundraising dinners. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite how it is that they 
would draw a difference between SIGA buying a table, 
sponsorship table — taxpayers’ dollars is what they argue — 
they draw a difference between that, but not their good friends 
Hollinger press or CP Rail or anybody else. They are absolutely 
phony and irresponsible in their accusations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
taxpayers’ dollars are supposed to be going to the associated 
entities fund, to the First Nations fund for the general benefit, 
economic, and well-being of First Nations people and . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m sitting close to the member and I 
can hardly hear him. I ask all members to please come to order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor says 
all casino profits generated by SIGA-operated casinos in 
Saskatchewan is taxpayers’ money. It’s not SIGA’s money; it’s 
not FSIN’s (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) 
money; it’s not the NDP’s money — it’s the taxpayers’ money. 
 
So when the NDP accepts money or prizes from SIGA, you are 
funnelling taxpayers’ money from SIGA to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support the practice of funnelling 
taxpayers’ money from SIGA to the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the member keeps on 
going over and over again, and I’m saying to the House and to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we have given the SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) complete 
authority to have all of the books and the records checked — 
and they will be checked completely and fully. 
 
They will be done so by an independent auditor, Ernst & 
Young. They’ll be done so in concert with the Provincial 
Auditor. They will be made public, and if remedial action is to 
be taken, we shall take this action. 
 
On the issue of this amount of money that the members 
continue to characterize wrongly as taxpayers’ money, and 
perhaps some general sense they are right. On this issue 
opposition is correct. 
 
If it is ruled that these were not donations, the contributions 
made, pursuant to sponsorship in the right way, we will be 
making those payments back forthwith. And that’s something 
more than the Saskatchewan Party has ever done to date on 
their contributions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Hon. members, I truly 
appreciate the applause, but kindly now let’s get back to 
business. Thank you very much. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Hon. members, please. Hon. 
members on both sides, please. Government orders have been 
called. I’ll ask the Clerk to call our next order of business. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again today would 
like to take this opportunity to speak out against Bill 59, speak 
out against its negative effects on the economy, and also on the 
negative effects it has on the freedom of speech for the workers 
in this province. Also on the loss of the democratic right for 
employers and employees in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill 59, is nothing but 
forced unionization. The government will be forcing workers 
into unions. The union workers will not have the right to 
determine on their own whether they want to belong to a union 
or not. Not only they will not have a secret ballot, but they will 
not even have the right under the current rules to sign a 
certification card in order to ask whether they want to be in a 
union or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill 59 is nothing but an NDP money grab. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government forces 
workers into a union, the workers of this province are forced to 
pay union dues whether they’re in the union or not, and the 
unions donate that money to the NDP Party. 
 
Not only the employees are forced, but also the employers lose 
their right to pick their own bargaining representative. This Bill 
is nothing but a Bill to circumvent the law, the judge’s ruling 
recently. 
 
(1430) 
 
Bill 59 will have a dramatic negative effect on the economy of 
this province. It will result in loss of jobs. Because of the effect 
of Bill 59, Saskatchewan companies will not be able to compete 
bidding on Saskatchewan jobs. These contracts will go out to 
the out-of-province, open-shop companies. The profit from 
these companies will be paid in other provinces, and the 
workers will pay their personal income tax in other provinces. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the utility rates and cost to 
the taxpayer will increase in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has had an opportunity on a number of 
occasions to debate this Bill. The North Saskatoon Business 
Association offered to host a debate between the minister and 
the Saskatchewan Party but they refused to have a public 
debate. Also, the Alliance for Economic Growth has asked the 
Premier for a meeting to discuss the effects of this Bill, but 
again the Premier said there wasn’t enough time before the Bill 
was passed to discuss the implications. 
 
My colleague brought in a motion to hoist this Bill for six 
months — delay it for six months. Again, the coalition 
government turned down that request. Saskatchewan Party has 
put forward a number of very common sense amendments and 
each one was voted down by this NDP coalition government. 
 
With this Bill . . . we would like this Bill withdrawn or at the 
very least delayed. Give the Saskatchewan construction 
industry and the Saskatchewan construction workers and the 

Saskatchewan people an opportunity to be heard. Do the right 
thing — put the Saskatchewan people ahead of your fundraising 
schemes and withdraw Bill 59. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel I must 
respond to that. And there’s really just two things that I want to 
say. 
 
One is that we had several years of consultation on this Bill. 
And people who were participants in the processes — I quoted 
yesterday, Mr. McLachlan and others — they acknowledged 
that there was an MOU (memorandum of understanding) that 
became very close to being accepted. 
 
Certainly I wasn’t very happy that they weren’t able to reach a 
consensus because it would have made my job much easier to 
have had the parties reach agreement as they did in Ontario. 
 
But that wasn’t the case here, Mr. Speaker. And I regret that. 
And certainly I’ve made a commitment to the members that we 
will sit down with the industry and get on with life in terms of 
how to deal with the real competitive issues that they raise . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I understand that. But at the end of 
the day, I remind the member opposite that when you sign a 
contract with somebody, you should not be able to avoid that 
obligation by setting up another company and moving your 
interests into that company. 
 
And based on the letter that the member opposite sent out 
guaranteeing to sell his vote for either 1,000, 5,000, or $10,000 
based on the 23 votes they had on this matter yesterday, I would 
assume you’re now $115,000 richer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 2:34 p.m. until 3:03 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 

The Chair: — I’ll invite the Hon. Premier to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the members of the House, especially the new 
members of the House, the officials who I have advising me. 
 
First of all Dr. Greg Marcheldon, who’s the deputy minister to 
the Department of Executive Council, seated to my immediate 
left; seated to my immediate right is my chief of staff, Ms. Judy 
Samuelson. In no special order, behind, is seated Bonita Heidt, 
director of administration and information services, behind Dr. 
Marcheldon; and seated behind me is Jim Nicol, who’s the 
acting director of senior management services and also the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
Those are the officials that are with me today. 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the 
Premier, we welcome you here with your officials. We look 
forward to a productive session of garnering some information 
from you and your officials on the role of Executive Council, 
and by extension, your entire government. For as you and I both 
know, as the Premier of the province you are responsible for 
your administration in every degree. 
 
Mr. Premier, this has been an interesting session — my first 
session, some would speculate your last session. That’s 
something that you’ll have to let the people of this province 
know in your time. 
 
But it’s been a particularly interesting session because you’ve 
been lurching from crisis to crisis. And when that happens, it’s 
a sign of no vision, no battle plan, a lack of planning, lack of 
management, lack of understanding of the problems, and 
preoccupation with the wrong things, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, what we have seen as a government and a Premier 
that was once seemingly invincible — no one could ever touch 
the mighty NDP Government of Saskatchewan — and yet last 
year’s election you almost lost it. In fact you lost the popular 
vote, you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — You had to do what you called some soul 
searching at the time. And the soul searching you did was to 
find three souls that were for sale to put together a majority 
government. And since that time, I think you’ve disappointed 

the people of Saskatchewan with a government that has become 
unaccountable, autocratic, and unable to deal with the problems 
facing Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, I looked at some comments that you made back in 
1989 — that’s when you were the leader of the official 
opposition and you were criticizing the Devine government. 
And I want to make it clear that probably that the Devine 
government deserved criticism. I have no quibble whatsoever 
with that. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, you said, then there’s the — and I quote you 
from August 16, 1989, and this is out of Hansard, and you say: 
 

Then there’s the question of the vision. Does a government 
have a positive vision of the future, a vision that has room 
for all? Or is it a vision which in effect tries to return the 
province of Saskatchewan to a yester-year . . .  
 

And I’ll interrupt there to say, Mr. Premier, I haven’t heard 
anyone in this House talk about the past more than I’ve heard 
you talk about the past in this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And then you talk about: 
 

. . . a vision which (is really a narrow) . . . which has a 
(really) narrow and partisan plan, the result of which is 
going to be for the benefit and enrichment of the 
advancement of fewer of our Saskatchewan people? It is a 
vision which builds bridges between urban and rural, or is 
it one that divides? 
 

And you know, Mr. Premier, that your administration has 
divided rural and urban Saskatchewan more than any 
administration in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — You go on, Mr. Premier, to say: 
 

Is it a vision which seeks to build into the system the 
accommodation of the interests of the Indian and native 
Aboriginal people, those who have been traditionally been 
victimized over the years by all governments, Or is it a 
vision which divides?  
 

And again, Mr. Premier, I interrupt your own words to say that 
the state of Aboriginal people in this province has never been 
lower than it is under your administration. 
 
Mr. Premier, you go on to say that these are five yardsticks by 
which you measure governments: 
 

. . . fairness, stewardship, capacity to run things in a proper 
way, management, trust, and vision . . . this government 
(you said) has been an abject failure, and in my judgment, 
the worst government, probably, in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  

 
Mr. Premier, you may have been right at the time. I don’t know 
whether you were or not because I don’t know about previous 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

administrations. But I know that your administration has been 
worse than the one that you succeeded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, our province has gone 
downhill in the last nine years. Mr. Premier, we have watched 
an NDP government that was once touted as the champs of 
political strategy become a government that lurches from crisis 
to crisis. You have no plan for this province. You don’t know 
how to deal with our problems. 
 
For the first seven or eight years, your strategy has simply been 
to blame others — blame the Devine government, blame the 
federal government, blame the current opposition. You’ve got a 
thousand ghosts that you want to blame, Mr. Premier. 
 
And then something happened; it happened last September and 
people said, is that all you’ve got to say, Mr. Premier? Is that 
the best you can do? And that’s why you lost the popular vote. 
The answer coming from your government was no, this is the 
best we can do. Those other guys were terrible. Measure us 
against them and we’ll measure up. 
 
Well you don’t measure up. You don’t even measure up 
according to your own yardstick, Mr. Premier. After nine years 
in office you still don’t have a plan to deal with the challenges 
facing Saskatchewan. You don’t have a plan for tomorrow, let 
alone the next year or the next decade. 
 
What you’ve been reduced to is dealing with issues 
management and lately, I might say, crisis management. And 
that has led to such ill-conceived and politically crass policies 
as forced amalgamation, forced unionization, and Mr. Premier, 
it must even sadden you — forced gravelization. We’re going 
back to the ‘30s under your administration, Mr. Premier. 
 
You have no plan to deal with the youth of this province. You 
just expect them to leave. You’re giving them nothing to stay 
here for. What a legacy you’re leaving. Young people leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan. It’s so sad that I . . . that it’s hard 
to find enough words to describe the hurt in the families of 
Saskatchewan as they watch their children leave probably never 
to return, unless we can change this province’s attitude and give 
them a good reason to come back to this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have not given Saskatchewan people 
high-paying jobs. People in other provinces standard of living is 
going up; Saskatchewan’s standard of living is at the bottom of 
the barrel. We’re on the bottom rung of the ladder. So many 
categories, economic categories, and Saskatchewan is a failure. 
We’re the poor cousins of our great country of Canada. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Premier, you have no plan to deal with a lack of investment 
in our province. Private capital and industry opportunities are 
passing our province by. You have no vision as to how to 
change that. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have no plan to deal with the important . . . 
the emerging importance of the Aboriginal population in 
Saskatchewan. Their standard of living is despicable. They are 

one of the biggest assets our province has and you have no plan 
to harness that asset, to help them to feel more at home in 
Saskatchewan and more a part of our province’s economy. 
 
Mr. Premier, there are other issues that you are failing to 
address, and I, along with my colleagues during this opportunity 
of estimates, will deal with those issues. 
 
After nine years in office, you still have no vision, no plan, to 
deal with these issues. All you can do is continue to point your 
finger at others, blame others for your incompetence and your 
lack of performance. 
 
Mr. Premier, huge blow it must have been when you set up your 
renewal program for the NDP Party. And you took your 
colleague, a very close colleague, Mr. Ned Shillington and put 
him charge of NDP renewal, only to see him also throw up his 
hands and say there’s no hope with this NDP government, I 
can’t convince them about renewal. And he took a job — 
where, Mr. Premier? Where did he take a job? 
 
He took that job in Calgary. He went to Calgary for opportunity 
— your own colleague, your own close colleague. One of the 
few that you have remaining has up and abandoned this 
province. He’s abandoned you, he’s abandoned the NDP, and 
he’s gone to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Premier, he is an example of what’s happening to people, 
person after person, whether they be young people, business 
people, seniors, who are leaving this province. The problems 
aren’t getting better, Mr. Premier, they’re only getting worse. 
 
As I said, Mr. Premier, I believe you may be getting near the 
end of your tenure. There’s a lot of speculation in that regard, 
but whatever the case, you seem to be on cruise control, Mr. 
Premier. Your hands are barely on the wheel. Certainly your 
feet aren’t on the gas — we know that because we’re stalling, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
I believe that your personal agenda, as some would call it, is an 
exit strategy from your current position, and perhaps that’s why 
your government lacks vision and doesn’t know what course to 
lead the province down. 
 
Mr. Premier, your team is in a shambles. Your key players are 
gone. Your caucus, your cabinet is weaker than Saskatchewan 
has seen in decades. Mr. Premier, you have failed the vision test 
by your own yardstick. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, will you apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for losing vision and losing confidence in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I 
have a great deal of respect on a personal basis for the Leader of 
the Opposition. I think as a Member of Parliament for four or 
five years, he distinguished himself. I don’t agree with his 
policies and programs. That’s another matter. 
 
I say that by way of preface because what I have to say next 
makes me wonder whether or not my heretofore relatively high 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

opinion of the Leader of the Opposition should be maintained. 
 
I have to say that this is his first time in the House as Leader of 
the Opposition in Executive Council estimates. For me it isn’t 
my first time — nor is it my last time. And I want to say to the 
opposition leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And I want to say to the opposition 
leader that of all of the opposition leaders that I have faced and 
opposition leaders with whom I have served in estimates, your 
presentation this afternoon talking about lack of vision really is 
one of the dramatic descriptions of that failure — that failure on 
the part of this amalgam of men and women who have come 
from basically disgruntled Conservative ranks who have old 
scores to settle. They never believe they lost the election in 
1991; they want to re-fight the election. Disgruntled Liberals. 
Some new Alliance types, new Reform types, like yourself, sir. 
 
You talk about our vision and our program and I’m prepared to 
stack it up — as it will be stacked up at the appropriate time at 
election — at any time against what your party has offered. 
 
Our vision for the province of Saskatchewan is a vision which 
is based on a dynamic 21st century Saskatchewan which is 
plugged into the information and technology society, which 
knows how to build and to prosper in a global society and 
community, which makes sure that while we are economically 
competitive and strong we provide a very solid social base. 
 
I point to the programs on the economic development. A budget 
introduced by the Minister of Finance this year which will put 
us on a track where 70 per cent, approximately, of Alberta 
taxpayers will be at the same level of taxation as ours, the 
largest . . . 
 
And the rudeness, the rudeness of the members opposite there. 
They can laugh if they want, but that’s typical of the kind of 
opposition that we have. And a big warning I might add, 
parenthetically, to the people of Saskatchewan of the kind of 
government that they could expect if ever, ever that day comes. 
 
Largest tax cuts in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, 
voted against by the Leader of the Opposition and his group. An 
economic package which sees more people in the first five 
months working each month in the province of Saskatchewan 
than ever in the history of the province of Saskatchewan since 
1905, since we entered Confederation. 
 
A social program which shows compassion for children, the 
children’s action development program at 55 million people, the 
joint committee that the member from Humboldt is serving very 
ably with the member from Saskatoon Greystone. The new 
provisions in respect to social services, building on 
independence, getting away from the safety net. Where are 
they? They’re in the National Child Tax Credit Benefit program 
— that’s where they are. 
 
I can continue on listing those examples. New opportunities for 
working men and women. Job skills and job skills training and 
work training programs. And one could go on and on, including 
in a very difficult farm situation where I want to thank the 

Leader of the Opposition in uniting with us or we uniting with 
them — I don’t care about the credit — coming together as a 
Saskatchewan team. We went down to Ottawa; we fought. We 
didn’t get what we wanted to get but we got $300 million for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve got a huge agenda out there now to fight for. 
Transportation for farmers and making sure that that works. 
We’ve got to make sure there’s a safety net which is in place. 
All of these are programs which are in progress or being 
accomplished and it hasn’t been done. It hasn’t been done in 
nine years; it hasn’t been done in nine months of the election. 
 
But I tell you when the history is written of this period of 
government, it will be demonstrated by not the Leader of the 
Opposition and not by me but by independent observers that 
this was a government that rescued Saskatchewan from 
bankruptcy, from bankruptcy, from bankruptcy. 
 
Now this is a word that I am told I should never use by the 
banking institutions and the investment houses who tell me that 
no Premier should say bankruptcy. And I want to tell you in 
1992 and ’93 when The Globe and Mail reported, because of 
the profligacy of the government preceding for nine years, that 
there was a provincial government unable to meet its budgetary 
demands given $850 million a year in interest payments. 
 
And I say to the credit of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, to his 
credit and also to the premier or at least the Finance minister at 
the time, Mr. Mazankowski, they came to the assistance of this 
government and helped the people of this province put together 
a budget. 
 
And with the people rolling up their sleeves and tightening their 
belts and some taxes went up and some programs were reduced, 
we’ve pulled through it and we eliminated the deficit and we 
balanced for seven years in a row and we’ve done it in a 
balanced way — one-third for debt reduction, one-third for 
income tax reduction, one-third for investments and new 
programs, be it roads or health care education, the Ken Fyke 
review which has been launched. 
 
You can hear me, Mr. Chairman. I don’t want to take up the 
time of the committee unnecessarily. 
 
That vision of what we are aiming for and what we have 
accomplished is a vision of a dynamic, progressive, socially 
sensitive, caring, and all-embracing government. That 
commitment remains in this coalition government as strong 
today in the year 2000 as it did from the day that I was sworn in 
first as Premier on November 1, 1991. I will put that record up 
against any other record at any other time. 
 
And this is no time to re-fight the election of September 
because I always get a chuckle of my Conservative friends 
when they re-fight it. But I do say one thing, in this House, in 
this session — I haven’t done a record of it, so I’m not going to 
re-fight the election; but I’ll tell you what it’s reflective of — in 
this House, in this session, I stand to be corrected, I’ll say this 
right now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I stand to be 
corrected and I’ll say so publicly. But I bet you, Mr. Chairman, 
that if the officers of this House took an examination of the 
number of questions that were asked and in what areas they 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

were asked by the Saskatchewan Party and the official 
opposition, I bet you that there were — what? — not one 
question on economic development, not one question on 
economic development. 
 
A handful of questions to the Minister of Agriculture — a 
handful of questions. 
 
I bet you, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I will say, Mr. Chairman, if you total 
up the questions asked during this session, you’ll find by two 
country miles, three country miles, where these people opposite 
were headed. They asked more questions about forced 
amalgamation as they described it, and more questions about 
the Queer City Film Festival than they did about medicare or 
education or even on roads or any other concerns of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
If there is any more damning indictment of the failure of this 
opposition, it is their phony arguments and questions on 
so-called forced amalgamation and their failure to speak to the 
concerns of ordinary men and women. Mr. Chairman, that’s a 
condemnation of them, not of us. They’re the ones who have no 
image. They’re the ones who want and have no vision. They’re 
the ones who want to freeze health care. They’re the ones that 
want to freeze education. They don’t care. 
 
And talk about divisions, talk about divisions. Isn’t it interesting 
that we went through question period and we may go through 
estimates here, isn’t it interesting that when you go through the 
sponsorships that took place in respect to leaders’ dinners or 
golf tournaments, not a question directed to anybody except 
SIGA. Not a question directed to anybody outside of the SIGA 
area. Why? Why? Why . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t 
want to get into that. If you want to get into it, we’ll get into it. 
But not one question. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is an opposition which is totally divided. It’s 
an opposition which has a group of men and women who 
support Stockwell Day actively, who I predict will resign their 
seats while I’m still Premier to run for Mr. Stockwell Day. 
That’s what I predict. 
 
And you know what Mr. Stockwell Day believes in with respect 
to health care? He believes that Ottawa should transfer the 
money to the provinces with no conditions. And that means 
every province can have their own standards. And that means 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . right on, right on. The member 
from Moosomin says right on. That’s why you have a Bill 11 in 
Alberta. 
 
That’s exactly what’s going to happen. It’s an opposition which 
is terribly fractured, divided. The member . . . oh, they laugh. 
They laugh. The member from Estevan . . . the member from 
Estevan . . . yes, you. The member from Estevan objected in 
question period today to me saying that she’s for privatization. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did not. I sent you a letter asking you 
to give me the quote from Hansard that said I supported it. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Oh, well the member says now that she 
wants a letter to show whether or not she’s for privatization. My 
question is this: is she for privatization or is she not? She has to 
tell me. Her argument can’t be, you can’t find it on me, Mr. 
Premier; you can’t find it. I’m for privatization but you can’t 
find it anywhere in Hansard. 
 
Her position has got to be to stand up and say, I’m for it or I’m 
agin it. And if you’re agin it, then your member from Weyburn 
is for it, and your member behind you is for it. The member 
who got elected is for it. And if you’re agin it, your leader is for 
it. And if you’re against it, the person sitting in front of you is 
for it — privatization. 
 
Divided on policies, divided in their political ambitions, 
visionless, gutless, and they want to take us back to Devine. No, 
Mr. Leader of the Opposition, it is this side that has the 
opposition; it is your side which is barren of ideas, and why 
you’ll never sit on the treasury benches — never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and through you 
to the Premier, Mr. Chair. My concerns and my questions are 
around the issue of SIGA because I think, Mr. Premier, you 
mentioned a couple of issues there and ridiculed our interest 
and our concern about them. 
 
And first and foremost amongst them was the issue of 
amalgamation. Well, Mr. Premier, not understanding why it is 
that this side of the House is concerned about amalgamation 
shows just how out of touch you and your government are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — That is nowhere near where the real 
world is, Mr. Premier. Go out into the Porcupine Plains, the 
Shellbrooks, the Nipawins — go out and talk to those people. 
Spend some time with them and find out what they think about 
your plans for municipal amalgamation. 
 
I would suggest, however, that you don’t take Dr. Jack Stabler 
and Dr. Garcea with you. 
 
Mr. Premier, some of the issues around SIGA I think have to be 
addressed, because they go right to the core of the very 
understanding of some very, very basic principles. 
 
You suggested earlier in question period, in fact you and the 
members of your government ridiculed the statement that the 
government owns the slot machines at SIGA. Well I would like 
to read from you . . . for you a letter dated June 14 from the 
Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan to the Hon. Minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
The Provincial Auditor says, Mr. Premier: 
 

The Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority owns the 
slot machines (at) . . . SIGA casinos. The revenue from the 
slot machines belongs to (the) Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority and . . . therefore, Mr. Premier, (is) 
public money. SIGA can deduct legitimate expenses from 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

the slot machine revenues and then remit the net amount to 
(the) Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 

Further to that, the Provincial Auditor also believes that 
casino profits are public money, taxpayers’ money because 
they are for the social and economic well-being of the entire 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The profits from SIGA, and this has been determined by your 
government, must be divided in three ways: firstly, to the First 
Nations fund, secondly, to the associated entities fund, thirdly, 
to the General Revenue Fund. Those are then as a result of the 
distribution of the profits considered taxpayers’ dollars — 
taxpayers’ dollars that are to be used for the well-being of the 
people of this province. 
 
I think firstly, Mr. Premier, of the First Nations fund. Yesterday 
in this House we had two very articulate and compassionate 
MLAs stand up and deliver the interim report of the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 
Through the Sex Trade — this report, Mr. Premier — in that 
report it is clearly identified that some of the victims, a lot of 
the victims of the exploitation of children in the sex trade are in 
fact First Nations people, First Nations children. Those are the 
people where it is necessary that that money go to in order that 
they stand a fighting chance at life in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — But what’s happened? The money is 
being siphoned off to NDP MLAs and NDP constituency 
associations. They don’t even stand a chance of getting it in the 
first place. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Premier, is the associated entities fund. I 
spent 20 years working in the human services field, Mr. 
Premier. I have a very good working knowledge of the 
associated entities fund. 
 
The associated entities fund has done a tremendous amount of 
good for people with disabilities and vulnerable people in our 
society. And there are lots of agencies, non-government 
organizations, community-based organizations out there, Mr. 
Premier, that are suffering today. They can’t deliver the 
programs and services that they need to to provide support for 
vulnerable people because your government has cut their 
funding. 
 
So here’s the one last avenue that they have is the associated 
entities fund. The people with disabilities, vulnerable people, 
people with special needs are not going to get that money. 
They’re not going to get it as long as you don’t consider SIGA 
profits taxpayers’ money. 
 
The other issue, Mr. Premier, is the issue of the General 
Revenue Fund, the third area. I mean if this isn’t taxpayers’ 
money, then I would like you to explain to me what it is, if it 
can go directly to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question simply is: do you agree with the 
Provincial Auditor that SIGA profits are taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what I believe. I 
believe what the Provincial Auditor wrote but what you, the 
hon. member from Carrot River, did not say in question period, 
or even now, until you were forced to read it. 
 
And I remember a little incident involving myself where the 
allegation was a misquote and that I should withdraw. I’m not 
going to put that to you. But you know full well what you put in 
question period, and only now were you forced to come clean. 
 
And here’s exactly in that letter of June 14, 2000 what the 
Provincial Auditor writes. He writes the following: 
 

The revenue from the slot machines belongs to SLGA (and 
that is an obvious fact with which we agree) and is, 
therefore, public money. 
 

That’s what he wrote. You said taxpayers’ money. Now I want 
to tell you — I want to tell you — that when the Royal Bank 
gets shares money, it is public money. That’s why they’re 
called publicly credited corporations. I am telling you that when 
it is argued that there is an obligation with respect to public 
money . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Now when the questioner was making his statement and putting 
the question, there was no problem hearing the statements and 
questions. And I ask for the same respect for the person 
delivering the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And so, Mr. Speaker, to try to make 
the point succinctly. Here’s a situation with respect to SIGA 
and with respect to the question of, let’s take the VLTs (video 
lottery terminal), the SLGA licensed VLTs. 
 
If you have a hotel which has VLTs, privately owned, privately 
operated, of which there has to be a payment of the revenues of 
VLT to the GRF (General Revenue Fund), is it argued by the 
Saskatchewan Party that that private hotelier is not permitted to 
buy a corporate sponsorship table at a Saskatchewan Party 
banquet? Yes or no? 
 
And is it argued by you, sir, and is it argued by you, sir, and is it 
argued by you, sir, that that private hotelier is not private — 
that he’s really a nationalized corporation? What is it? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, the 
issue around interpretation — interpretation. Mr. Premier, it’s 
absolutely incredible how this government . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Now I’m going to ask members to . . . 
Order, order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Premier, let’s put the same 
question to you, sir. If the government of this province has the 
regulatory and legislative responsibility for SIGA — the 
regulatory and legislative responsibility — is it then appropriate 
for that very government to turn around and allow those that 
they regulate to donate back to the political party which they 
belong to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member from 
Carrot River now is way over his head. He is way over his head. 
 
I want it to be known that the hon. member from Carrot River is 
in effect arguing that if the hotels association should buy a 
corporate table in representation of the hoteliers privately, at a 
Saskatchewan Party corporate fundraising, that that somehow is 
unlawful and inappropriate, regulated as it is — the hotels — by 
the SLGA. That’s your argument. 
 
And my question to you is simply this. If it is wrong for SIGA 
regulated by SLGA, is it wrong for the hotels association to 
appear on November 10, 1999 funnelling money to the Sask 
Party and the Leader of the Opposition? Tell me that. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Premier — thank you, Mr. Chair — 
Mr. Premier, it’s not us that’s saying this is taxpayers’ dollars. 
It’s the Provincial Auditor who is saying it’s taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And how, Mr. Premier, can you justify taxpayers’ dollars being 
turned around and redirected back to the political party to which 
the government members opposite belong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Chairman, why I say 
he’s way over his head. He refuses now twice to answer the 
question and I’ve given . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, 
I’ve given the . . . I’ve given the answer. I’ve given the answer 
of the government in my questions. 
 
By analogy if a farming person on farming operations makes a 
profit, as tough as it is these days, and pays taxes, by his 
argument, that belongs to everybody. And it’s got to be audited 
by everybody. 
 
If the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, if a hotel on VLT 
makes a profit, privately owned, your argument is that’s 
taxpayers’ money — every cent of it has got to be audited by 
the Government of Saskatchewan. That’s what you’re saying. 
 
That is the most ludicrous and ridiculous argument, and you 
single out one group and one group only, and you don’t even 
apply it. If the company that is paying royalties for oil 
companies, pays taxes, you argue that is public money . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order, order. 
Now we had, by my count, at least a half a dozen people that 
were making every bit as much noise as the Premier in his 
attempt to answer the question. The Chair appreciates the quiet 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’ll be very 
brief. It is not an arm of government we’re talking about here. 
And the examples I used make that point. Now maybe they 
didn’t catch it by me asking the questions, but that’s the issue 
there. It’s an arm of government. 
 
And it is important when you’re dealing with public funds — I 
don’t care whether you’re the Royal Bank or the Government of 
Saskatchewan or SIGA — it is absolutely, critically important 
that those funds be properly, and totally, and completely 
accounted for. 

That’s why the minister in charge of the Gaming Authority 
acted decisively and immediately and that’s why, I repeat again, 
that we are going to pursue this, through the SLGA, the 
regulatory authority — not the government but the SLGA — by 
law empowered. The auditors are there, full compliance by 
SIGA. Whether it is SIGA or in any other field of endeavour, 
there has to be proper accounting of funds. 
 
That is the situation which exists today, and we’re committed 
on that. But for that member to single out and not be able to 
answer even logically where the differences are shows how 
hollow these arguments are and really shows one thing — he’s 
not interested in joining with us in cleaning this up and 
answering the issues. What he wants to do is to draw political 
points. It’s not working, Mr. Member. It’s not working, and it 
won’t work. 
 
Let the process work. Let the auditors do their job. It’s in 
concert with the Provincial Auditor. It’ll be public. You can 
debate it. What remedial action needs to be taken, will be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, 
when we as the official opposition attempt to, as you say, let the 
process work, we are just simply thwarted each and every time. 
And I want to refer specifically to the stonewalling of our 
attempts to be able to discuss this with the Provincial Auditor at 
Public Accounts. 
 
And once again . . . And it’ll be interesting to see what kind of a 
spin you can put on this one, Mr. Premier. The Provincial 
Auditor, in the report just recently issued, indicated very clearly 
— members can ask our office questions on what we plan to do 
and on what we actually did; such questions can be asked at any 
time and at public meetings of the Board of Internal Economy, 
the Standing Committee on Estimates, and the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
But we, Mr. Premier, were not allowed to use due process. So 
with respect to the issue of hotels and the issue of contributions, 
there are some very distinct differences, Mr. Premier. Hotels are 
not bound by a province-wide agreement with the Government 
of Saskatchewan that mandates the division, the division of 
funds into the three categories that I referred to earlier. Hotels 
as well, Mr. Premier, have revenue from other sources. 
 
SIGA has revenue from only one source — gambling. And that 
is why your government has a specific special agreement with 
them because even you realize that it is a single and sole source 
of revenue. And it is through that that you then in turn wanted 
to be able to have a certain degree of input into where those 
profits went. 
 
And I don’t think any hotelier out there would have any 
appreciation of you attempting to tell them where their profits 
go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — The question, Mr. Premier, is do you 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

honestly believe, Mr. Premier, that contributions to NDP MLAs 
and NDP constituency associations are legitimate expenses of 
SIGA whose sole source of revenue is gambling and who have 
a very specific, very narrow agreement with you and the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the member asks three 
questions. First of all, on the issue of the Public Accounts 
Committee, you have a right — the opposition does — every 
member has a right to raise whatever issue is appropriate before 
the Public Accounts Committee, in its wisdom, deems should 
be discussed. 
 
Now I wasn’t at the particular meeting that you refer to, but the 
argument that was advanced, as it was explained to me later by 
the government/coalition government members of the Public 
Accounts Committee was this: you can debate the report of the 
Provincial Auditor once the audit is done, but what is there to 
debate in the absence of this study being completed? 
 
I mean it’s underway right now in a full-scale way. There will 
be lots of opportunity to do that, and I acknowledge that. So 
there’s no denying your right to raise it. The issue is the 
difference of when is the appropriate time. 
 
Now the second issue you raise is the question of hotels. I have 
news for the hon. member opposite — hotels have been for 
years in the province of Saskatchewan virtually totally 
regulated by the government — Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority. Virtually . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll 
tell you how they’ve been . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
I’ll tell you how they’ve been regulated. 
 
They are regulated as to whether they get a liquor licence. They 
are regulated as to how much they can sell and in what time. 
They are regulated as to what hours. They are regulated as to 
what food they must serve. They are regulated as to whether 
they get a VLT licence. They are subject to a government 
agreement as to where the proceeds of that VLT revenue goes 
to. They are subject to an absolute check by the SLGA. There 
are SLGA inspectors out there checking the hotel operators, and 
even by your own earlier admission, the SLGA owns the VLTs 
that are inside the hotels. 
 
And you’re telling me that they’re not government regulated? 
Give your head a shake, please. They are government regulated, 
but they are also private operators and they are entitled to have 
promotion and they’re entitled to be involved in advertising as 
is anybody else who deals with the SLGA such as SIGA. 
They’re entitled promotions and advertising just like anybody 
else under the rules. 
 
Now you asked a question about what happens if, what happens 
if, what happens if . . . well we’ll all be smarter when the 
accountants take a look at the report and tell us what should 
take place. All smarter in that regard. 
 
But I want to tell you one thing. That if the argument it is that 
there shouldn’t be money coming by SLGA-regulated 
authorities, then somebody’s got to explain why there was 
money being funnelled by the hotels association on November 

10, 1999 to the Leader of the Opposition’s official lunch and 
business dinner. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know the Premier 
is a lawyer and he’s using a tactic here to deflect attention from 
the issue. The Premier knows that there is a formula for the 
revenues of the Liquor and Gaming funds. He knows that in the 
case of the hotels that they get a share of that which is their 
money. 
 
Now if they were to take more than their share of money, Mr. 
Premier, they’d be breaking the law. But they’re given that 
money, that’s part of the agreement, and they can do with that 
as they very well please as long as they pay their taxes. You 
know that they have to live by the rules, Mr. Premier. 
 
SIGA has some rules too. Just as it would be wrong for those 
hotels to take more than their share from the formula, Mr. 
Premier, it is wrong for you . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Now there’s much 
competition in the opposition benches for the Premier’s 
attention. I would simply inform members, during the estimates 
for Executive Council there’s no prohibition on any and every 
member asking questions. But for the moment, the Hon. Leader 
of the Opposition has the floor. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I hope 
you’re not accusing the hotels of breaking the law because you 
know they’re not. You know that they’re acting very 
responsibly. 
 
The problem is . . . The question is, Mr. Premier, should the 
NDP be receiving money from SIGA? Is that ethical? Is it 
legal? And the answer is no. That’s the problem. You’re a 
lawyer and you know that. You’re trying to deflect blame or 
suspicion on hotels when in fact that blame and suspicion rests 
on your shoulders and the shoulders of your party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Premier, if I have time I’ll come 
back to this, but I want to get on to another issue and that’s the 
issue of the coalition government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m sorry, I can’t hear you. I can’t hear 
you. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I said I now want . . . if I have time I’ll 
come back to the SIGA issue but right now I want to get on to 
the issue of the coalition government. The Premier’s having 
trouble hearing but I’ll speak loud so he can hear every word. 
 
Mr. Premier, the story of the session so far of course has been 
the unholy alliance of the Liberals and the NDP. It was very 
controversial and the controversy has only grown. And then 
when you start thinking about the unpopular policies of your 
government and the poor performance of your government, the 
popularity and the respect of the citizens of Saskatchewan for 
this coalition — or as it might be better described demolition 
government — continues to sink to new lows. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, without the support of those Liberal 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

members you wouldn’t be able to push through your agenda. 
That’s obviously why you talked them into joining in a 
coalition with yourself. Without Liberal support you wouldn’t 
have been able to pass Bill 59 which was passed a few minutes 
ago, a negative labour legislation package that sets 
Saskatchewan again behind our competitors in the fight for jobs 
and economic growth. 
 
You talk about who’s talking about economic growth and 
you’re killing economic growth with bills like Bill 59. 
 
That was achieved with the support of the Liberal member from 
Saskatoon Northwest and the Liberal member for North 
Battleford, Mr. Premier. Without their support you wouldn’t 
have been able to further plan to gut health care, close facilities, 
and downgrade facilities. 
 
The Liberal leader said prior to the election that he was going to 
chain himself to the Plains hospital to keep it from closing. 
That’s what he said. We all heard that. You heard it. You were 
laughing at him. You were laughing at him too then, Mr. 
Premier. But lo and behold, now he’s chained to you. He’s 
chained to you, Mr. Premier. He’s chained to the NDP and of 
course he’s chained to your health care policies. 
 
Now the Liberals campaigned very hard against you in the last 
election and they actually surprised you and they surprised me 
by getting about 20 per cent of the vote. Of course in Wood 
River they won about 40 per cent of the vote, and it was a 
saw-off between ourselves and the Liberals as to who would 
represent that seat. That of course was settled pretty clearly the 
other day and it’s a real weather vane to point out people’s 
dissatisfaction with your coalition government. 
 
Last year, Mr. Premier, the Liberals made 35 promises to the 
people of Saskatchewan. None of those promises have been 
honoured. Now that tells us a little bit about what happens 
around the cabinet table. 
 
But we want to look at some of these as they specifically 
concern your department, Executive Council. And I want to 
know why you haven’t done what the Liberals suggested, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
In Priorities 1999, the Saskatchewan Liberal platform, they 
suggested that you should reduce the administration budget — 
this is vote 10 in case your officials want to check on this — 
reduce the administration budget from 2.256 million down to 
$700,000. They also wanted to reduce the accommodation and 
central services by over two-thirds. The Premier’s office they 
were going to leave as is. 
 
But they were going to cut communications coordination and 
media services to zero. To zero, Mr. Premier. They were going 
to cut House business and research to zero, Mr. Premier. And 
they were going to cut the department staff, your staff, Mr. 
Premier, they were going to cut them from 82 people down to 
21 staffers. That’s what your Education minister said he was 
going to do. 
 
Now I have the new vote 10 here, and lo and behold, instead of 
spending $7.256 million, it’s gone up. It’s gone up to $7.349 
million. And instead of staff dropping from 82 down to 21, it’s 

gone up to 84. 
 
One of those people include two-tier Harvey McLane, the man, 
the Liberal MLA in this House that you used to lambaste, you 
used to belittle, you used to call the spokesperson for two-tier 
health care in Saskatchewan. You’ve vilified that man. You 
coined the name yourself, you called him that name and other 
names under the sun, Mr. Premier. And now you hired him. 
 
So the only thing you’ve done that might indicate some Liberal 
influence over there is hire a defeated candidate. All of the other 
recommendations you ignored. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is: why didn’t you follow the 
Liberal leader’s commitment, his party platform to reduce your 
department? Why didn’t you do that? 
 
And we’d like to know, did the Liberal member, the Liberal 
leader, lobby you hard? What kind of a battle ensued in the 
cabinet . . . around the cabinet table to keep that staff up there at 
its current level, to increase your budget? Why didn’t he have 
enough clout to commit to . . . to get you to commit to his 
platform, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
assure the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that our government 
believes in competence with respect to hiring, and that means 
that people who are of neutral political persuasion if they’re 
competent, people who may be of New Democratic Party 
persuasion if they’re competent, and Liberal people of Liberal 
Party persuasion if they’re competent. 
 
Why, Mr. Chairman, we’re so committed to competence that 
I’d even hire a Saskatchewan Party member if I could find a 
competent one anywhere around the province of Saskatchewan; 
and thus far, it’s been rather difficult to find a competent one. 
But we’ll look and maybe the Leader of the Opposition will 
give us some suggestions. 
 
I want to say a few words about the coalition before I speak 
specifically to the question. The coalition, as the 
parliamentarian that the Leader of the Opposition was in the 
House of Commons will know, is not new in parliamentary 
government and it’s not new for sure in European forms of 
government where many coalitions exist. New Zealand is the 
most recent example of a parliamentary government coming 
together in coalition. 
 
And in coalition the government basically operates as follows. 
You’ll have the platform of the two parties — let’s bring it right 
home to Saskatchewan — the party of the New Democratic 
Party platform, the party of the Liberal Party and their platform. 
And there will be areas where the Liberals will not agree with 
our platform and there will be areas where we may not agree 
with their platform. And what you try to do is to identify the 
areas where you do agree in order to benefit the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is exactly where we stand. In some areas, we may 
have to agree to disagree. We may even see some areas where 
what we stood for amended in the election campaign in an 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

attempt to compromise and we’re working at doing that whether 
it relates to Executive Council or to any of the other areas of 
health or education or roads. 
 
(1600) 
 
But what the coalition does bring together in commonality is a 
positive vision for publicly funded, single-payer medicare and 
more money — not two-tier like they do. We believe in, as we 
have funded nearly 7 per cent for education under the Liberal 
leader’s leadership in that portfolio, I might add, strong 
education. 
 
We believe in the situation that the highways issues, which have 
been raised by the opposition members, that has to be dealt 
with, and we’ve got to deal with it together as The Leader-Post 
or StarPhoenix editorial I’ve been citing lately says, I think, 
quite accurately. We’ve been dedicating more money. 
 
A number of areas I can identify with has been positive action 
and progressive action and visionary action. Now the hon. 
member says what about the Executive Council? There’s been 
no reduction as the Liberal leader has advocated and the answer 
is that there hasn’t been a reduction at this particular time. We 
are continually looking to reduce money. We’re trying to make 
sure that the increases are moderate. The increases this year 
amount to 1.3 per cent only this budget year under review that 
the Leader of the Opposition over the year before, that’s what it 
amounts to in percentage terms. In staff size, it’s two full-time 
equivalents or an increase of 2.4 per cent. 
 
Now that doesn’t match what has been said. I acknowledge that 
as the Leader of the Opposition says, but I say to the Leader of 
the Opposition the reality is these increases are for sure very, 
very modest. And in that regard both the Leader of the Liberal 
Party and myself, as the Premier as the province of 
Saskatchewan, are determined on common goal to achieve. 
Lean, as tightly and as efficiently a managed government as we 
can with as few bodies as we can without destroying the 
operation of government and that includes Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, you 
said prior to the election that the Liberals couldn’t even govern 
themselves; they should never be . . . you know, form the 
Saskatchewan government. You now have two key ministries 
— two key ministries — given to Liberal cabinet ministers, one 
who was going to give you zero dollars in your communication 
budget. I mean zero dollars for research for this Assembly, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
The Minister of Education, Minister of Education is supposed 
to be in charge of the knowledge base of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and . . . (inaudible) . . . as one of the 
people that you correctly identified should not be in 
government. And then you turned around and put him in 
government for your own well-being and for the well-being of 
your party so that you can continue to govern Saskatchewan. 
That tells you a lot about your priorities, Mr. Premier. 
 
And you put the member from North Battleford in place in the 
very important ministry of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs, another area where there’s some severe problems in 
your government. You identified that these people are not 

capable of governing because they weren’t capable of 
governing themselves and their own party prior to the election, 
and now they’re full partners in your own government. What 
kind of reflection is this on your judgment, or on the judgment 
of your government and also on the quality of your government, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I want to go on to another area and that’s the 
area of taxes. I find it’s extremely . . . Mr. Premier, I find it 
extremely entertaining to listen to the members on the opposite 
side suddenly hold themselves up to be champion tax cutters, 
yourself included. You were very reluctant to talk about cutting 
taxes. The Liberals said they weren’t going to cut taxes at all. 
 
Mr. Premier, you didn’t have the courage to sign your own 
election promise that you would cut taxes by $1,000. You 
wouldn’t sign that, other leaders did. Of course. the Liberal 
leader knew he’d never form government, but you didn’t have 
the courage to sign that commitment to cut taxes. You weren’t 
sure you wanted to cut taxes. You’re still not sure you want to 
cut taxes. And the Liberals are clear that they don’t want to cut 
taxes. 
 
The current Economic Development minister, Mr. Premier, said 
with a straight face that tax relief was not a priority for 
Saskatchewan people. Where do you people live? Who do you 
talk to, Mr. Premier? That’s the same minister who cautioned 
against Saskatchewan people becoming . . . or Saskatchewan 
becoming economically strong to the point where it actually 
becomes a have province, because it would cut into federal 
equalization payments. 
 
Mr. Premier, your Economic Development minister, the 
minister in charge of growth in this province, wants us to be a 
welfare case. Can you imagine? 
 
So you’ve got incompetent Liberal members in your 
government. You’ve got an Economic Development minister 
that wants our province to be a basket case. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, this sentiment was supported 
wholeheartedly by the Liberals who joined your coalition, and 
so we’ve seen your tax reduction package in the Finance 
minister’s budget. There was a lot of talk. If I remember 
correctly, it started off saying that this was a historic tax-cutting 
budget. Aren’t those the right words? Historic tax-cutting budget. 
 
But when all the dust settled, Mr. Premier, when all the dust 
settled and Saskatchewan taxpayers checked their pocketbooks, 
they’re $40 million behind after this budget, not the meagre $40 
million ahead that your Finance minister said they would be. That, 
simply put, is a tax increase. It’s no wonder you weren’t prepared 
to sign that commitment to lower Saskatchewan taxpayers’ tax 
bill. 
 
Of course, you know what you did. You expanded the PST. I 
don’t recall a whole lot of talk about that prior to the election. 
There was some talk about lowering income taxes and some talk 
about lowering the PST, but there certainly wasn’t talk about 
expanding the PST. That was when you kind of slipped in there at 
the last minute, wasn’t it, Mr. Premier? 
 
Of course you didn’t talk a whole lot about underfunding of 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

schools. And in fact, since you took office in 1991, you reduced 
funding for education. 
 
Now you misquote others saying that we would zap spending 
for health care or education. You actually reduced funding for 
education from 1991 and the total loss to the education system 
in Saskatchewan is $380 million up until this budget. That’s 
your record. That’s your legacy, Mr. Premier. 
 
The PST was expanded. Mill rates have increased at the 
municipal level. 
 
And then you tried some sneaky things. You tried some sneaky 
fee increases that you didn’t want tell people about. You started 
off with the infamous coyote tax. And then you went on to 
increase fishing fees, hunting fees, park fees. You didn’t want 
people to have recreation in Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, Mr. Premier, and this is the one that disturbs me the 
most, and I don’t how you can stand up and not blush about the 
fact that you’ve increased nursing home fees. You know, the 
most vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. And Mr. Premier, my 
father, who has now passed away, had to use the health care 
system; he had to stay in the Palliser hospital in Swift Current 
for the last years of his life. So I know what I’m speaking about 
when I talk about long-term care for people. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, the people that are the most needy, the most 
helpless, and who have contributed the most to the well-being 
of this province, you have the nerve in this budget to hike their 
nursing home fees. Mr. Premier, that’s about as low as a 
government can go. I don’t know how you folks can come into 
this Assembly and not slouch in your seats when you do those 
kind of despicable things — tax the most needy, the most 
vulnerable people in this province. 
 
It is one of the low points of your nine years in government; 
something you need to correct, you need to not be so proud and 
just simply say, we made a mistake, we’re not going to attack 
seniors, we’re not going to attack people that are in nursing 
homes, we’re going to rescind that decision to increase their 
fees, Mr. Premier. This is the tax cutting, the historical 
tax-cutting budget that your Finance minister announced three 
months ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, your government is failing on the very 
important issue that is going to hurt this province in the long 
run. People are leaving this province because taxes are too high. 
Young people are leaving the province because there’s no jobs 
here; there’s no opportunity where there’s high taxes. Business 
people are pulling up and leaving the province; even some 
larger businesses are talking about leaving NDP Saskatchewan 
because your taxes are too high and they don’t believe you any 
more when you say you’re going to cut taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, seniors are leaving Saskatchewan. I know of 
one couple, Mr. Premier, they’ve made an agreement that when 
one of them passes away, when one of them passes away, the 
other one will move to Alberta to escape the high death taxes in 
this province. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, you’re going to try and squeeze every cent out 
of these people when they die. And they’re not going to let you 

do it; they’re going to leave Saskatchewan. And so Alberta or 
Ontario or some other jurisdiction’s going to get some money, 
and we’re going to get absolutely no revenue even though they 
have spent a lifetime contributing to this province. Some 
legacy, some record, Mr. Premier. 
 
In the past year because of your high-tax policy we’ve had a net 
loss of 1,600 people. 
 
A huge population growth on the Prairies. Manitoba’s doing 
very well; they grew 6,000 people — that’s more than the 
population in Melfort, if I’m correct; that’s more than the 
population of Kindersley, it’s more than the population of 
Nipawin. That’s a lot of people and Manitoba was able to grow 
their population by 6,000. Alberta was 11,000 or more — I 
think it was more than 11,000 people they grew their 
population. 
 
We’re going backwards. We’re going backwards under your 
administration. We lost 1,600 people; prospects for population 
growth are just not there as long as taxes are high. 
 
Mr. Premier, given these facts . . . And you know that I’m not 
manufacturing these, these are Statistics Canada numbers. They 
are facts. Our taxes are high — that’s a fact. Our economic 
performance is poor — that’s a fact. Our population is dropping 
— that’s a fact. It can all be tied to high taxes — that’s a fact. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you call a fall session of the legislature, bring 
in a mini budget, and actually cut taxes. Just cut taxes — don’t 
raise any taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, on the specific 
question about a fall session, we are not ruling out that 
possibility. I have not made a decision, and obviously won’t for 
the next few weeks in any event. I do want to say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take the summer off. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — It won’t take the full summer. 
 
I do want to say, however, a few points in response to a rather 
lengthy address by the Leader of the Opposition. First of all, 
talking about the Minister of Economic Development and on 
the general issue of taxes which took place, the tax policy, 
under her term as minister of Finance and the present Minister 
of Finance, speaking to both those issues generally. 
 
What the Leader of the Opposition conveniently fails to draw to 
the attention of this House is what I would argue is the 
outstanding performance of the former minister of Finance in 
inheriting a province from ’91 to ’95 — I’m talking about 
bankruptcy — and bringing it to balance and setting the pillars 
into place for long-term balances and surpluses well into the 
21st century. The member from Saskatoon did that. 
 
But specifically, the tax situation is clear. I have a lengthy list 
here that is provided as a briefing note. It’s rather disjointed. 
Just to give you a sample. Effective April 1, 1993, the sales tax 
on 1 800 telephone services eliminated to attract calling centres 
to Saskatchewan. That’s what the Minister of Economic 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Development did. 
 
Effective January 1, 1994, new adjustments to royalty structures 
for oil and natural gas to be competitive to Alberta. It was 
introduced by her reductions. 
 
February 17, 1995, investment tax credit for the manufacturing 
and processing was introduced at the rate of 9 per cent, and 
been extended to used M&P (manufacturing and production) 
equipment effective retroactively to February 17, 1995. And 
that was reduced to 7 per cent in 1997. And the reduction, I 
might add, in that period of the sales tax to 7 per cent also by 
the current Minister of Economic Development. 
 
Nineteen ninety-five, the fuel tax rate on aviation reduced from 
7 cents per litre to 3.5. July 1, 1995, personal income taxes were 
reduced to $150 per taxpayer reduction in debt reduction surtax. 
 
I could go on. I’ll just give you two more. Effective July 1, 
1995 the very successful M&P profits tax reduction was 
introduced. Effective March 21, 1997, as I said, the sales tax 
was cut. And on March 21, 1997 the sales tax on certain 
medical devices purchased by individuals was eliminated. 
 
The members say when was it increased? It was increased 
beginning with the former administration of Mr. Devine’s, who 
was going to reduce it to zero, and increased it. And we 
increased it. I acknowledge we increased it. But I tell you — we 
decreased it. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I want to tell you something else while I’m on sales tax. 
Right now, I don’t care whether we had to or not, we did it. We 
did it. You say we didn’t. We did it. And I want to tell you, 
even with this budget where it remains at 6 per cent with an 
expanded basket of items which are taxable, it is the second 
lowest tax percentage rates on sales — the lowest being Alberta 
— and the second lowest basket of tax items in all of Canada. 
That’s a fact. That is a fact. 
 
Now we want to continue to reduce that. We want to become 
more competitive with Alberta on the sales tax side. If you’re 
saying to us more needs to be done, we agree. Where we 
disagree with you, however, I’ll say in a moment, is what I 
think is an extremely imbalanced — and if I may say so kindly 
— highly irresponsible fiscal policy which I will talk about in a 
moment in getting to that goal that you talk about. That’s what 
the former minister of Finance did. 
 
And what did the current Minister of Finance do? In a budget 
that you voted against, that we’re voting off today, the 
Saskatchewan flat tax and provincial surtaxes abolished. Three 
rate structures — 11, 13, and 15 — introduced. De-linking. 
Fairness for families. By 2003 — this is the same Alberta track 
— the average family will save about $1,000 a year in income 
tax. 
 
Significant higher personal credits. An implementation of basic 
personal credit of 8,000. A spousal credit or equivalent of 
8,000. A child credit of 2,500. A thousand dollar supplement 
for existing seniors credit. 
 

I want to draw this to the attention of the Leader of the 
Opposition: 55,000 low-income people — you want to pay 
attention to this; I ask the Leader of the Opposition to just give 
me one brief courtesy to pay attention to this — 55,000 
low-income people, one in every eight taxpayers, will be 
removed from the income tax rolls. One in eight. One in eight. 
That’s what we’ve done. Do we need to do more? The answer is 
yes, we need to do more. 
 
But here’s your problem, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, and 
why I say you’ll never be in the treasury benches. Your 
problem is that right now you are playing what is the old-style 
politics of opposition — everything to everybody. 
 
You want to rebuild the roads, as the Wood River by-election 
was all about. You want to increase the health care and more 
than we’ve done at 6 per cent. You want to cut taxes. You 
condemn us on education, even though there’s a 7 per cent 
increase. You want to balance the budget. 
 
You want to do all of that, although in this session . . . and I am 
going to make this prediction, Mr. Chairman, subject to 
correction, but we’re going to check this and put it out to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I predict, Mr. Chairman, I have made 
one prediction on questions, that by 2, 3, 4 country miles they 
asked more questions on Queer City Film Festival and on 
so-called forced amalgamation than they did on anything else 
together. And health included. 
 
I’m saying, you total them all up, you total those two up, and 
you will have asked more than anything else . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well no, the hon. member from Rosthern . . . 
It’s okay, Mr. Chairman. I can hear him. 
 
The hon. member from Rosthern, he’s right — they did ask 
questions about health. I think it was the member from Swift 
Current who talked about the bats in the belfry of the hospital 
somewhere. They did ask questions about that. 
 
And they actually talked about Bill 11 and how we should 
follow Alberta. So they did ask some questions. I didn’t say 
they didn’t ask any questions at all. They asked questions. I’m 
saying they asked more. 
 
But I make this prediction, I say this: when, as we are now 
doing, when our Department of Finance is now doing, is 
computing the calls on the public purse by you, sir, and your 
officials, this budget alone, my prediction is it will be well in 
excess of a billion dollars — in other words, a deficit of a 
billion dollars if we were to adopt all of your disparate points of 
view that you have advocated in your disunited and not 
purposeful session. That’s what I predict. A billion dollars. 
 
And here’s what your problem is. I’m going to read it one more 
time. The Saskatoon StarPhoenix. I never thought I would do it, 
Mr. Chairman, but I’m going to do it. Quote: 
 

Whichever political party promises to deliver it all is 
playing voters for patsies. 

 
I’ll stop there from the quotation. “Deliver it all”. Know what I 
just said? Deliver it all, all things to all people, you’re playing 
the voters for patsies. 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

Any voter who believes that turfing out the current 
government will, overnight, get all highways magically 
paved (new member from Wood River), rural hospitals 
reopened and waiting lists zapped, farm supports ratcheted 
up and taxes slashed is practising a form of self-delusion 
not seen since the heady days of Grant Devine. 
 

Not my words, the words of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
editorial board . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, a newspaper 
owned by Conrad Black; $75,000 in contribution to those 
people. Even they see the self-delusory nature of this group that 
pretends to be ready to be a responsible government. 
 
And I’m going to close, Mr. Chairman, from this editorial. And 
mark my words. This is why I say to the Leader of the 
Opposition why he’ll never be in the treasury benches, none of 
you will be. This quotation: 
 

The sooner we all understand that, the sooner we can 
demand that our politicians stop cynically driving wedges 
between people and start articulating workable plans on 
how to address such challenges as highways, education and 
health care without adding to the debt. 
 

New member from Wood River — not one word. Not one word 
in your by-election on how you could achieve that. No vision, 
no plan. You, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, not one word how 
to achieve that. No vision, no plan. You, Mr. House Leader, not 
one word. You in fact have put $1 billion at risk. 
 
I serve notice on the people of Saskatchewan that if this 
government should be defeated, I serve notice on this province, 
that if it should be defeated — which it will not be defeated — 
they will see a return to the Devine years with a vengeance, a 
vengeance. What we’re seeing here are the last remnants of 
those self-delusory, heady days of the Devine government. 
 
I close by saying: 
 

. . . (it) is practising (they, the opposition) a form of 
self-delusion not seen since the heady days of Grant 
Devine. 

 
I say this, Mr. Chairman, “heady days of Grant Devine,” I never 
thought that any official opposition leader or any official 
opposition would even begin remotely to make Grant Devine 
look responsible in the management of public finances. They 
have succeeded where even Mr. Devine couldn’t, in being even 
more irresponsible than he ever was. No, you’ll never be 
elected, sir, never, because you are not a man of vision or 
compassion or purpose, and you cannot speak to these issues. 
That’s my view, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and to 
the Premier, that’s what you say every year and it never comes 
true. People don’t believe you any more. It doesn’t. 
 
You said the hon. member from Canora-Pelly wouldn’t get 
elected. He won with a huge majority. You said the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena wasn’t going to get elected. She had 
one of the highest pluralities second only to the member from 
Cannington. You said Mr. Wiens would get re-elected. We 
clobbered him in Rosetown-Biggar. Most of us got way more 

votes than you got in Riversdale. You’re the Leader of the 
Government for heaven’s sake. 
 
Nobody believes you any more. We don’t believe you when 
you tell about . . . when you talk about how many questions we 
had. You were wrong again, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, out of 748 questions that we asked — now listen, 
listen carefully — 700 . . . We have good staff on our side of 
the House, a little better than yours. From the 748 questions, by 
far the most questions were asked on health care to the Minister 
of Health. I don’t know what you call your second — is it the 
junior Minister of Health, the other one? I’m not . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . the Associate Minister of Health, 47 questions, 
and to the full-time Minister of Health, or whatever her title is, 
108 questions, for a total of 155 questions on health care out of 
748 questions. 
 
I think my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale did a heck of a job, 
Mr. Premier. And my colleague from Weyburn did a great job. 
And, Mr. Premier, I think you answered some health care 
questions on top of that. So maybe the percentage is even 
higher. 
 
We asked the Municipal Affairs minister 71 questions and that 
includes questions on roads besides forced amalgamation. So, 
Mr. Premier, you might want to eat your words, and you might 
want to start being accurate in the comments you make. Don’t 
make these wild allegations year after year. 
 
You know I think you think you’re on TV, and you can say that 
we’re all doomed over on this side. But the facts are speaking 
louder than you are. You’re wrong time after time after time 
after time. People are tired of it. Your Minister of Education 
called it rhetoric and you live it. You live it every day in this 
House. You live it every day out there. And people of 
Saskatchewan have caught on. You can’t play those tricks any 
more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to table the document that shows the 
questions that we’ve asked to the ministers of the Crown. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I’m going to just briefly touch on health 
care and my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale will also touch on 
health care. I know you like to talk about health care, Mr. 
Premier. I know you like to talk about health care, but it’s 
always looking to the past and saying what had happened in 
1962. You know, I find people . . . I find it almost hysterical, 
Mr. Premier, that you continue to hold yourself up as the 
champions of health care when all around you the evidence is 
that health care is falling apart in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Premier, you remind me of a person who used 
to be clothed, you used to be clothed in some beautiful raiment, 
but it’s been so long and you’ve worn the same clothes for so 
long that they’re tattered, they’re torn, they’re threadbare. In 
fact they’re falling off. In fact, Mr. Premier, you’re almost like 
the emperor with no clothes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because you’re so naked, we are now seeing the 
scars. And these are some of the scars, Mr. Premier. The scar of 
waiting lists is on your NDP body. The scars of infant mortality 
— and this isn’t funny, Mr. Premier — scars of infant mortality 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

on your body. We have the scars of the nurses’ strike and the 
working conditions for nurses. Those are scars on the body of 
you and your government, Mr. Premier. 
 
We have the scars of health districts in debt. You had to take 
over the East Central Health District, the Yorkton area, because 
things were so messed up. Most of the health districts are 
running deficits. This is in your wellness plan. 
 
Mr. Premier, the administration of health care in Saskatchewan 
has run amok — it’s a mess — under your watch, Mr. Premier, 
and that of your government and your two health ministers. You 
have two people helping you with health care, and it’s never 
been worse. 
 
You don’t know how to manage health care, so that’s why you 
talk about 1962. People of Saskatchewan want to talk about the 
year 2000 and whether or not there’s going to be health care 
today and tomorrow when they need it. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan residents have fled by the 
thousands in search of health care outside of our province. We 
live in a province where cancer surgery or heart surgery is no 
longer treated as an emergency. People are forced to watch their 
lives hang in the balance or to leave the province to get 
themselves treated. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you may not like it, but that’s a two-tier 
health care system. It’s your two-tier health care system. Mr. 
Premier, you are in contravention of the Canada Health Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, we live in a province where 
we now live hours from the nearest health care facility, which 
may or may not be a hospital. And to get to that health care 
facility, we have to travel over the worst highways in Canada. 
Mr. Premier, that is two-tier health care. It’s your two-tier 
health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, you and your Minister of 
Health, you just love to talk about the five tenets of the Canada 
Health Act, and they are noble, Mr. Premier. They are noble. 
But you’re ignoring the fact that one of these tenets — equal 
accessibility to health care — is being lost, and you could argue 
is lost in the province of Saskatchewan. And so what do you do 
— what do you do, Mr. Premier? Well you get up here and you 
did what you just did a few minutes ago. You start pontificating 
about unrealities, virtual reality you might call it, but it’s simply 
not true, Mr. Premier. The evidence insists that it’s not true. 
 
So you talk about 1962. You talk about your days in the 
Blakeney government. Mr. Premier, it’s not 1962 any more. I 
believe that’s 38 years ago. That’s a long time ago, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
People are worried about health care today. Everything’s all 
right when people are waiting months and months for 
treatment? No I don’t think so. And we all have loved ones who 
have waited, I’m sure you have friends and close colleagues 
who had to wait far too long. I know I’ve had some. 

I know I had an uncle that had to wait months and months for a 
hip replacement. He’s one of your supporters — I don’t know if 
he supports you any more, Mr. Premier. That was a long, long, 
painful wait he had to . . . he had to go through. He had to quit 
driving; he felt like he was a burden on his family because of 
you and your health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, is everything all right when palliative care patients 
in Climax have to be transferred out every weekend to 
Shaunavon? Can you imagine? I talked about the 
despicableness of increasing nursing home fees. I think this is 
about equal. If you take palliative care patients and say okay, 
it’s Friday. It’s Friday and palliative care patients hit the road; 
we’re going to bounce you down that highway. 
 
What number is the highway from Climax to Shaunavon? 
Highway 18, the one you’re going to turn back to gravel. Got to 
bounce that . . . or Highway 37 . . . got to bounce that person to 
Shaunavon, and then make them stay in Shaunavon for the 
weekend, and then you load them back up. 
 
This sounds more like potatoes or flour we’re hauling around. 
These are people, Mr. Premier, they’re people. Don’t forget it, 
they are people and they are people that are counting on you. 
Palliative care people that you’re hauling around on the 
weekend because you don’t care about health care. 
 
You’re worried about 1962. Well that falls pretty flat on the 
ears of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you can’t help an alcoholic until he knows he has 
a problem. Mr. Premier, we can’t help you fix health care until 
you recognize, until you acknowledge that you have a problem. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have a problem. Are you listening? You have 
a problem that’s got to be fixed. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop playing your childish 
games, your pretend games about health care and actually get 
down to the job of making health care work in the year 2000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, to some extent, Leader 
of the Opposition is dead right — I have a problem and the 
problem is the Saskatchewan Party on health care. But it’s not 
only my problem; it’s the problem of everybody in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the hon. member starts off again with no facts, no proper 
facts. The hon. member, I don’t know if he ever has heard of 
the Canadian Institute for Health Information, CIHI, but this is 
a very authoritative, reputable, independent national 
organization which rates the question of health care across the 
country. 
 
And by the way, I would add, moving from CIHI, Maclean’s 
magazine did a rating of health care too and put University in 
Saskatoon as number three of all of the cities in Canada. And 
they don’t like that but that’s the reality. 
 
But nonetheless, CIHI, I want to say this, and that is about 
CIHI, the following. CIHI publishes its figures and it says that 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

per capita surgical volumes, I wonder if the member from 
Kindersley would just be interested in this, per capita surgical 
volumes in Saskatchewan are higher than the national average 
in 13 of 16 — 13 of 16 — major categories of in-patient 
surgery. The figures are for ’97 . . . ’99 . . . ’97-98 and are 
adjusted. 
 
Saskatchewan surgeons perform 90.6 orthopedic surgeries per 
10,000 residents compared to a national average of 67.1 per 
cent. Now I want to ask the Minister of Health and associate to 
give me some help here. How many doctors’ visits are there a 
year in Saskatchewan, GP (general practitioner)? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 4.7. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — 4.7 million? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The Minister of Health advises me 4.7 
million people in Saskatchewan visit GP offices a year, every 
year — 4.7. 
 
How many visit specialists? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 926,000 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Nine hundred and twenty-six 
thousand visit specialists, plus, — 926,000 visit specialists. 
 
How many road ambulance trips a year — 76,000 trips by road 
ambulance and more than 836 air ambulance trips. 
 
How many diagnostic and therapeutic radiology services — 
253,000 a year. How many tests at the provincial lab a year — 
1.45 million a year. 
 
And I could go on and talk about the satellite kidney dialysis in 
Prince Albert, Tisdale, Yorkton, Lloydminster. The cancer 
treatment — 44,000 radiation. Outreach chemotherapy ranging 
from Humboldt, Kerrobert, Estevan, Outlook. And I could go 
on and on. 
 
And CIHI recommends and notes all that. 
 
My question to the hon. member opposite is, if the system is so 
bad, how come it does so much? How come it does so much? 
Listening to the member opposite, the system is not doing 
anything. And it’s doing more than ever. 
 
And in this year’s budget, we see an 11.1 per cent increase over 
last year. The budget totals $2.1 billion — it’s in the record — 
and includes $150 million transition fund, which is going to be 
used while the study of Fyke is going on, and particularly 
post-Fyke. 
 
And I could give you the list, but without taking time of the 
committee, it’s all in the budget. But give you one example, a 5 
per cent increase to the health districts. I give you one other 
example, $3 million to Aids for Independent Living. Another 
example, 27 per cent increase — 21 million for prescription 
drug. And I can go on and on. That is what our program does. 
That’s what we do. 

And so I ask the hon. members again, opposite, if the system is 
so bad, how come it does so much? Tell me that. Tell me how 
much that’s the case . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And cancer 
therapy — I cited that one — the Minister of Health is giving 
me cancer therapy; I’ve cited that one. I can continue. 
 
The numbers are there. These aren’t numbers from myself and 
the government. These are numbers from CIHI and independent 
observers. That’s why the people know that what the Leader of 
the Opposition and the Sask Party is saying is not factual, is 
absolutely not factual. 
 
For the hon. members opposite, they say that I’m concerned 
about 1962. You know something? I am concerned about 1962, 
because 1962 was the establishment of single-payer, publicly 
funded medicare on the basis of the five fundamental principles 
of health care. They were our gift to Canada. And I would tell 
for those who do not know opposite, for six years the people of 
Saskatchewan funded medicare 100 per cent, Mr. Member from 
Melfort, 100 per cent right out of the treasury. 
 
It wasn’t until after John Diefenbaker appointed Emmett Hall 
— to John Diefenbaker’s credit — and Emmett Hall 
recommended the program, our program nationally, and only 
after Mike Pearson implemented 50/50 federal cost sharing, that 
we had national medicare. For six years, we carried it alone, and 
50/50 and we had national medicare based on those five 
comprehensive principles. 
 
And we are now adjusting. We have to acknowledge the system 
is in flux and in change. We have huge technological changes 
— $3 million for an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), just to 
buy one; 1 million to operate it every year. Same with all of the 
others. CAT (computer assisted transcription) scans. 
 
Today in Canada we spend more money on prescription drugs 
than we spend on doctors in Canada. That’s what’s happening 
in this country and in this province. That’s the change. 
 
We’re not frozen to the question of 1962 because we know that 
medicare changes in its technology and its medicines. But what 
we are addicted to and in support of, are the basic values and 
five fundamental principles, and here’s where there is a 
difference between us. 
 
We support medicare, Mr. Chairman; and that bunch opposite 
— okay, I’ll withdraw the word, bunch — the official 
opposition opposite, this group calling themselves the 
Saskatchewan Party, the amalgam of the coalition party 
supporters, the amalgam of the former Conservatives 
provincially, they are opposed to the health care, medicare 
system, which we invented and which we’re trying to save and 
to preserve. 
 
You know why they’re opposed? It started right away from 
their constitutional debate and their policy platform way back 
when they founded themselves, November 17, 1997. And here’s 
how it’s reported in the Regina Leader-Post, quote: 
 

During a panel discussion Saturday, party organizer Brian 
Fitzpatrick called the five fundamental principles behind 
medicare (quote) “mindless slogans” . . . 

 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Not my words, their words . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are 
they? 
 

. . . “mindless slogans” that stand in the way of innovative 
health-care solutions like private clinics. 

 
Here’s what the member from Rosthern says — Village Press, 
November 24, 1999. Here they say, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is experiencing a serious health care crisis, 
and would do well . . . 

 
To do what, Mr. Chairman? Do well, quote: 
 

. . . to look at the Alberta government’s experiment with 
private clinics, according to Ben Heppner, Saskatchewan 
Party MLA for Rosthern constituency. 

 
Do I hear hear, hear from there? Do I hear, hear, hear? We 
heard it, hear, hear from the opposite side. 
 
Then we have the new member from Wood River, the new 
member from Wood River. Remember there was a leadership 
race. There were three leaders: the current, successful leader, 
they had the member from Melfort running, they had the . . . 
Who else did they have? Maybe there was three only, and they 
had the new member from Wood River. 
 
On health care, on health care, on health care, people of 
Saskatchewan note on health care, this is what the would-be 
leader believes in, quote: 
 

The whole health care system needs a review. I’m in 
favour of private clinics. 

 
Then we have the member from Weyburn, the member from 
Weyburn. Weyburn Review October 20, 1999, quote: 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. 

 
Note, Mr. Chairman, note, Mr. Chairman, note the report, Mr. 
Chairman, note the . . . I’m going to say this it doesn’t matter 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Members of the Assembly 
I think that the level of background noise and yelling . . . I 
realize there’s a lot of emotion around this issue and I want to 
respect that, but the amount of noise at this point is making it 
very difficult for the speaker who has the floor to make himself 
heard. And I therefore ask for a little calmer response please, 
more order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to repeat 
this from the Weyburn Review October 20, 1999. And this is the 
quotation, quote: 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. 

 
Now this is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the whole thing. 
“I think it should be an option,” she goes on to say. 
 

Now note the words health services, health services — health 
services. Even the new member from Wood River who tried to 
limit himself to private clinics — private clinics — even he 
limits to private clinics. 
 
The member from Weyburn says health services — services — 
that is the whole shebang. Private for-profit hospitals. Privatize 
the whole doggone thing because they don’t believe in the five 
principles of the health care system. And why would they not 
do anything other than follow the way their leader has set the 
course . . . (inaudible) . . . the current Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Starts all the way back from his days back in the House of 
Commons. Back in the House of Commons he says, this is in 
Hansard, March 16, 1995. He’s talking about health care in 
Manitoba. He says, “Is the government prepared to bring the 
Canada Health Act in line with the 1990s and give the 
provinces real control over medicine delivery and health care 
financing?” is what he says. 
 
By the way, there is a quotation, if someone could find it for 
me, where he speaks about our province and what he calls the 
closure of hospitals and how he supports it. How he supports 
the closure of hospitals, coming back to . . . (inaudible) . . . But 
then he goes on to say this, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Then he goes on to say this, Mr. Chairman. He starts out on 
February 23, 1999 and he’s talking about health care. And he 
says this, according to the CKRM report: “Hermanson also 
likes one of the new Party’s first proposals,” referring to the 
new party that’s being set up here, and that is to have the 
federal government surrender its responsibility. Surrender its 
responsibility for what? For health care. Not even private 
clinics, but for health care to the provinces. 
 
Right, they say. They say it now — right. Now just imagine if 
the federal government funds and surrenders its responsibilities, 
there are no national standards — no national standards. 
Nothing that says you as a Canadian as a matter of birthright 
will have reasonably competent and reasonably accessible 
services to all the health. It’s not identical from region to 
region. 
 
Not even identical in this province. I understand that and I 
understand much more has got to be done. 
 
(1645) 
 
But he wants to surrender it. And that he says. He’s publicly 
said that he supports Mr. Preston Manning, Leader of the 
Alliance Party. The one who’s going to win it of course is the 
person that his next door seatmate supports, the member from 
Kindersley, Mr. Stockwell Day. And what does Mr. Stockwell 
Day say? Exactly what I just read to you about what the Leader 
of the Opposition said — surrender federal responsibility to the 
provinces. 
 
Now you do that without national standards . . . and oh by the 
way, I think maybe I have the quotation. February 15, 1994, in 
the House of Commons. This is what he said, the Leader of the 
Opposition, this is what he said then as opposed to now. Quote: 
 

I know that most Canadians place a high priority on health 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

care. I would just like to relate a little bit about what is 
happening in my own province of Saskatchewan. We had 
governments that liked to build monuments, that liked to 
build hospitals. We probably have more hospitals per 
capita in our province than in any other part of Canada. 
Unfortunately, we have now no money to operate those 
hospitals. Our priorities were probably wrong. In fact, I’m 
sure they were wrong. 
 

That’s what he said in 1994. 
 
And now he would have us believe something entirely different. 
It just goes to show you, the reason I’m citing this is not 
because I need his support for our health care reform — I don’t 
want his support on our health care reform — but to show the 
inconsistency, the fundamental inconsistency. And then when 
he’s pressed further on this matter, in doing away with the 
Canada Health Act — just do away with it. Do away with the 
Canada Health Act. 
 
The hon. member from Humboldt just keeps on yelling from 
her chair. I can barely hear her, notwithstanding . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. I do want to encourage members not to yell across the 
seat from their floor. It’s one thing to heckle, it’s another thing 
to bellow. But let’s try to avoid doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I will try to bring my 
remarks to a close because I think I’ve made the point with 
respect to where these folks opposite us stand on the differences 
with respect to health care. That is clearly documented in all of 
the quotations that I’ve given. And it’s not only that, but it’s 
seen — it’s seen — by those who observe it, independently. 
 
Well this is the second time that I’ve had to do this. The 
StarPhoenix, October 31, 1998, reviewing the platform of the 
would-be government over there. Quote: 
 

Welcome to the remake of The Good, The Bad and The 
Ugly, this time featuring Saskatchewan Party leader Elwin 
Hermanson in the lead role. 

 
This is the quotation, The StarPhoenix. It has nothing to do with 
personal appearances or otherwise. Quote, dealing with health 
care, I’m reading now from the editorial: 
 

For instance, (it has, referring to their party) it has no plans 
(no plans, no plans) to address concerns in health care. 
There’s no prescription to cure the bed closures, surgical 
waiting lists, nursing shortages. All it will do is hire an 
ombudsman to whom people can complain. 

 
No, there’s something else they’ll do. This is their way up 
platform. And what they’re going to do is they’re going to 
implement, within six months of attaining office, 
value-for-money health care audit. Now I want to say two 
things . . . And again, the member for Wood River applauds. 
 
I want to say two things as I take my chair on this issue. The 
StarPhoenix of 1998 that I just read, saying it has nothing to 
offer, is dead wrong. It has a lot to offer — privatized health 
care. That’s what they didn’t see in 1998, except that they had 

no vision. Now we know clearer where they’re headed, 
supported by the member from Wood River. 
 
The excellent . . . He applauds again. The member from Wood 
River . . . that’s fine, he can applaud. He applauds again in 
support of my statement that they’re for the privatization of 
health care — applaud it — and that they are in favour of 
having no national responsibility, no national responsibility in 
health care. 
 
You know how you have no national responsibility in health 
care? Do away with the Canada Health Act. Then, like 
Stockwell Day, let every province control it; then, like 
Stockwell Day, see Alberta set up Bill 11. That’s what Stock 
Day in Alberta. Let them two-tier, let them have private 
hospital for profit. 
 
Well I want to tell you, you may think it goes back to 1962 — I 
don’t care what you think. It goes back to 1962, to the year 
2000, to the year 2062. This government coalition and this 
government and this party is committed to medicare and the 
principles of medicare. They’re opposed, and they will never 
have the front benches as a result. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I’d like 
to welcome your staff here today. And, Mr. Premier, just before 
I start today, not knowing if you’ll be back next session, and I 
believe you possibly don’t know if you’ll be back, Mr. Premier, 
I thought of a couple of solutions, and I think we’ve mentioned 
one before, where you might go and be the health care saviour 
for the Prime Minister. 
 
But there’s a new job opened up, Mr. Premier. Stockwell Day is 
gone, and I thought maybe you could go over to Alberta and 
learn under Mr. Klein how a progressive, a progressive and 
successful province runs their province, knows how to lower 
taxes, knows how to get an economy rolling, knows how to 
keep the people happy within that province, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — But I did want to say, Mr. Premier, that 
should you not be here next session I want to wish you very 
well in your endeavours in the future. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to take just a minute and remind you — and 
I’m not sure, Mr. Premier, if it was last year’s estimates. I 
believe it was maybe two years ago just after we formed the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I remember you getting up and 
ranting and raving and pointing across at me and my colleagues 
and saying, Mr. Member, you’ll never be back because in the 
dead of the night you were formed — the backroom boys — 
you will never be back. I believe you also said that to other 
members in this House — the member for Canora-Pelly, 
Kelvington-Wadena, Kindersley, Rosthern, Cannington, all the 
other members, Moosomin. Well, Mr. Premier, as you know 
I’m back; they’re back. The only difference is, is I found some 
friends. We found some friends, Mr. Premier — 17 new friends. 
And, Mr. Premier, you know what? Wood River just found me 
another one — 18 friends. 
 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

So, Mr. Premier, what I’m saying to you is you’ve been wrong 
before; I believe you’re wrong again. 
 
Mr. Premier, on September 16, out in rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan, they elected a minority government — I 
think something you’d like the people of this province to forget. 
And how did you counter that? You went out and bought a 
fledgling Liberal Party that was going nowhere, but now they’re 
going somewhere; they’re going down. But, Mr. Premier, that 
was your solution and your reaction to the people of this 
province telling you that they weren’t happy with what you’d 
done, and they wanted you to change direction. 
 
Mr. Premier, that was your solution because I don’t believe you 
are capable of functioning under a minority government. Mr. 
Premier, I believe that because I believe you don’t know how to 
lower taxes. Is there a member on this side of the House that 
believes you know how to lower taxes? I don’t think there’s a 
person in Saskatchewan believes that. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don’t believe you know how to provide health 
care, shortened waiting lists, that the people of this province 
deserve. Is there a member on this side that really believes that? 
No. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don’t believe you know how to provide 
education for our kids that they deserve. I don’t believe you 
know how to keep our schools open. No one on this side 
believes you know, and I believe no one in the province thinks 
that you know how to provide education that our children need, 
that our children deserve, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I also believe that you bought the Liberal Party to 
get out of a minority situation because you don’t know how to 
repair, how to build our roads, how to stop the crumbling of our 
highway system. You bought the Liberals to protect you from 
going down because you just don’t know how to fix the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to talk about farmers for a minute. Being 
one myself, Mr. Premier, we know — I know — you have no 
idea how to help farmers in this province. And your record 
shows that, and the September 16 election proved that, because 
farmers from all across this province said that Premier and that 
government hasn’t cared about . . . enough about us to help us 
one little bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, I believe you knew you 
weren’t capable to lead a minority government and compete 
with our provinces to the east and the west — Manitoba and 
Alberta. Once again, because you couldn’t compete, you bought 
the fledgling Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Premier, a few minutes ago you talked about how great 
1962 was. And I’m amazed this session, the Minister of Health 
every day gets up in this House and says, in 1962 we did this. 
Well that’s fine, Mr. Premier, but it’s 2000. Isn’t it time to get 
with the times and start governing like you’re in the year 2000, 
not 1962. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, I want to talk, I want to talk, 
Mr. Premier, tonight, today, about something that’s near and 
dear to my heart — and that’s local municipal government. And 
what was one of your solutions? I believe you probably had 
cabinet meetings and caucus meetings and said, what are we 
going to do to rural Saskatchewan out there because they 
wouldn’t vote for us? Punish them. Punish them by removing 
local municipal governments. 
 
So what did you do? You thought you would bring in once 
again, forced amalgamation. Two years ago you tried to bring 
in the service district Act and you had to back off and drop that 
legislation. Now you’re elected under a new term with your 
Liberal friends, and you’re going to force amalgamation on 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And the cities, Mr. Premier, probably had no problem with that 
because number one, it didn’t affect them; and number two, if it 
didn’t affect them, they really didn’t care about it. 
 
But it did affect our towns, our villages, our hamlets, and our 
RMs (rural municipality), Mr. Premier. And I don’t think out 
there you should be punished for the way you vote and the 
services you receive from your provincial government just 
because you didn’t like the government of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, out in rural Saskatchewan we 
have what we call volunteerism, and to a degree our local 
councils are volunteers. Because these are men and women out 
there that probably get at the most, $10 an hour for the services 
they provide. And what you and your minister of municipal 
government plans to do, is replace these people with a 
bureaucratic nightmare, big municipal districts, where we will 
have no say in how, number one, Mr. Premier, that we provide 
care for our seniors out there. We will have no say in how we 
provide services for our people. 
 
It will be totally removed, put into these big municipal district 
boards, and the example I’d like to use, Mr. Premier, is health 
care reform. Every person in rural Saskatchewan has saw what 
your health care reform has done to them. It cost us out there 54 
hospitals, including the Plains, which was a great hospital in the 
city of Regina, that supplied services for out there. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like you to explain to me how forced 
amalgamation would help the lives of people in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, to shorten the . . . my 
responses up a little bit in the interests of time, although I’m 
enjoying giving them and I’m sure that the opposition enjoys 
hearing them. I do have to, however, make just one or two 
quick observations. 
 
I fully intend to be here at the next session, and I sure hope the 
hon. member from Saltcoats is. But in case he isn’t, I wish him 
the very best wherever he may be. So let’s agree to meet. 
 
The second part I want to say is this business about “bought the 
Liberal Party.” Here is a report from the Langenberg 
Four-Town Journal of April 10, 1996. And it’s under the 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

headline, Mr. Chairman: “Your MLA Reports.” The headline 
says: “MLA committed to riding, by (I’m quoting now; Mr. 
Chairman, I’m quoting now) by Bob Bjornerud, MLA, 
Saltcoats constituency.” 
 

Many of you undoubtedly read or heard the press reports 
last week indicating that Liberal caucus members are 
considering defecting to another political party. As 
ludicrous as these reports are, I want to ensure you . . . 

 
The member who just spoke wrote this: 
 

. . . the people of Saltcoats constituency, that I remain 
committed to you, the Liberal Party, and my caucus 
colleagues. As a further sign of my loyalty, and that of my 
caucus colleagues, we have each signed a document in 
which we unequivocally deny any intention of joining any 
other party. 

 
(1700) 
 
Now, now, Mr. Chairman, now, Mr. Chairman, now Mr. 
Chairman . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order, members. Order. Order, 
members. 
 
I’d ask members on both sides please to come to order. I’d ask 
members on both sides to come to order, and thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I 
may have accidentally struck a little nerve there with the hon. 
members opposite. 
 
In any event the point is the member who spoke signed a 
loyalty . . . Now if, if, if, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t have the 
respect for this institution which I’d like to think everybody has, 
all members, I would say or ask the hon. member from 
Saltcoats: how did the Sask Party buy you? How did you . . . 
What are they paying you? 
 
But I’m not going to ask that. But I’m not going to ask that. I’m 
not going to ask that. Some . . . I’m not going to ask that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Right. Well that’s what a . . . You 
know what? That’s what a coalition . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I just want to draw to the 
attention of the Hon. Premier that he may have unintentionally 
. . . he has implied motives of members of the opposition that he 
may not have intended to, and I just ask him to withdraw those 
remarks and rephrase them, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I will withdraw them, Mr. Chairman. 
Absolutely. And parenthetically I’ll only say that the member 
from Saltcoats alleged buying over here. But I withdraw them. 
Because I don’t think that kind of language is worthy of the 
member from Saltcoats for whom I have respect. And it’s not 
worthy of anybody and I withdraw without any qualification. 
 
Now the issue comes on, quote, forced amalgamation. Mr. 
Chairman, this government never was committed to a policy of 
forced amalgamation. What this government was committed to 
was a round table discussion in 1996 of SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), and the government as a 
result of the service districts. From that flowed the studies, the 
studies of which the hon. member takes great objection to. 
 
From that what did not flow logically, except politically, and I 
remind the hon. member from Saltcoats what his leader was 
urging me to do and urging all of us to do — not to plan 
divisions. What flowed from that was this clarion call based on 
absolutely no facts whatsoever, that this government was for 
forced amalgamation, knowing full well that the process had 
gone the way it had gone. 
 
So much so that the Leader of the Liberal Party and myself 
were at meetings when we signed yet another MOU with 
SUMA and SARM, saying there will be no forced 
amalgamation, never has been, and we’ll be looking at ways 
and means legislatively to make governments at a local level 
work efficiently — urban or rural. And that’s what they’re 
doing. And yet the argument is somehow we are “for forced 
amalgamation.” 
 
Now that’s the factual situation. 
 
Mr. Chair, we believe that local governments have done a very, 
very good job — a very good job. They are volunteers in many 
instances. We think that this has been a credit to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We do also believe, he lecturing me to get into the 20th century 
. . . 21st century and beyond — that’s fine, fine; it’s a slip; you 
can laugh at that — he’s urging us to get into the modern day 
world. And that’s all we’re asking everybody else to do too, 
including you. Take a look at everything that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan to see how we can make it better, 
more efficient, more responsive. 
 
We’re committed to voluntary; and we’re committed to 
co-operatively coming up with the best form of governance 
provincially, at the regional level, local level, nationally, 
regionally, everywhere that we can. We want to make sure that 
this is a responsive and effective, and we’re opposed to forced 
amalgamation. Never were for it at any, any time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, I just want to touch 
on a couple of things you said, Mr. Premier. You talked about 
how much I was paid — I believe if I heard you right and I 
apologize if I wasn’t — but to join the Sask Party. I just want to 
tell you, Mr. Premier, that actually what happened is I went for 
a walk one late, dark night and it just happened. 
 
And you know, that’s what happens to people in the Sask Party. 
We grow on you. In fact that’s what’s happening to the people 
of Saskatchewan. We’re growing on them, Mr. Premier, and 
they’re joining us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — In fact what’s happening, Mr. Premier, and 
it’s happening every day, is some of your supporters, been your 
supporters for the last 40 years, some of them on automatic 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

debit even, are walking into our office and saying, we will 
never support that party again. And they’re now with us, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
I want to comment for a second. You talked about the Liberal 
leader. And you know, yes, I was elected a Liberal to start with. 
And I actually sat with that leader, Mr. Premier. And you know 
what, Mr. Premier? Every day of this session I thank my lucky 
stars that I am not still sitting with that leader of that Liberal 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And I’ll go, Mr. Premier, I’ll go one step 
further. The people, my constituents, are glad I’m not sitting 
with that Liberal leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And, Mr. Premier, I think a number of days 
this session you agree with me. You wish you didn’t have to sit 
with that leader of that Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The number of mistakes and putting his 
foot in his mouth that that Liberal leader has done, you might be 
better off working within that minority government that I talked 
about before. The pain might be less, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you had said — and I don’t for a minute believe 
you on this one, Mr. Premier — that you’re going to do what’s 
best for rural Saskatchewan, what’s best for local government. 
But, Mr. Premier, go back to Mr. Blakeney’s days, back to the 
days when your previous government said we should have a 
county system in this province. Oh, and he scoffs at that, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
That was your government then and it’s your government today 
that’s trying to remove local voice and local autonomy from 
rural people so that when the next election comes along, there’s 
less people living out in rural Saskatchewan because you’re 
forcing them to give up out there and move into the cities, and 
you think that way you can hold on to government. It’s not 
going to work. It never worked in the ’60s for Mr. Blakeney 
and it’s not going to work for you now, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Premier, what you are thinking of 
doing out there is the worst thing that has happened — if you 
get away with it — to rural Saskatchewan; the most devastating 
thing that happened to rural people out there — seniors, 
working people out there that are trying to make a living, and 
our kids out there today. You’re trying to change their complete 
lives. This is the socialist way. If it’s not to your favour, remove 
it, control it, take it over. 
 
Mr. Premier, we could go on and on here about rural 
Saskatchewan, but please, Mr. Premier, we have our dads and 
moms out there, our grandparents out there, that we want to 
look after out there. But what you’re planning on doing is 
removing the power for us to look after our own by removing 

local governments. 
 
Mr. Premier, have some compassion — if not for us on this 
side, the people in rural Saskatchewan. Think of those people 
before you make these kinds of moves just for the betterment of 
the NDP Party. These people helped build Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you know your solution to that out there right now for our 
seniors? One of your solutions is raise home care rates. 
 
Mr. Premier, all we’re asking is to just create the atmosphere 
that we can live out there under the best conditions possible. 
And what is your solution? Removing a lot of the conditions 
that we could do that with our parents and grandparents. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you listen tonight and take seriously what 
we’re saying about rural Saskatchewan and, for goodness’ 
sakes, promise that you will not remove the few things we have 
left out there, the few things you haven’t already removed and 
taken away from us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I gave my answer and 
the government’s position on the issue of local government and 
our respect and support for it. The hon. member says he doesn’t 
believe it; nothing I can do. I can repeat it 5,000 times over and 
over again. We are working in this province . . . we’re a small 
province . . . million people plus, rural and urban people. 
 
We’ve got to get along together. We have some good ideas. 
We’ll try to employ them. I think we have some good ideas. 
Local governments have good ideas. All of us need to pull 
together. That’s our commitment. You can believe it or not 
believe it. That’s my position. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, and 
Mr. Premier, thank you for this opportunity to raise some issues 
concerning transportation and highways with you. 
 
We’ve heard time and time again this session about the $250 
million budget that the Department of Highways and 
Transportation is working with in the upcoming year. I believe 
it’s said to be a 6.6 per cent increase, 15 million-odd dollars 
more. In fact we’ve heard about it ad nauseam. And the reality 
is that this is the first year that the budget for Highways has 
actually reached this lofty height. It’s the first time in nine years 
of your administration. 
 
I’d like to ask what was the budget for Highways and 
Transportation like back in 1992, 1993, ’94, ’95. Isn’t the truth 
of the matter that the budgets for Highways in those years were 
gutted? Isn’t it true that the average spending on highways by 
your government has been less in your nine years than it was in 
the previous decade? 
 
If you took inflation into account, your government’s spending 
on highways would be considered miserly by comparison. I 
believe a published report put the actual numbers at 199 million 
yearly average for your government, compared to 219 million 
yearly average by the previous administration. And those 
figures didn’t even include the inflation factor; that wasn’t even 
worked into those figures. It didn’t figure in the equation. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve heard you vilify the federal government for 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

failure to fund infrastructure; and we’ve heard you complain 
about rail line abandonment. We’ve heard you decry grain 
handling consolidation, and the impact of grain being hauled 
over roads unintended to handle such loads. 
 
But we’ve never heard you once admit that your own decisions 
have played a role in the failure of Saskatchewan’s highways. 
We’ve never heard you say anything at all about how 
underfunding in the early years of your regime didn’t allow for 
proper maintenance of the roads, nor undertake proper planning 
for the eventual consolidation of the grain handling system. 
 
Mr. Premier, what did your government do to prevent rail line 
abandonment? What did your government do to anticipate grain 
company consolidation of their grain handling facilities? Why 
didn’t you talk to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool whose support 
you have had on almost every other policy issue? What did you 
do to anticipate the unfolding crisis in rural roads and rail lines? 
What is your record in these areas? What did you do to prevent 
the crisis in rural roads these last nine years? 
 
Mr. Premier, your legacy in rural Saskatchewan is that of a 
Premier who has overseen the demise of the countryside. You 
have paid the people of rural Saskatchewan lip service for so 
long now, they don’t believe you any more. 
 
For the sake of our economic future and for the opportunities 
we all need to survive, let alone prosper, please tell us today, 
what are you going to do differently in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, it’s 
quite clear from the editorials, both in the larger centres and the 
smaller centres, that the party that is not being believed is the 
party opposite. They don’t believe the so-called critic from 
Highways on his solution because, without me repeating the 
quotation again from The StarPhoenix, it just doesn’t add up. 
What they would say just doesn’t add up. And when we total up 
the numbers demanded by him and the solutions demanded by 
him, it just doesn’t add up. 
 
The lack of credibility is your problem, sir, and the Leader of 
the Opposition’s problem, and that of the Conservative . . . the 
Saskatchewan Party opposite. That’s where the problem really 
lies. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member secondly raises the question of the 
issue of the demise of rural Saskatchewan. Well I’ll tell you one 
thing that we didn’t do: we didn’t speak for the demise of the 
Crow rate. We did not urge the change in the Crow rate. We 
fought the changes in the Crow rate. Where were you on that 
battle? Will you tell me when you stand up next where were 
you in that battle? I know exactly where you were in that battle. 
We fought for, and are fighting for, a Canadian Wheat Board 
which is modern and reflective of the competitive world that 
exists out there. 
 
We are for the question of making sure that we can get 
short-line hauls working, provincially and federally, and 
making sure they connect to the main lines. We are for making 
sure there is a highway structure, provincially and federally. 
Because this is a national situation which requires national 

attention. We fight for those issues in terms of the highways 
situation. 
 
One thing we also . . . we’re not for. We were not for the 
giveaway of hundreds of millions of dollars of highways 
equipment. Privatization — just like you would do in health 
care — has happened during the Devine years in the 1980s. We 
weren’t for that. 
 
And we weren’t for the giving away of the road tax. How many 
years was the road tax given away? Eight years, you gave up 
the road tax. Eight years, you gave up the road tax. Eight years, 
each year, you allowed about a billion dollars — whatever the 
figure is roughly speaking, given a number — given a billion 
dollars to be lost which should have been spent on highways. 
Shame on you. Shame on you. Shame on you. You were there. 
 
Nine years they’re saying for us to repair. Nine years. You 
doggone right nine years. In that nine years, we’ve had to 
balance the budget, we’ve had to fight the deficit that you folks 
have left the people of Saskatchewan. You’ve saddled it . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I just want to bring to the 
attention of members of the official opposition that the level of 
noise in the Assembly is unbecoming of the Assembly. And it’s 
making it very difficult to hear the current speaker. I’d ask you 
to let the Premier make his remarks without undue intervention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, there’s nothing more I 
can add. I’ve outlined our game plan and our program. I’ve 
raised questions as to the dilemma the government was in, and 
is in, and the people of Saskatchewan are in; being recognized 
by people everywhere in Saskatchewan, editorialists, farmers, 
people who understand the situation occasioned by what took 
place in the 1980s. 
 
And until and unless they acknowledge those people who 
engineered this, the member from Swift Current and others, 
those who worked in the constituency offices of the premier of 
the day, until they acknowledge that this . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes it was, yes it was. Because the cat . . . what 
did the cat . . . what did the cat steal your tongue? 
 
Why didn’t you speak up? Why didn’t you speak up? Now 
she’s laughing at his . . . at the former leader that she supported 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I did, I fought against it. That’s 
what I did. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not very good with 
mathematics, but I find it hard to believe that the previous 
government could lose a billion dollars a year in road tax when 
we only collect $360 million a year now. And gas prices are 
higher now. We travel further. We have to go further just to 
survive, to get services of any kind. We only generate $360 
million a year now. How did we possibly lose a billion dollars a 
year in road tax in the 1980s? I don’t understand that. 
 
Mr. Premier, in the nine years of your NDP administration, 
we’ve witnessed a lot of things in this province, most of which 
have not been good. It began with the closure and consolidation 
of SaskPower offices, SaskTel facilities, and other provincially 
operated outlets in rural communities throughout the province. 
 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

And then you closed 53 hospitals, seriously undermining the 
health care and the economic viability in each of the affected 
communities. If the hospital wasn’t closed outright, Mr. 
Chairman, the Premier managed to downgrade the services, 
replacing full service with something substantially less. 
 
Mr. Premier, the record of your government has been to 
downsize, eliminate, or consolidate every conceivable service 
ordinarily provided by the government to the people of 
Saskatchewan, especially in the rural areas. 
 
But recently, your government has dropped to a new lower 
standard with its disregard for the vital roadways which link the 
communities, the communities without services, to those towns 
and cities that have the services necessary to the survival of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Premier. having slowly but surely tightened the 
economic noose around the collective neck of rural 
Saskatchewan, you are now willing to let the cord which keeps 
many of them alive, barely — those highways out there — 
slowly deteriorate to nothing. 
 
It’s not what I would call a fast killing technique; it’s a measure 
which slowly lets these communities expire. Neglect their 
highways with underfunding and inattention to repair 
requirements and let the deathly effect run its course. 
 
I’m reminded of a story of a visitor to a farm where he noticed a 
pig walking around the yard with three legs. Curious, the visitor 
asked the farmer what explanation he had for the pig’s missing 
leg. The farmer replied that the pig was really very valuable to 
him and his family because the pig had once found the barn on 
fire and it squealed so loudly that the family had been alerted 
and the fire put out before irreparable damage had occurred. 
 
The visitor was really impressed with the story but didn’t feel 
that he had obtained a satisfactory answer. So he pressed the 
farmer again. 
 
Well, said the farmer, this pig has prevented the theft of gas 
from my tanks on many occasions by chasing off the would-be 
thieves. And I really appreciated the pig’s efforts, said the 
farmer. 
 
Still unconvinced, the visitor asked again why the pig had just 
three legs. Well, said the farmer slowly, it’s really quite simple 
— any pig that valuable, well, you wouldn’t want to eat it all at 
once. 
 
The record of your government, Mr. Premier, especially as it 
applies to rural Saskatchewan, is reminiscent of the way that pig 
was treated by this story. 
 
You always talk about how valuable, how critical the rural 
reaches of Saskatchewan are to the whole of this province — 
economically, socially, and even politically. But, Mr. Premier, 
your actions indicate otherwise. Your policies and decisions 
have — one by one — cut the communities of rural 
Saskatchewan to the quick. 
 
You can talk about their value and importance, but they’re 
limping around wounded by the policies of your government. 

And now you stand by while community after community, in 
desperation, undertakes to fix their own roads — the only 
lifelines left for most of them. 
 
Now we just learned that once again yesterday about 150 men 
and women from communities along Highway 18 in the great 
southwest, invested sweat equity to fix about 83 kilometres of 
provincial highway. This is after they have paid taxes for a 
lifetime, with reasonable expectation that they would have at 
least a minimum of modern services. 
 
Mr. Premier, what they are getting is a return to 1962, or earlier, 
when the roads were all gravel, completely unreliable for 
all-season travel, and safety of the motoring public was 
considered unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you justify this regressive, 
backward-looking policy, affecting people throughout rural 
Saskatchewan just as the rest of the province struggles to move 
into the 21st century? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, what I don’t accept is 
the canned speech prepared by some staffer of the Sask Party 
for that member to get up and read. And the assumptions are all 
wrong. Our record is clear — fifth consecutive budget increase 
in highways, 6.6 per cent over last year’s budget. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. No. Order. Order. Order. Now I 
recognize the Premier . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — They don’t want to listen in any 
event. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And just in 
case the Premier wants to compliment the comments that I 
make by attributing them to research staff, he can take a look at 
my handwriting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I would like to wish you well in 
your future life outside of politics. In all likelihood what we are 
seeing is the last day that the Premier is in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And he has had a very long and yes, 
very successful career over the last 35 years. And I do wish him 
well in his life after politics. 
 
But if he wants to stay, I would hope that he would take up a 
challenge that he issued to me the first year I was in here. 
During debates he pointed his finger across the floor at me and 
said, I will make sure you never get back in here. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, there’s been two elections since that time 
and I’ve managed to make it back both of those times. The fact 
is, Mr. Chairman, the Premier says it was a fluke. Well, it might 
have been a fluke, Mr. Premier, but it was also a fluke that gave 
me the largest plurality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Mr. Premier, I would like to issue 
you a challenge. If you wish to stay in provincial politics, come 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

and run in Cannington. 
 
Mr. Premier, as my colleague said, as my leader said, the NDP 
have no vision, Mr. Chairman. They have no vision, and that’s 
why this province is adrift. But, Mr. Chairman, if — if 
perchance the NDP should have a vision, that vision is in their 
rear-view mirror looking back to 1962. 
 
The Premier very clearly sees 1962, because I suspect it was 
one of his best years. He is romantic, Mr. Speaker, for those old 
gravel roads, dust flying out, streaming out behind the ’63 
Pontiac that you often see in the black-and-white pictures, or 
perhaps a Ford Frontenac. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier that is a romantic time. That is the 
time of his youth, in his early 20’s. Mr. Speaker, while the 
Premier may wish to return to that after he leaves politics, the 
people of Saskatchewan do not share his romanticism of driving 
on gravel roads. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, want good, 
all-weather roads, Mr. Speaker, that can be driven whether it’s 
wet or dry. They don’t want the dangers of driving down dusty 
dirt roads as the Premier is romantic about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier fondly remembers those dirt roads. But the rest of 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, do not. 
 
They’ve had 10 . . . They had those, Mr. Speaker, 40, 50 years 
ago, but they don’t want to return to them now, even though, 
Mr. Chairman, it has been the theme of the highways and 
transportation policies of this government for the last nine 
years. 
 
That theme, as exemplified by Berny Wiens when he was the 
first minister of Highways, was to turn the roads of 
Saskatchewan, the highways, back to gravel. And the latest 
Minister of Highways, the member from Meadow Lake, his 
vision of highways in Saskatchewan is to turn them back to 
gravel roads. 
 
We need, Mr. Speaker, a transportation policy for the 21st 
century, not the 19th century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — In my own constituency, Mr. Chairman, 
most of the highways are in terrible shape. No. 8 is being turned 
by the minister back to gravel. Highway 361, which is a gravel 
road, is impassable most of the time. The people of the area 
avoid it like the plague. Highway 47 — Corning north to No. 1 
— is another one of those roads that people avoid because they 
simply cannot drive on them. And that’s the state of highways 
that this Premier is leaving. 
 
There’s a good many other highways across this province that 
are in similar condition. Highways 21, 15, 42, 20, 27, 3, and 
Highways 18 and 22, even the school boards don’t want their 
school buses driving down those roads. And we can’t forget that 
champion of bad roads in Saskatchewan, Highway 56. 
 
Mr. Premier, most of the people in Saskatchewan believe that 
you are out of touch with what is happening across 

Saskatchewan, that it’s time for you to leave. 
 
People don’t want to relive your youth, Mr. Premier. They don’t 
want to relive your pasts of the 1950s and the 1960s. They’re 
looking forward to the future, to the 21st century. They don’t 
want to go back to your visions of the 19th century, the visions, 
Mr. Speaker, of the 19th century that spawned your hero, 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the people continue to leave Saskatchewan on 
the roads that are so bad that they only drive that road once, and 
that’s leaving. They don’t turn around and come back. And the 
fact is, even Tommy Douglas left Saskatchewan. Allan 
Blakeney went to work at the University of Toronto. Ned 
Shillington and Doug Anguish, your cabinet ministers, have 
gone to Calgary to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to your . . . Mr. Premier, I’ve listened 
to your words today, and they’re hollow words. Just like your 
words prior to the last election were hollow when you wagged 
your finger across the floor and said, not one of you will be 
back. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, each of us, the nine that were here at that 
time, are back with bigger pluralities than ever before, and we 
brought along with us 17 new colleagues that were previously 
. . . those ridings were on your side, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, what is the record of your government? Nine long 
years of excuses, nine long years of being unresponsible for any 
of your actions. Mr. Premier, you should be able to see those 
nine long years in your rear-view mirror, and see the destruction 
that you have caused across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, recognize the need of a transportation system in 
Saskatchewan to carry on the commerce and to build an 
economy in this province. Why don’t you put the highway taxes 
you collect into fixing the highways instead of padding your 
union jobs? Fix the roads and get out of the way and let the 
people build a strong economy. 
 
Mr. Premier, you are no Tommy Douglas. You are not a friend 
. . . your government is not a friend of Saskatchewan. Move 
over, get out of the way, or run in Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, he’s right. There’s 
only one Tommy Douglas. And I’ll tell you one thing, he’s also 
right. I admire Tommy Douglas and I’ll take my admiration of 
Tommy Douglas over your admiration of Grant Devine and 
everybody who brought this province to bankruptcy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. I have some 
thoughts that we wanted to share with you with respect to 
agriculture, but before we did that there’s a couple of areas that 
in the proceedings here this afternoon that I wanted to address 
you. 
 
I’ve watched with great interest here this afternoon, and you’ve 
made a number of predictions. Some of them that I think . . . 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

even you don’t believe will come true, I don’t think. You’ve 
made some predictions in the past that were accurate, and I 
want to touch on a few of them. I’ll try not to be too unkind to 
your coalition partner with respect to these. 
 
I remember when you said that they couldn’t even govern their 
own party, let alone govern the province of Saskatchewan. And 
then you picked him up in the Liberal dispersal draft and ran 
with him even after the people of Saskatchewan said that they 
didn’t want that to happen, Mr. Premier. 
 
And if you recall, if you recall previous to the last election, the 
editorialists in this province, what they were saying about the 
Liberal Party at that time, they categorized their election 
platform as how to make government more stupid. 
 
That was how the editorial papers of this province suggested 
that the Liberal’s campaign would unfold. And you agreed. And 
I remember that distinctly in the House, you made great fun of 
that kind of platform that they had put forward. And I can’t help 
but agree with you. You were right then in your prediction that 
they couldn’t govern themselves, let alone the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they upheld that promise very, very well — they quickly 
destroyed the Liberal Party. Quickly destroyed it to the point 
where in the Wood River by-election they’ve gone from 
winning the by-election in a squeaker, to third place — just 
about wiped off the map. The Green Alliance, the Green 
Alliance, a fringe party in the province of Saskatchewan, nearly 
got more votes than they did. 
 
And in the last little while, Mr. Premier, you’ve seen many 
predictions in the House — I even made a couple of them. One 
of the predictions that I made was that you would get the 
thrashing of your lives in the Wood River by-election, and 
that’s exactly what happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And I’ll make a couple more predictions. And 
one of them is when it comes to agriculture, the farmers of this 
province, just as they did in the Wood River by-election — they 
didn’t support you — and I predict that the farmers of this 
province won’t support your party for decades after what they 
have seen in the last number of years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — After they have seen the kind of alienation from 
your government that they have never seen before in the 
province of Saskatchewan, after they’ve seen an administration 
that ripped up a GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contract a number of years ago — replaced it with absolutely 
nothing. 
 
After they saw that kind of thing from your administration . . . 
And I remember the minister, Bernie Wiens, at the time, he said 
one of his . . . there was a leaked cabinet document I recall at 
the time. And the contents of that leaked cabinet document 
were, we’ll get over this; it won’t matter; they’ll forget about 
this. 
 

Well I can assure you, Mr. Premier, that the farmers of this 
province haven’t got over it, they haven’t forgotten it, and they 
never will forget it. They never will forget it, Mr. Premier, 
because they simply do not trust your administration any 
longer. 
 
There’s no plan from you in agriculture. There hasn’t been a 
plan in agriculture for a long period of time, and I doubt you’ll 
ever come up with one. 
 
Mr. Premier, in your Throne Speech — you just most recent 
Throne Speech — you promised two things that rural 
Saskatchewan people I think pinned a little bit of hope on. Two 
things. One was you were going to appoint someone, a 
distinguished person I think was the term you used, to oversee 
changes in terms of the agriculture community in 
Saskatchewan. I forget, you had some hokey way of putting it, 
as you always do, but there was somebody you were going to 
put in place. You haven’t done that. The people of 
Saskatchewan, the agriculture community continues to wait in 
that regard. 
 
The other thing you were going to do was put interim . . . into 
agriculture you were going to work towards and implement a 
long-term safety net program. Nothing could be further from 
the truth of what’s happened here in Saskatchewan. We do not 
see anything with regard to that. 
 
The other day in Ag estimates the Minister of Agriculture 
admitted to the farmers of this province that there was nothing 
more — nothing more — than the four-letter word AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) that you helped 
develop on your side of the House. And that has become 
nothing more than a four letter word in agriculture for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact that is your legacy in agriculture. Two four-letter words 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan — one of them being GRIP and 
the other one being AIDA. And to this day the farmers of 
Saskatchewan will never forget it and they’ll never forget it 
long into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, I think the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are looking for some things from your government and I don’t 
think it’s too much to ask. I think they are looking for an 
adequate rail and an adequate highway system to move their 
product to market. 
 
I think they are looking for diversification opportunities so that 
they can diversify their farming operations to allow them the 
opportunity to take advantage of the markets that the world is 
putting forward to them. 
 
I think they are looking for a reliable safety net from your 
administration and from the federal government as well so that 
they know that they have some interests that are going to be 
protected. That’s the other things that they’re looking for. 
 
They are looking as well for marketing choices. They are 
looking for marketing choices because they see a world market 
out there that is lucrative; they see a world market out there that 
is demanding of new products and new innovation. They want 
opportunities in those areas, Mr. Premier. 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

But most of all I think what farmers in Saskatchewan are 
looking for, and I think was demonstrated more clearly than 
ever in the Wood River by-election, they’re looking for a 
government that at least listens to them and understands the 
problems that they have. And they have got none of it from you. 
In any area that I have just outlined, they have got nothing. 
 
They’ve got no vision from this government in terms of 
marketing choices. They’ve got nothing in terms of highways or 
a rail system. They’ve got nothing in terms of diversification 
opportunities. They’ve got nothing in terms of a reliable safety 
net from you. And they most certainly have not got any kind of 
an understanding of the problems that they have from your 
administration. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Premier, that’s why . . . You may not 
understand why you lost the by-election in Wood River but 
those were very, very good reasons why you lost down there 
and took the thrashing of your lives, and I think in a seat that 
your administration and the Liberals have held for a number of 
years and a seat, in fact, that the Deputy Premier held at one 
time. That, Mr. Premier, is what your legacy is in many, many 
areas. 
 
That’s what your legacy is in agriculture. That’s what your 
legacy is in health care. That’s what your legacy is in highways. 
That’s what your legacy is in taxation. All of those kinds of 
things that the communities all across this province have grown 
tired of. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I think that as we draw forward into the next 
election campaign — and I don’t know whether you’re going to 
be fighting the next election campaign or not — but I predict 
across this party that we have here on this side, I predict that 
every single member of this Assembly that we have on this side 
of the Assembly, including myself, will be here to fight you all 
the way along. We will be there. We will be candidates. We 
will be putting forward a platform. We will be doing everything 
we possibly can to defeat your administration. And I predict, 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, that the people of Saskatchewan 
have had enough of your administration, they’ve had enough 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I predict that they’ve had enough of the . . . I 
think they’ve had enough of the failed promises from your 
administration — from the Department of Health, from the 
Department of Highways, from the Department of Agriculture, 
the municipal amalgamation minister back over there. A 
number of ministers all across this province will go down to 
defeat, I predict, Mr. Premier, because they are tired of your 
administration. They want nothing to do with it any longer; all 
they want is to be relieved of the NDP for as long as we can 
possibly have it here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, when . . . I’ll sum up by asking two simple 
questions to you. When are you going to put in place the 
long-term safety net that you promised since you destroyed the 
GRIP program? And when are you going to put in place your 
rural agricultural spokesperson that you have promised the 
farmers and the rural people of Saskatchewan? When will you 
at least live up to those two commitments? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to begin by 
thanking sincerely the hon. member from Kindersley for at least 
bringing back these estimates to a discussion of some of the 
policies which we need to be discussing, and some of the 
politics which is inevitably tied up to the issue of policies and 
the debates, and keeping it away from personality as I think 
should be the effort for all of us, although we all get carried 
away from time to time. So I thank you very much for that. 
 
I do want to say in response to the Wood River by-election. 
You won the Wood River by-election; you won it very 
significantly. I’ve already read to you some of the editorialists’ 
analysis of it, and I think that they are partly accurate; they’re 
partly . . . Your observations are accurate. 
 
But I would say to all of you, if I may say so with the greatest 
of respect, don’t show too much hubris. In by-elections since 
the Saskatchewan Party was formed — I think there was six; 
you lost four — you’ve won two in the southwest part of the 
province, Maple Creek and Wood River. Fair enough. 
Congratulations to both members and we look forward to 
working with you in the House. 
 
But don’t make this some sort of a harbinger of inevitability 
because the one thing about politics that we all know and about 
the attitudes of Saskatchewan people is that they are thinking 
and they do change and they do see things in the proper light. 
 
In fact in that spirit, if I may say so, and I say it with a bit of a 
joke but with a little bit of a point to it, one of the better things 
and one of the good news sides of this estimates that I’ve heard 
so far is your prediction that all of the team opposite me right 
there, the official opposition, are all going to be running in the 
next election. That really has buoyed me up and all the boys and 
women on this side in the operation. We’re very much pleased 
by that because we fully believe that by the time . . . Well 
within the next few months, your true positions will become 
very, very eminently known. 
 
Now the two specific questions . . . By the way I want to say 
one thing, I want to say one thing which does trouble me a little 
bit — the member from Kindersley didn’t expand on it; he may 
or may not want to — is marketing choices, he talked about. 
And I’m assuming that this means changes fundamentally to the 
Canadian Wheat Board. But I could be wrong on that and I’m 
not going to get into it. But certainly that is something which 
the people of the rural community, the farmers should take note 
of. 
 
But I’m going to answer the two questions if I can very briefly. 
The Speech from the Throne is on page five as follows: 
 

My government will . . . appoint an eminently qualified 
and respected Special Advisor on Agriculture to support 
our province at the next round of trade talks. And to help 
the federal government confront the protectionist policies 
of our trading partners. 

 
That person is Professor Hartley Furtan who is an agriculture 
economist of some note and I think well respected by most 
members of the House, if not all. He is occupying the Al 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Johnson special chair in the Department of Finance. 
 
(1745) 
 
We think this is properly located doing that particular task, at 
least he’s now beginning to organize himself in doing that task. 
And any ideas that you might have, I’m sure that he’d welcome 
that. 
 
With respect to the safety net program commitment which we 
have made. The Minister of Agriculture said during his 
estimates and I repeat here again, he tells me just a few 
moments ago he expects that to be signed, the framework 
agreement, to be signed in the next two weeks is it, Mr. 
Minister, approximately. There’s a ministers’ meeting in New 
Brunswick of all the agriculture ministers. 
 
And our Minister of Agriculture says . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, I’m saying wait until the announcement is made and the 
framework is there and then you can make your criticisms. You 
can wait two more weeks. It’ll be there. But I can tell you one 
thing, our Minister of Agriculture predicts that the provinces of 
Alberta, and the province of Ontario, probably all the provinces 
will sign onto that framework agreement. 
 
Now, whether it is what we all want, we know the give and take 
in the negotiations, but we hope to have that safety net at that 
point. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, it’s indeed a pleasure to have the 
opportunity to engage in these Premier’s estimates tonight, 
because it gives me an opportunity to publicly share a little bit 
of our perspective about where we believe health care is going, 
and where it’s been, and who is responsible for what. 
 
I was very pleased when the Leader of the Official Opposition 
asked me to undertake the challenge of being the health critic 
for the official opposition, because when I look back on what 
motivated me most singularly to get involved in this political 
process, it probably was health care in my home community of 
Melfort. 
 
In Melfort over the years, we’ve always been extremely proud 
of the health care facilities and the services that were offered in 
our community. We’re very proud about the fact that we were 
one of four sites that looked after the provincial regional 
hospital, Parkland hospital. One of four sites; we’re very proud 
of that. 
 
And the community, when I moved there in 1981 and later, 
always struck me as being extremely proud about the level and 
professionalism of the delivery of health care in our 
community. They worked very hard in their different boards to 
provide services through the long-term care facilities and 
through the acute care facilities, and looked with a lot of pride 
and were recognized, I think, provincially with a lot of envy in 
some instances about the quality of medical professionals we 
had in that community. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 I watched as there was indeed a 
major change in government in this province, and I had not 
been very much a person that has needed the health care system 
other than for the minor things that your children have when 
they’re growing up. But I too began to share the pride that the 
community had in the health care services that were in Melfort. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, leading up to 1995 when I again become 
involved, the commitment to health care in 1991 was what 
motivated me to be involved. And I thought it was an important 
transition that was going to go on not just in our community or 
our province, but indeed in the world 
 
And to listen to the Premier and the Minister of Health from 
time to time, you would think that the only forces of change in 
health care that were happening in the whole world were in 
Saskatchewan and that simply is not correct. It simply is an 
unrealistic isolation of attitude that must have developed back 
in 1962 when Tommy Douglas suggested something that was 
pretty important to this country and it was embraced across 
Canada. And that’s good stuff; it was valuable. 
 
But now you’re stuck in it. That’s all you can think. That’s all 
that has been able to come out of your government’s mouth 
since 1991 except for a few facts that I think need to be talked 
about. 
 
People have said that in 1991 and with your health care reform 
that there were rural hospitals closed. And that’s true. It’s true 
that subsequent to that with the Minister of Education chained 
to the door or not, the Plains Health Centre was closed. And 
that’s true. 
 
But nobody really talks a whole lot about what a lot of 
communities lost to health care. They don’t talk about the fact 
how services have changed and diminished. They don’t talk 
about people that I can remember in Melfort that practised 
medicine there in 1991 and who were forced to leave this 
province because they were so frustrated by the lack of 
direction and the lack of vision that your government brought 
in, in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I remember Dr. Ernie Fuller. Dr. Ernie 
Fuller had spent a great part of his life working in third 
countries and gained a tremendous amount of surgical 
experience. Dr. Ernie Fuller was doing laparoscopic surgery in 
Melfort, Saskatchewan before they were in the Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon. That’s the calibre of the man. 
 
And do you know why he left? He left because he was so 
frustrated with the lack of direction and the aimless theoretical, 
philosophical wellness thing that was going on. And he’s gone 
to Melfort and to Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember Dr. Paul Anderson who was a brilliant orthopedic 
surgeon who practised medicine in Melfort and who was 
recognized to the extent that there were people from Regina 
coming up to have his services availed. And he’s gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, I remember Dr. Rob Webb, 
another brilliant general practitioner who has left this province 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

in frustration. I remember Dr. Rick Twano who has left this 
province, and this country in fact, in frustration. 
 
Mr. Premier, time after time we have seen our Canadian 
educated and trained doctors leaving in frustration, and these 
are people who have been tremendous losses to this province. 
 
And they have told me when they left, it’s because you didn’t 
have the vision to know where you’re going in health care and 
instead kept the blinders on and ignored the fact that change is 
happening everywhere and you’re unwilling to embrace change 
in a constructive, visionary way. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, this has to change. In our country the 
vision has to change, in our province it has to change. We can’t 
simply go from one crisis to the next and expect the fact that 
we’re going to make up the shortfall by importing offshore 
doctors. We did that in the past with British and Irish doctors 
that came to Canada. And that got us out of the glue, if you like, 
and we’ve most recently done that with South African doctors. 
 
And they’ve been good doctors and they’ve helped our 
communities, in many instances practising medicine in small 
communities where other people were unwilling to go to 
provide services in this system that is in such flux that no one 
knows where it’s going to end up. 
 
And over this time, Mr. Premier, I’ve heard time and time again 
where you put on your blaming methodology. You blame the 
federal government because they haven’t contributed 
appropriately to their share of health care. And they need to be 
blamed for that. They need to be held accountable for the fact 
that Paul Martin’s budget is balanced on the backs of reduction 
of transfers to provinces. That has to be said. 
 
But it also has to be acknowledged that just automatically 
throwing more money at any issue is not going to be enough if 
you don’t have a vision, if you don’t know where you’re going, 
if you don’t have a plan. 
 
And the latest statistics that have come out of the World Health 
Organization substantiates that. If you look at the ranking, many 
countries, many countries who indeed are spending less money 
per capita, are ranking better than we are. And one of the 
lessons as a country that we have to learn is that it just isn’t 
enough to throw money at the issue, we have to have a plan. 
And just blaming past administrations or living in the ’60s is 
not going to lead us to that plan. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Premier, you say that you’ve got this great 
commitment and this great vision. Well no one sees it. No one 
knows what it is. You know, you can wrap yourself in all the 
rhetoric around when you’re in this House and when you’re in 
this province. You can wrap yourself around the rhetoric of the 
Canada Health Act and all the wonderful principles of the 
wellness model and all these good words. And they are good 
words. But, Mr. Premier, they’re cold comfort for the elderly 
people who are waiting to have painful hip replacements done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Premier, they’re cold comfort to people 
that are aged and are worried about going blind because they 

can’t get cataract surgery in a timely way. Mr. Premier, they’re 
cold comfort to people that are being run around this province 
in the back of a bouncy ambulance because there’s no place for 
them in a hospital. Mr. Premier, they’re cold comfort to people 
that are sitting at home waiting when the next home care visit is 
going to happen and they’re out in isolated farmyards or things 
of that nature. 
 
I went out and saw an individual in . . . a senior man and a 
woman who were sitting at their home and were sitting in a 
snowed-in driveway; and they said to me, because I walked in 
to visit them, they said what would happen if we got sick? How 
would they get to us? People are worrying out there. And all the 
nice rhetoric is cold comfort to any of those people who 
actually are finding that the health care system is not coming 
close to meeting their needs, Mr. Premier — not their 
expectations but their fundamental needs. 
 
Mr. Premier, you quote a lot of statistics and I know that there’s 
a lot of things going on in health care. And you know why 
they’re going on? They’re going on not because of your vision 
but in spite of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — They’re going on in this province, Mr. 
Premier, not because of your vision or this government’s vision 
or your Health minister’s platitudes. They’re going on because 
of people who are committed as professionals in this province. 
They’re going on because of doctors like Dr. Stan Oleksinski 
who was a recent president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. And on behalf of the doctors he represented 
indicated his frustration. And he said, and I quote from 
Saturday, May 13, Saskatoon, The StarPhoenix. And he said: 
 

The abilities of doctors in Saskatchewan to provide quality 
care for their patients is being compromised by 
“unacceptable” waiting times for beds and medical 
procedures . . . 

 
That’s what he said. And in spite of that frustration, medical 
doctors are providing incredible service to the people of this 
province. 
 
And you know another group of people who have to be 
recognized for what they’re doing? It’s the whole nursing 
profession, Mr. Premier. And what is your attitude of your 
government to these people? Well last year you went and 
dumped on them by forcing them back to work. You went and 
ridiculed their great frustration about the work conditions 
they’re working in, and you try to demean what they were 
trying to say that . . . try to make it just a strict monetary issue. 
That’s what you did to them. And you frustrated them time and 
time again as they’ve been forced to try to cope in a system that 
you have no idea of where you’re heading with. That’s the 
frustration that’s going on. 
 
And then because they absolutely stood up to you and your 
interference in the whole negotiation process, what did you do 
this spring? Your Health minister gets out in the hallway here 
and says: now you registered nurses and the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses Association, I’m sorry, you don’t have the 
professional competence to decide what the educational 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

requirements are for your graduates — you know, mother 
knows best. 
 
And I’m sorry, Mr. Premier, that does not indicate the kind of 
respect that’s needed, and it’s only after they’ve protested with 
our support loudly that you backed off with that ridiculous 
situation. And it needed to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — You talk to the people that are providing the 
care out there — the doctors, the nurses, both registered and 
licensed practical nurses — and you listen to the frustration that 
they have. And, Mr. Premier, it’s extreme because they now 
see, as well as everyone else in this province, that you don’t 
have any ideas about where you’re going. 
 
Mr. Premier, that’s unacceptable. And after nine years — you 
can point to the ’80s or the ’60s or any other time you like — 
but, Mr. Premier, you have to accept responsibility for your 
tenure as the Premier of this province. And I would like to 
quote you some interesting statistics. 
 
You know it’s interesting — and I’m quoting from a Fraser 
Institute publication — the annual waiting list survey from 1993 
to 1999. And, Mr. Premier, in 1993 it showed the relative 
median total time from referral to treatment, from GP to 
treatment times in Canada. 
 
And you know, Saskatchewan was in pretty good shape. The 
average median waiting time from GP visit to treatment was 9.8 
weeks in Saskatchewan, you know, and that was actually pretty 
good. There were only two provinces in Canada that were better 
— Ontario at 9.2 weeks, and Quebec with 7.3. We were number 
three — the third best in the country in 1993. 
 
And you know where we are in 1998 after five years of your 
mismanagement of the health care system? We were dead last at 
20.2 weeks. We went from 9.8 weeks to 20 weeks — that’s 
your responsibility, Mr. Premier. 
 
And you can sit there and talk about how many procedures are 
happening. This indicates how long people have to wait for 
those procedures. They wait in fear; they wait in pain; and they 
wait in uncertainty because of your mismanagement. Mr. 
Premier, stand up and take responsibility for your record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 (1800) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud of our 
changes, and reform and renewal, to health care and I take full 
responsibility for it. I might add that I would like to see you do 
the same. Because as you are critical about our position on 
nurses, I believe you voted for the back-to-work legislation as 
well. But you didn’t notice that at all in your remarks. So do it 
in a fair and balanced way. 
 
With respect to the Fraser Institute, you can talk about the 
Fraser Institute — that’s fair enough. I don’t accept the Fraser 
Institute indicators. I do accept CIHI, because Fraser Institute, 
whatever it is, is not a specialized, independent institute on 

health care matters. That organization is, and the Fraser Institute 
simply is not the case. 
 
Now with respect to physicians, I want to say to the hon. 
member opposite that he has identified a continuing challenge 
which has faced previous governments and current 
governments. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that the individuals that he’s named 
— I don’t know them all but I know one or two of them — have 
been outstanding. And I wish they were still in practice in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But the truth of the matter is, historically physicians do change; 
they do travel around. On a province-wide basis — and I’ll say 
a word about your area of North Central in a moment — on a 
province-wide basis, here’s a situation. March 1996, family 
practitioners totalled 707; today they total 731. Specialists in 
March ’96, they were 439; today they total 453. And the 
comparisons ’96 to 2000 are 1,146 in total compared to 1,184. 
 
So it is stable and it is growing. And by the way, there’s another 
stat which I think is very important here. It can be better, but 
it’s a very important stat — 76 per cent of the 1999 family 
medicine graduates opted to remain in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s an increasing number. 
 
Now coming to your own area, there’s no doubt about it that 
there’s been change. But in your own area all the doctors that 
have left or decided to make other career changes, have been 
replaced by doctors who are trained, equally trained, from many 
parts of the world, but also from our own Saskatchewan 
situation. And they have been replaced. 
 
And the hospital services in your area, North Central Health 
District, in Melfort, the Melfort hospital provides emergency 
services, ambulatory care, chemotherapy, intensive care, 
obstetrics, palliative care, pediatrics, endoscopy, as well as a 
wide range of visiting specialist services such as plastic surgery, 
urology, orthopedics, ophthalmology, asthma allergy, ear, nose, 
throat, rheumatology. North Central provided in-patient acute 
care for 1,471 people last year, and performs an average of 300 
in-patient and 1,000 day surgeries a year — 1,000 day surgeries 
a year. 
 
I could give you the other list of community services in mental 
health and counselling, the areas related to Melfort and St. 
Brieux and surrounding areas, childhood psychology programs, 
public health, and the like. There’s no doubt about it. If the 
argument is that more can be done, I agree with you. More 
needs to be done. 
 
But there’s something else which you said which I think is very, 
very important indeed. And that is, you said that more money 
alone is not the answer to health care. And you talked about it 
in the context of vision. And I want to tell you that I agree with 
you on both of those statements. 
 
Now you may not say this is a visionary speech — I suspect 
you won’t, for political reasons — but I had the honour of 
addressing A Forum on Medicare: Sustainability and 
Accountability in the 21st Century, in Vancouver, May 11, 
2000. I can get you a copy of the speech and you can look at it, 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

your analysts can take a look at it. You can critique it, even 
write to me. 
 
This is, by the way, to the British Columbia medical society, 
association, invited me to speak to it, and the Canadian Medical 
Association. The president of the CMA, Hugh Scully, was 
there. 
 
And I set out in this speech that there are three options that we 
can adopt, talking about the road map and the plan. And one 
way that we can follow is the American model. The American 
model is a privatized health care model. I’m going to spare the 
words which obviously arouse you but I firmly believe you 
folks are committed to, which is the privatized model. 
 
In the United States, the percentage of GDP (gross domestic 
product) spent on health care is the highest of any of the OECD 
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) 
countries. And do you know what the life expectancy is for 
males? Thirty-seven, in the consequence. 
 
And we all know that in the United States, 50 million — these 
are stats from OECD — 50 million Americans are uninsured, 
plus 50 million are underinsured, which amounts to fully a 
third, fully a third of Americans who have no coverage at all. 
 
They’re on an HMO (health maintenance organization) system, 
which basically means a battle between the private insurer, 
which seeks to de-insure you in order to save their insurance 
costs and make a profit, and the hospitals, which also seek to 
make a profit. And the system doesn’t work. 
 
That’s one model though. And people can advocate it and you 
can advocate it. I don’t. I reject it. 
 
Another model is the UK (United Kingdom) model. The UK 
model has hit a brick wall. It’s hit a solid wall because the 
Beveridge Report, the national health services . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon me? Is the argument what? 
Government? Socialist government. It hit the wall during the 
days of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. That is 
acknowledged by the European Community. 
 
But here’s what happened in the United Kingdom. Let’s forget 
about attaching blame on ideology for a moment. In reality you 
have a situation in the United Kingdom now where doctors, on 
two-tiering, practise public medicine — I’m using this by way 
of example, not literally — public medicine in the mornings and 
private medicine for profit in the afternoon. 
 
And the two-tier system has just ballooned up so that now, 
Prime Minister Tony Blair, recognizing the crisis and the folly 
of permitting the two-tiering and the Bill 11’s and that kind of a 
concept, has dedicated $50 million — I think it’s Canadian, $50 
million, is it Mr. Deputy? — approximately in that order; $50 
million for a five-sectors study on how to get the system back 
akin to a single-payer, publicly funded approach. 
 
Then there’s the third way which I described in my speech and 
I’ll spare you the time and maybe the agony, but I think it is the 
game plan. And the third way is one which starts off on your 
theme. Money is not alone going to solve this. We spend 40 
cents of your tax dollars now on health care in Saskatchewan — 

that’s up from 35 to 36. 
 
The question is, if we’ve rejected the American model, and if 
we’ve rejected the UK model as it’s unfolded, what kind of a 
model do we have? Well here’s what I say. We say there are 
challenges, yes, but crisis, no. CIHI says the same thing. 
 
We need to renovate I say, renovate our 40-year-old health care 
house. By this I mean we need to do more than move the 
furniture around. We can also change the size, the rooms 
themselves, expanding some, reducing others, perhaps creating 
a whole new family of rooms in a previously bare basement. 
 
And here I identify a number of things, the determinants of 
health care being the most important aspect of health care. I 
won’t say most — equally important, acute care. You know this 
yourself, as a thoughtful critic in Health. The determinants of 
health — do you have education, do you have good nutrition, 
do you have a job. Those are as important as when you are 
actually ill. And you need that emergency service that you’re 
talking about. We need both. 
 
Very often we talk about health care, but what we really are 
talking about is illness care. Of course we have to take a look 
and take care of ourselves when we’re ill. We all have, as the 
Leader of the Opposition’s rightfully said, loved ones and 
people who have a responsibility for the entire province, who 
when they are ill we have to have the best that we can do for 
them. 
 
But you talk to any doctor or medical professional and they will 
tell you that frequently at that stage in the game, it gets too 
serious or maybe even too late. They do the best they can in 
palliative, and the medicines are great and the technology is 
exploding, and who knows what the future of genomes is going 
to mean in the terms of identifying the illnesses and how we can 
tackle them. 
 
All of those are exciting prospects; all of them carry huge 
dollars with them. Huge dollars which will not be distributed 
equally uniformly across all of Canada no matter how much we 
desire it — and I desire it — or for that matter in other parts or 
regions of the country. That’s the future; that’s the future that’s 
facing us. 
 
And so what we have to do is look at the other side of the coin. 
Acute care, yes, but we’ve got to look at the determinants of 
health care. How about just the question of early childhood 
development, the very question that the . . . myself and the 
member from Carrot River debated on another issue earlier 
when these estimates began. 
 
We need to find a right balance between investments in the 
acute care, I say in my speech, and health determinants. We’ve 
got to find the right balance between treating illness and 
preventing illness, something which I’m disappointed you 
discarded in your comments — the wellness model. That’s all 
that wellness talks about — a combination of acute care and 
prevention. 
 
And all I can say to you is, as I conclude my remarks, this is not 
a question of saying that Tommy Douglas and those people 
back in 1962 had it right; they had it right in the principles, the 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

third alternative. Not the American model, not the UK model. 
They have it right and that’s what we want to defend 
provincially and federally. There’s no doubt about that. 
 
But they could not have envisaged the CAT scan; they didn’t 
know what it was like in ’62 or ’64. They couldn’t have 
envisaged the drugs. They couldn’t have envisaged . . . To be 
frank with you, even I’m having difficulty, although I see it, 
accepting television ads saying go to your doctor for this drug 
or that drug. They couldn’t have envisaged the miracles that are 
taking place, all of which are tied in with dollars and all of 
which we’ve got to try to provide for our people in 
Saskatchewan and Canada as best as we can. 
 
But if we do it alone, as you said, picking up on your theme, it 
will never be enough. You’ve got to dedicate the dollars to the 
determinants and the prevention. It’s the combination of the 
two. And that’s the blueprint. 
 
And the blueprint then says, how do you do it? And we say the 
best system still to do it is not Bill 11, it’s not two-tiering, it’s 
not for private, for profit, it is a medicare system and the 
principles of that period that Douglas and those men and 
women who had the vision and the guts, to be blunt about it, 
establishing it, not that we’re frozen in time on that. We have to 
deal with these new medical, technological, and other factors. 
No doubt about it. 
 
And you’re dead right, Mr. Member, if I may say so — if I 
may, I don’t mean this sarcastically — in a partially thoughtful, 
in my judgment, critique of the system; partially not thoughtful 
by not putting enough attention on the prevention. We can do 
more, but that is the blueprint. There it is. 
 
Now, Mr. Ken Fyke has been charged with these thoughts. 
Those are the only restrictions on him, namely that we’re going 
to work within the medicare system. To apply his best thinking 
and his experience and get the input from the doctors in Melfort 
and the nurses, and get it from the district health boards and 
from the farmers and from the workers and from everybody in 
our community, to devise for the 21st century the very, very 
best system of medicare. 
 
And when I get passionate — you can describe it as oratorical 
flight or whatever — it is because I am passionate about this. 
This is a question of saving this Canadian dream, saving this 
great social plan. 
 
I do not agree . . . I respect your right to advocate privatization. 
I know by looking in the United States what the result is. I do 
not agree with it. I will fight it to the last day of my ability to 
fight. 
 
Politically and in every other way I can, I will fight for a third 
way, which is a combination of modern day medicines, 21st 
century health care, prevention, making the right balance, and 
doing it so that, in conclusion, we have enough tax dollars to 
look after our sick and to prevent sickness, but that we have 
enough tax dollars to provide tax cuts — more for roads, 
education, and balance the budget and not go back into deficit. 
 
And that I will say — forgive me if I sound like I’m lecturing 
— but that’s something you’re going to have to come to grips 

with as a political party. Because you can get all the votes you 
want in Wood River or anywhere else, but if you’re all things to 
all people without balancing and making those decisions, when 
it comes to decision-making time, you will not be elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1815) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Premier, 
and your officials, welcome this evening. Our leader and some 
of my colleagues have touched on some of the very important 
issues that people across Saskatchewan, not just in our 
constituencies but right across the province, are talking about. 
 
We all know that everyone in this province is concerned about 
health care. They’re concerned about long waiting lists and 
being shuffled out of hospital beds because there’s another 
emergency on the corner waiting for the bed. 
 
And we’re concerned that in rural Saskatchewan we already 
have a two-tier health care system because you have to cough 
up the money to get to the hospital before you can even worry 
about waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Premier, people in Saskatchewan are concerned about the 
highways. They’re concerned that they’ve deteriorated to the 
point that they’re dangerous and unsafe, and we live with that 
daily. We talk about it in the legislature every day but it’s just 
talk. We don’t live it because we’re not out there every day. 
When our cars . . . we know out in rural Saskatchewan that our 
cars are going to wear out quicker, we know that our insurance 
is going to go up because we’re bound to have the accidents 
that happen when you have roads in the conditions they are 
right now. 
 
Mr. Premier, the crisis in health care is obvious because 
everyone can see it and they know about the waiting lists. Mr. 
Premier, the crisis in the highways situation is there. Everybody 
knows it because we see the craters in the road every day. But, 
Mr. Premier, there’s another crisis that isn’t as obvious. There’s 
one that we may not even see the real results of for the next 5 or 
10 years and that’s the crisis that we have in education. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people who are most affected by this crisis is 
the most important part of our province and that’s our children. 
Mr. Premier, your government has downloaded the 
responsibility of education onto the backs of property taxpayers 
in this province. Frequently I’ve heard you say that the 
Saskatchewan Party would freeze the education budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, when I talk to teachers and I talk to school 
boards and I talk to parents and even children, they’re saying 
they wished you would have frozen the education budget the 
way it was in 1992. It would have been an asset if you would 
have frozen it then because you didn’t freeze it, you cut it back. 
You cut back $390 million in education. Mr. Premier, $390 
million pays for a lot of teachers. It pays for a lot of capital 
expansions and it pays for a lot of maintenance on schools and 
it pays for a lot of technological improvements. 
 
Mr. Premier, it would have helped us address the concerns that 
teachers and parents have about integrated classrooms. It would 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

have helped address the needs for more training so that we can 
deal with our special needs children, the ones that need help to 
keep up with their classmates, and the ones that have more 
ability and a greater capacity for learning and they have to be 
challenged just to stay interested. 
 
We all know, Mr. Premier, that when cutbacks were announced 
the school boards and the taxpayers and the parents just said 
okay, we’ll hunker down and we’ll do it ourselves. Just like 
they’re doing with the highways right now, Mr. Premier. We’ll 
do it ourselves. We’ll work harder. We’ll make do with fewer 
teachers, and we’ll make do with leaking roofs, and we’ll ask 
more of the teachers and the aides and the school boards. But 
what we won’t do is cut back on the education. We’ll pay for it 
ourselves, Mr. Premier. And they did. 
 
So the school boards raised the taxes and then the government 
cut back funding. And they raised the taxes and the government 
saw it worked so they cut back funding again. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, the government used to pay for 60 per cent 
of the education in this province and now they’re paying for 40 
per cent. We still have a 40/60 split but it’s the other way 
around, Mr. Premier, because the people of Saskatchewan are 
proud and independent people and they are going to look after 
their children, Mr. Premier. 
 
Since 1991 your government has cried poverty. There was no 
money and it sure wasn’t your fault. It was everybody else’s 
fault. In fact you did a really good job of convincing everybody 
that life was terrible and we just had to suck it up because we 
weren’t oil rich like Alberta, and the federal government hated 
us and they wouldn’t give us any money, and that the last 
government betrayed the citizens, and everyone believed you, 
Mr. Premier. Everyone believed that if we all worked harder 
and together, worked a lot longer, we’d get through the crisis 
and then this government was going to help us out. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, your government has made a mistake — at 
least one mistake, Mr. Premier. It was not knowing when to 
stop blaming and when to start taking responsibility for being 
government in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — We as citizens, Mr. Premier, have heard in the 
past few years that the province’s economy is turning around; 
that there was an economic growth and prosperity. In fact your 
own government revenues have grown from $4.8 billion to over 
$6 billion since you were elected. But, Mr. Premier, the citizens 
of this province haven’t seen that. Their own bottom lines have 
not grown by that percentage — by 15 per cent. They aren’t 
taking home that much more money themselves. 
 
We’re paying more and more taxes and we’ve lost more and 
more services. So last fall, Mr. Premier, we started seeing 
something new in this province — we started seeing tax revolt 
meetings. People right around this province saying, I’m not 
paying anymore education tax. This is government’s 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan is now, out of 63 jurisdictions in 
North America, we’re the lowest spending on education per 

child. And on the other hand, there’s only one province in 
Canada that actually is spending less provincial dollars on 
education than Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, the taxpayers aren’t 
going to take it anymore. 
 
The teachers can’t work any harder. The school boards can’t cut 
any more budgets, and our students still need an education. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, when you and your cohorts grouped together 
after the beating last September, and you figured out the only 
way you could survive was to buy yourself a couple of friends, 
and you had some major decisions to make. 
 
Decisions like how can we keep some of our election promises 
and none of the Liberal’s promises. Continue to spend like 
drunken sailors in areas that’s important to you and your group 
of people that you’re still trying to keep a handle on, which is 
very few and far between, and still be able to spin your stories 
about economic growth. It was how little money can I put into 
each department and keep the maximum number of people 
happy. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, I’m sure that the day that the inspiration hit 
you that you could kill two birds with one stone in the area of 
Education was the happiest day you’ve had since September of 
1999. That was the day when you let the Liberal Party . . . 
Liberal leader be the Education minister. Let’s give him one of 
the most important departments in government on one hand and 
then continue to underfund it on the other hand. That way you 
could blame the good doctor when things weren’t going right. 
 
We can pretend he’s an NDP when it comes to a vote in the 
legislature. We can let him believe he’s part of the coalition 
when it comes to a little decision in the coalition. But when it 
comes to talking to the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), or when it comes to talking to teachers about 
wage increase, or when it comes to talking to taxpayers at tax 
revolt meetings, then he’s the Liberal leader then. Then he’s on 
his own and he takes the blame and the Liberals are the ones 
that are wrong and the NDP government is standing strong. 
 
It was a wonderful idea. It kept tough political obligations away 
from you and planted them squarely at the feet of the Liberal 
leader — the man who couldn’t keep a caucus together, 
couldn’t keep a party together, and can’t even keep his thoughts 
together long enough to stop interrupting himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, education is the only hope for so 
many of the problems that we have in this society, right from 
growing the economy to ending racism in this province, Mr. 
Premier. We must have a minister that’s visionary, we must 
have a minister that’s strong, and we must have a minister that’s 
open-minded. 
 
Mr. Premier, there must be respect given and shown to the 
minister and we have to have someone that is listened to across 
this province, Mr. Premier. We have to make sure that 
education starts registering on the Richter scale in this province. 
We have to make sure that people know the economy is only 
going to grow when we have education, everyone is . . . when 
it’s available to everyone. 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Mr. Premier, one of the fastest growing populations in our 
province is the Aboriginal population. And we know that there 
is about half of the Aboriginal children in this province live 
off-reserve. The Provincial Auditor, the school boards, and the 
teachers have a growing concern over the number of students 
who get lost in the school system. 
 
The number in Saskatoon alone, Mr. Premier, is about 1,500 
students each year who register in one school system and then 
move to the reserve or another school system and they get lost. 
They drop out of the system and they aren’t found, Mr. Premier. 
The effect of the dropouts hurt the child, and it hurts their 
family originally and then in turn it affects all of society. The 
chances of them being on social services or chances of being 
part of the justice system, or teen pregnancy or child 
prostitution, that’s all part of the things that happens when 
there’s insufficient education, Mr. Premier. We must work side 
by side with Aboriginal people to develop their economy and 
our society. 
 
Mr. Premier, I believe we have the opportunity to develop a 
new vibrant society and culture unlike any other place in the 
world. We will, and we can take this challenge and show the 
world what can happen in the new millennium when we have 
experienced and educated people working together. 
 
We can only address the challenge if the partners are on a real 
level playing field, Mr. Premier. We can only be on the same 
level playing field if we combine our cultures and our abilities. 
Education is part of our abilities, Mr. Premier. You must be 
concerned about education when you’re the Premier of this 
province. 
 
I’ve spoken to members of the FSIN about this problem, and 
they talk about the possibility of building schools on urban 
reserves. They talk about how it would work and the concerns 
that there could be. And when I discussed this with the minister 
about how your government is dealing with this challenge, he 
said he had no knowledge of this issue. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is a huge issue and one that’s facing all of us 
in the future. And I believe that as Premier of this province, this 
is one issue, a very critical issue that we should be dealing with 
and looking at right now. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell me how you’re dealing with this very 
important issue to make sure that we are all working together as 
we go into the new millennium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to answer 
the question first and then with your permission, make just a 
few comments of correction as it seems that I have to with these 
interventions today. 
 
Specifically, the question of schools on reserves. Let me begin 
by saying that everybody, I would like to think, in this 
legislature, understands the importance of education for 
everybody and understands the importance with respect to 
Aboriginal peoples, whether they’re on reserve or off reserve. 
There’s no doubt about that. The demographics and the other 
challenges require all of us to be as creative and as dedicated to 

providing those schooling opportunities. 
 
But your question asked specifically in reference to the Minister 
of Education who is doing an excellent job, and I just want to 
say a word about that in a moment. The question of reserves 
and schools on reserves and what is your government doing 
about it was the question. 
 
Well I want to, yes I want to tell you, hon. member from 
Kelvington, that you must fully understand that, when you’re 
dealing with reserves, you are dealing with a position taken by 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations that reserves are 
a responsibility, through treaty, a constitutional and fiduciary 
responsibility of the Ottawa federal government. 
 
Now that’s not to say that we can’t partner. But what it does say 
is that, heretofore in any event, largely the position taken by 
many of the leaders in the Aboriginal community — with 
whom we want to partner to make sure there is this education 
— is one where we need to get the federal government at the 
table, and in recognition of the fundamental principle that this is 
an overarching federal responsibility. And I’m sure that your 
colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, will understand that 
particular position. 
 
So there we are. We need to do as much as we can. But there 
we are with respect to on-reserve. 
 
Now what are we doing about off-reserve? A concerted effort 
— alternative programs, Joe Duquette at the secondary level, 
teacher training programs, a shared curriculum revision process 
for the inclusion of Aboriginal content, specific programs, 
pre-kindergarten, Indian, Metis education, structures to engage 
the educational community and the Aboriginal community in 
the general improvement of the circumstances. 
 
I can tell you in many parts of the larger centres of this 
province, in the inner core where there are Aboriginal people — 
First Nations and Metis — there’s a wonderful job being done 
by teachers and community groups in the early childhood 
development programs: detection, prevention, in parenting, 
getting them to school and keeping them in school. The 
budget’s about $55 million outside of the education budget on 
that program alone. 
 
So we’re doing it on an off-reserve basis. We need to do more. 
And we need to do more with the community and we need to do 
more with the shared responsibility of the Aboriginal 
community I would argue for the obvious reasons, that at a 
cultural level in any event, there needs to be some connection 
and some buy in to the program. 
 
But on the on-reserve issue, it is the problem that I’ve identified 
which is the challenge which is before us. 
 
Now having answered the question, at least to the best of my 
ability, I want to say a few words about the general preamble 
that the member has said. 
 
I said that the Minister of Education, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, and the purpose of a coalition government is to come 
together on those things that we can agree on in order to 
improve our community and our province and do it in a climate 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

of stability. 
 
I tell you in this budget, this budget, the first budget where the 
Leader of the Liberal Party has served as Minister of Education, 
the record is very good. For the 2000 calendar year this 
government is providing $416 million to school divisions — an 
increase of 18.5 million. 
 
(1830) 
 
Now that may not be enough in the members’ minds but that is 
a significant amount of money. That’s nearly 5 per cent over the 
’99 grant and far more than twice the rate of inflation at 1.7 per 
cent. Not enough? I agree. Important and substantial? I think it 
is. 
 
We have increased grants in lieu of taxes by $1.9 million and 
increased the capital budget by $5 million. Another factoid. 
Basic per pupil rate was increased by $262 per student — $262 
per student. 
 
We increased pupil funding for high-cost, special needs 
students. Level 1 to 5,000 from 4,752; level 2 to 10,000 from 
7,088; enhanced pre-kindergarten programs to include an 
additional 13 community schools; additional 40,000 per school 
for northern community schools; additional 300,000 for — 
coming back to the original point — Aboriginal elders outreach 
program, $18 million. The additional that I referred to or the 
4.7, nearly 5 per cent, shows the commitment to K to 12. 
 
I can tell you about our commitment to education with respect 
to post-secondary, but I’m assuming that’s not within the 
parameter of the question that you’re at. 
 
That is a substantial, substantial bump up that the Leader of the 
Liberal Party has brought to the coalition. And in Treasury 
Board, as a Treasury Board member and as Minister Education, 
in concert, and I would say in co-operation and in agreement 
with us as members of the coalition, have provided for the 
concerns and the needs of students. I want to work to, as the 
Leader of the Liberal Party does I’m sure, to this 60/40 balance. 
That is obviously an objective. 
 
If I may be permitted one small, perhaps last reminisence. I 
remember in 1982 in that election campaign, when the Treasury 
of the province permitted, with a balanced budget, that the 
provincial portion could be upped to 80 per cent within four 
years. 
 
Well we know what happened. In 1982 we lost. And that 
promise was gone like that with that loss to the Conservatives in 
1982. And you know what happened from 1982 to 1991. We’ve 
been over this and over this. You don’t like to hear me say it. 
I’m getting tired of it myself now, today, of saying it over 
again, but the facts are there and the historians will repeat it. 
That’s what happened to the 80 per cent. 
 
And now we start all over again in 1991 in eliminating the 
deficit and making the balances for education and for health and 
for taxes and all things that I’ve talked about. This is a 
wonderful record. 
 
Is it enough? Never enough. And do we need more? We need 

more. 
 
We have a teachers’ strike — we do not have a teachers’ strike 
— we have a teachers’ strike looming . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Look, it can be looming. The fact of the matter is that the 
teachers and the trustees and the government are back at the 
bargaining table or about to be going back to the bargaining 
table and negotiating. And unlike the members opposite, who 
we know about their attitudes about industrial relations, I am 
confident — I’m hopeful, I’ll put it that way in any event — 
that a satisfactory conclusion can be made. But keep in mind 
that there is a very, very strong commitment to education. 
 
And finally, I want to make this last point, finally, if I can. Just 
because you’ve been critical of us on a political basis, I want to 
just sort of remind you and the public about what your position 
of your party is. Contrast what I’ve described with what you 
promised you would do if you had won on September 16 and if 
these benches were being occupied by your members. 
 
Promised the following. Well, shortly, fair enough, there they 
go, braggadocio and hubris, keep it up. Here’s what you 
promised — how exciting and visionary it is, Mr. Chairman — 
one, they’ll launch a comprehensive K to 12 curriculum review 
to ensure students are graduating with the tools they need to 
compete nationally and internationally into the 21st century. 
 
Well, sorry to tell them there’s an ongoing review all the time 
within the Department of Education and the professions. But 
that’s what they’re going to do: launch a review. 
 
Secondly, going to launch a comprehensive analysis of 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education system. Yet another 
analysis. They didn’t want to use the review word twice, so it 
goes from review to analysis, leading to the implementation of a 
long-term education and training plan for Saskatchewan people 
and businesses. Great idea. 
 
And finally what they’re going to do is reform the student loan 
program so that all academically qualified students have access 
to funding for post-secondary education. 
 
That’s what their committed to. That’s it. Sum in total. 
 
And I know you don’t like me saying it, Madam Member, but I 
will. Coupled all of these great reforms of education with a 
five-year freeze on spending. Teachers of Saskatchewan take 
note: a five-year freeze. Trustees of Saskatchewan take note: a 
five-year freeze if these folks opposite get the treasury benches. 
 
Farmers of Saskatchewan take note: a five-year freeze where 
the property taxes will skyrocket and the debt of this province 
will be increased. 
 
People of Saskatchewan take note of the questioning in these 
estimates: more for education, more for health, more for 
highways, more tax cuts. More, more, more, more. I’m tempted, 
when I listen to all of this cacophony of contradictory and 
irresponsible promises to quote The StarPhoenix editorial one 
last time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to the members opposite, demonstrate that 
you are a responsible opposition. Mind you, I know you won’t 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

because you’re not capable. You are too disparate, too divided. 
That’s too bad. 
 
But in the meantime, we’re going to build as we are building, 
the best education system for the people of Saskatchewan we 
can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the 
Premier. First of all, I’d like to thank my colleagues for their 
part in asking questions. I’ve been a student of the political 
arena for quite a number of years — not as many as the 
Premier. A lot of people would say the Premier’s been around 
for too many years. 
 
But I’ve got to say that of the many parties, the many 
governments and oppositions that I’ve seen functioning, there’s 
none that I’ve seen that is any better than the Saskatchewan 
Party and I believe that the performance of my colleagues 
underscores that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I’m proud of each one of them and the 
work that they have done and the way they have held this 
government accountable. They tell me that on the evening news 
tonight the media are saying that the Saskatchewan Party 
cleaned up on the government in this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Or as my kids would say, we really kicked 
butt, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I know that there’s other business tonight that we 
need to undertake, but I do have a couple of more areas that I 
want to question you on. I’ll try to be as brief as I can but I do 
want to get through them and perhaps you might want to adjust 
the length of your answers. We know this is perhaps your last 
time and so we’ve been pretty generous and not complaining 
about the length of the answers. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, first of all, I want to talk about First Nations 
poverty. Now, Mr. Premier, the NDP has always purported that 
it is concerned about the plight of the Aboriginal people. 
 
And I listened to your speech on health care, and it was a 
moving speech. You’ve still got that knack. You still have that 
ability to present your case very well. The problem, Mr. 
Premier, as always, the facts don’t line up with the statements 
you make. 
 
And, you know, all these platitudes about Aboriginal people 
and the plight that they’re in and the fact that you care and your 
government cares and you want to do things to improve their 
lot, rings so hollow when year after year after year of NDP 
government goes by and in fact the plight of Aboriginal people 
have diminished. 
 
The whole SIGA affair, and I don’t have time to go into it 
tonight, but that whole SIGA affair, the problems that your 
government is having with the liquor and gaming commission 

in the regulation of SIGA, the fact that your party is taking 
money that was directed and supposed to go to Aboriginal 
people, is despicable, Mr. Premier. And it certainly is not 
helping the situation. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ve door-knocked in your riding. I ran and yes, I 
lost in that riding. I won part of the riding, but I lost the other 
part of the riding. But I door-knocked in your riding. And, Mr. 
Premier, it was heartbreaking. The housing, the crime, the 
prostitution or child abuse if it’s young people involved. Mr. 
Premier, Aboriginal people whose standard of living is far, far 
too low. And this is in your very own riding. In your own 
backyard, 20th Street. 
 
And my office, my campaign office was on the corner of 22nd 
and Avenue P, and I was about a block away from the stroll, 
Mr. Premier. Right near St. Paul’s Hospital. You know the area 
very well. You know the poverty. You know the crime. Mr. 
Premier, the heartbreak. If you don’t know, Mr. Premier, 
perhaps you should go into your own riding and check it out. 
 
Mr. Premier, these are people and they are a growing 
percentage of our province’s population. They’re important 
people. They’re people that right now are hurting. They’re 
disadvantaged people. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you seeing the problem? Is your government 
seeing the problem? I don’t think it is, because you’re not doing 
anything. And you can get up in your chair now and you can 
give some more platitudes and say you’re doing some 
wonderful things, but Aboriginal people know that tomorrow 
their lot is going to be just as bad as it was today, if not worse, 
under your government. 
 
Mr. Premier, our Aboriginal population should be an asset to 
this province. They are people. And as people, everyone is an 
asset to this province. But economically they have been 
underprivileged. And they have been a liability simply because 
they don’t have jobs, their unemployment levels are high, their 
social . . . the social problems they face are despicable. 
 
Mr. Premier, the conditions are Third World conditions in your 
very own riding. Third World conditions. You should be 
hanging your head. Your government should be hanging its 
head in shame. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ve seen it; I hope you’ve seen it — something 
needs to be done. What is the vision of your government? What 
are you doing? What practical things are you doing to improve 
the lot of Aboriginal people, important people in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the words of the 
Leader of the Opposition will be long remembered by the 
community leaders of Riversdale when he describes them and 
their efforts as being Third World. 
 
Since just a few days ago they . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
no, you’re the one who said that. You’re the one who said it and 
they’ll know it. You’re the one who said it and it is false and it 
is inaccurate and it is incorrect. 
 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

In the face of community leaders at Pleasant Hill and 
Montgomery and in King George community park and in the 
community schools that are active at King George where I visit 
and see and where only a few days ago — and I’m trying to get 
that press release located — they themselves were very proud 
and are very proud of coming to grips in co-operation with us, 
and not only us, others, to fight the issue of poverty. That is the 
truth. 
 
How dare you get up and tell those people who live there . . . 
you don’t even live there. And you tell them they’re Third 
World. I don’t live there but I work there. I’m in my riding 
there. I get elected by there. You get defeated by there. You get 
defeated by there. 
 
They’ll never vote for you because they know that you don’t 
have an ounce of compassion in you at all. They know that and 
you getting up and saying to those people who work morning, 
noon, night, and day to make their community work and call it 
third-rate, I say it is despicable — to use your words. To use 
your words, despicable. 
 
Now the question is, Mr. Chairman, what do we need to do? We 
need to continue working at this situation not only in my riding 
but in every riding. And we are. We’re doing it with the 
children’s action plan, the national child tax benefit program. 
The children’s action plan is working to the point where it is the 
only plan recognized nationally, nationally — if I may just, to 
the member from Humboldt, finish. 
 
Nationally. We’re the only program recognized nationally. The 
children’s action plan in this regard . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . nationally as being the best program and the only program. 
No Conservative government has instituted it. They’ve got 
these problems in spades and if you don’t believe me, all you 
have to do is believe the Canadian Council on Social 
Development, StatsCanada survey of . . . it was this year, 
actually released this year. The rate of child poverty now, this: 
 

Saskatchewan is the only province where the rate has 
decreased. The number of poor children in Ontario in 
contrast has doubled. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Has doubled. Those aren’t my 
numbers. Those are the Canadian Council on Social 
Development in Ontario, your friends out there. Doubled. 
You’re proud of that? That’s your policies? Decreased in 
Saskatchewan. And I say to him . . . I say to him . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
Order. I’d like to ask the member for Rosthern and the member 
for Humboldt to give the Premier, who has the floor, the 
opportunity to speak without undue interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, in the light of all of the 
business we have yet to do and the like, I’ve made my point; the 
Leader of the Opposition has made his point. We have to 
continue working at this. I don’t think there’s anything further I 
can add or should add at this particular point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1845) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I would 
just point out to the Premier that in fact we have met with 
Aboriginal leadership from your riding and they’re the ones that 
are telling us that you failed them. Mr. Premier, just a few 
weeks ago they were in our caucus office and they were saying 
the NDP government has failed us and, by extension, their own 
MLA, the Premier of this province has failed them. They, the 
leadership in your riding, were telling us that. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, don’t give me that line. Don’t give me that 
line. It doesn’t work because it’s not true. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I want to talk about your attitude and your 
record towards business in Saskatchewan. In order to have more 
jobs in Saskatchewan — in order to have more jobs in 
Saskatchewan — we need more employers. It’s employers that 
hire people, Mr. Premier. And yet the NDP continues to treat 
the business community with outright contempt. 
 
We saw it the other day when PIMA (Prairie Implement 
Manufacturers Association) was up in the gallery and members 
opposite — and, Mr. Premier, I don’t think you were one of 
them but your Deputy Premier and others — were laughing at 
the business leaders of this province. Laughing at the business 
leaders that hire people in this province, and hire hundreds of 
people who are taxpayers in this province. 
 
Today the NDP passed one of the most anti-business Bills that 
we have seen in years, the forced unionization Bill. Mr. 
Premier, you had every member in here; we had every member 
in the House but because you have a coalition with the Liberals 
you were able to force that legislation through. We did 
everything we could to stop it, Mr. Premier. We gave you 
openings to withdraw it but you wouldn’t take it. You had to 
push that through to satisfy your union boss leaders. 
 
Mr. Premier, not only did you insult business in that regard, but 
you taxed them at exorbitant rates and why? Why do you do 
this? Why do you get involved in business? The SPUDCO 
fiasco, Mr. Premier. Government should not be in the business 
of raising potatoes. 
 
There’s the NST, Channel Lake. There’s just a number of cases 
where the NDP have been involved in business, and they 
shouldn’t. Yes, we need to create an atmosphere where business 
thrives, but governments themselves should not be in business. 
You need to step out of the way and let business go forward. 
 
I think, Mr. Premier, with your government, profit is a dirty 
word because there are few high-income people in 
Saskatchewan. We’re far below the national average. You’re 
chasing them out. And when you chase them out, you chase out 
the jobs, you chase out tax base, and as a result the province 
suffers. 
 
Business people have told us that they’re giving up on this NDP 
government. They can’t wait for you guys to get the boot. They 
are becoming more and more outspoken. You know, Mr. 
Premier, they used to be afraid of you. They used to be afraid of 
you because of your heavy-handed ways. 
 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

But they realize it doesn’t pay to be afraid of you any longer. 
They got to stand up against you and they are starting to stand 
up. You know they are, because they’re writing you letters just 
as they’re writing us letters. We get copies of many of those 
letters. They’re sick and tired of a high-taxing, big-spending, 
big government that interferes in business and supports unfair 
labour legislation and unfair labour climate. 
 
Mr. Premier, we need to reduce the small business tax. Will you 
commit today to reducing and hopefully even eliminating the 
small business corporate income tax so Saskatchewan business 
can move forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well here we go again, Mr. Chairman. 
More for highways, more for education, more for health. Now 
lower the taxes yet again. Do something, do something, they 
say. It’s going to be over a billion dollars. 
 
And then he says the attitude with respect to business, in the 
face of statistics — business investment increased by 3.3 per 
cent in 1999; total public and private capital spending, $6.8 
billion in 1999. 
 
And my answer to the Leader of the Opposition is simple. 
These aren’t my words, see this — “Sask. job market sizzling 
hot.” Sizzling hot. Do you understand that? Sizzling hot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 
suspect that the Premier’s reading from a 1962 paper because 
the economy is not sizzling hot in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, business is like Doepker Industries, like 
Bourgeault Industries. They’re seriously considering leaving the 
province, and with that they would take hundreds of jobs. Mr. 
Premier, business is not sizzling hot in Saskatchewan. And if 
that’s a recent headline, it’s simply an inaccurate one — must 
be that awful Conrad Black newspaper, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to end this discussion as I began it, and first 
of all I want to make it clear that my attacks on you, Mr. 
Premier, are not personal. They are addressed to you as the 
leader of your government, Mr. Premier, the leader of your 
government because the responsibility for what your 
government does, the responsibility for the actions of your 
government rests on your shoulders. 
 
Yes, I know you had a long and distinguished political career. 
But, Mr. Premier, you also have a long record, and that record 
is not a very positive record. 
 
And right now, Mr. Chairman, the Premier’s record speaks of a 
government that has lost its way. Every day as a result of the 
actions of your government, more harm is being done to 
Saskatchewan than good is being accomplished. And the gulf 
between those two are becoming greater and greater as each day 
rolls into each week and month and year. 
 
Mr. Premier, we think your time is up. You say tonight that it’s 
not; you’re going to stay around forever. But we don’t think 

you should. Perhaps we can give you some good advice here — 
maybe you should pull the pin before it gets any worse. Maybe 
you should get out while you can, before you’re lynched, Mr. 
Premier, because it’s serious. 
 
You’re losing friends in every corner of this province. It’s not 
just rural Saskatchewan that’s not happy with you, Mr. Premier. 
Urban Saskatchewan people are concerned about your 
anti-business stance. They’re concerned about the failure of 
education, health care, and all the important areas under your 
watch, Mr. Premier. 
 
People are sending you a message — you lost the popular vote. 
You got to admit that — you lost the popular vote in the last 
provincial election. You wouldn’t have lost the provincial vote 
if you’d been supported in urban Saskatchewan. We almost 
won some seats in urban Saskatchewan. That’s a wake-up call 
for you and your government. 
 
The member, your Minister of Liquor and Gaming won by 117 
votes. That’s a very, very, very narrow majority. People of 
Regina — this is government city — were telling you that your 
performance is not very good, and you better shape up. 
 
Well what did you do? You didn’t shape up, and so we’ve had 
the Wood River by-election, and there you got trounced. You’re 
below, Mr. Premier, you’re below your rock-bottom, solid 
support. You’re losing your most trusted supporters, Mr. 
Premier, because your record is so bad. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time that you step aside and let somebody else 
come forward and make perhaps . . . We don’t think there’s 
anybody over there with better vision but it can’t be any worse 
than what you’ve been giving us. 
 
Mr. Premier, we think that you’d better consider that there are 
real people living in Saskatchewan. You know, we’ve talked 
and I know that you’ve waxed eloquent as you often do, but the 
one point that you’ve missed in this whole debate tonight is the 
fact that there are real people in Saskatchewan that are 
watching, real people with real needs and real problems. There 
are real people considering leaving Saskatchewan. There are 
real people on hospital waiting lists. They are real people. Their 
heart beats just the way your heart beats. And they’re watching 
you, Mr. Premier. 
 
There are real business people that are having problems making 
a profit. They can’t make ends meet any more. There are people 
having problems in social areas and we talked about your own 
riding. Mr. Premier, they are real people with hurts and needs, 
with dreams and aspirations that aren’t being met. And they 
aren’t being met to a large degree because of the actions of your 
government. 
 
Mr. Premier, you haven’t been able to keep your promises. You 
haven’t kept your promises on lowering taxes. You know, your 
Finance minister promised that 70 per cent of the lowest income 
tax people would be at a par with Alberta after his budget, 
paying income tax. That’s already gone by the boards and your 
Finance minister says he can’t keep that promise. Alberta is 
again outstripping Saskatchewan. We’re going to have lower 
taxes. 
 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

You promised there would be no more bed closures in 
Saskatchewan hospitals, and that promise was broken. You 
promised 30,000 jobs and no matter how you tried to jig the 
numbers, it never did add up to 30,000, Mr. Premier. You fail 
and you fail and you fail. Yes, you act eloquent. That’s the only 
area you don’t fail in. You can speak as eloquently as they 
come. You’ve got a national audience. But your record, your 
record which is the most important thing, does not match your 
eloquence. Actions speak louder than words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, I think we’re coming to the 
end of a session. Mr. Premier, nothing has changed. Same 
arrogant attitude over there, same lack of vision. Same we can’t 
do any better; we’re just old Saskatchewan. You know, don’t 
expect us to fix things. How do you think you can lower taxes 
and fix health care? You said that tonight. You don’t think it 
can be done. Well if you don’t think it can be done, get out of 
the way and let somebody do it, because we can do it. We know 
we can do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We have the strength to do it, we have the 
vision to do it, we’ve got the people to do it. Get out of the road 
and let us do it because we want to do it. We love 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, if you can’t do it — if you 
can’t do it — stand up in your seat, apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for your failure. Apologize, say you’re sorry — 
say you’re sorry, sit down, let’s leave, get out of there, and let 
us do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that was one of the 
funniest performances I’ve ever seen in my entire life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And if I may say so, with the greatest 
of respect to the Leader of the Opposition, this is nothing 
personal, but please don’t get carried away because I want you 
here in this Legislative Assembly next year. Please don’t get 
carried away at all. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, as I close my remarks I’m going to table, 
because he said it was probably some newspaper from two or 
three years ago — I know that he’s all right in this regard but 
some of the caucus may have difficulty in reading this — it’s 
June 12 the year 2000. I’d like to table it: “Sask. job market 
sizzling hot”. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Oh, I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have done 
that, I apologize; but it is sizzling hot in any event. And my last 
words I say with the greatest of love and the warmest of respect 
to the Leader of the Opposition and to all of his dear, united 

comrades that are there behind him, in support of him — all of 
them. All of those who fight in the defence of freedom, like the 
member from Wood River. The ever vigilant voices of the . . . 
by the way, I’m looking forward next session to your 
sermonettes on how things are in Eastern Europe and the like. 
 
I’ll close with this little . . . I put it out to you humorously but 
you know, maybe a little bit of truth in all humour. The 
headline here is in the June 26, 2000, The StarPhoenix: “Day 
supporters rejoice in Saskatchewan victory.” That’s what the 
headline says, and I’m reminded after this day of exciting 
debate. Hermanson — quote: 
 

Hermanson said Day can expect to be under increased 
scrutiny now. 

 
I don’t see the member . . . sorry I can’t do that, say that. 
 

Members do not have much time to find out if he can turn 
his media savvy into trusted leadership before the next 
federal election, he said. 

 
This is the Leader of the Opposition. Quote: 
 

“I would rather go with the proven performer . . . over 
taking a chance on someone new . . .” 

 
Mr. Chairman, he’s dead right. The people of Saskatchewan 
want to have a proven performer and a proven government, 
that’s us. He should take his own words to heart — bring his 
own words to heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 7:01 p.m. until 7:11 p.m. 
 
Subvote (EX01) agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Subvotes (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08) agreed to 
on division. 
 
Subvote (EX06) — Statutory. 
 
The division bells rang from 7:17 p.m. until 7:27 p.m. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 

Nays — 26 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvotes (AG01), (AG02), (AG05), (AG04), (AG06), (AG07) 
(AG12), (AG03), (AG08), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG03), (AG07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

Subvotes (AG08), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvotes (EM01), (EM02), (EM05), (EM04), (EM03), (EM06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 

Subvotes (ER01), (ER02), (ER08), (ER15), (ER04), (ER09), 
(ER10), (ER05), (ER07), (ER03), (ER11), (ER14) agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Forest Fire Contingency 
Vote 72 

 
Subvote (FF01) agreed to 
 
Vote 72 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 
Vote 26 

 
Subvotes (ER08), (ER09), (ER10), (ER05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvotes (FI01), (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI10), 
(FI08), (FI09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 
Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
(1945) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition on 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank 
you to the members. I’d like to bring to the attention of the 
members a guest seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Ms. Jenelle 
Wienbender. 
 
Ms. Wienbender is a former employee; and most recently, a 
former employee of the Regina Chamber of Commerce, who 
has a very important date planned for sometime in September 
when I believe she exchanges her marriage vows and will be 
moving to the United States to work in the United States of 
America. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome Ms. Jenelle Wienbender. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE01), (HE02), (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health — Transition Fund 

Vote 69 
 
Subvote (HT01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 69 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvotes (HI01), (HI02), (HI04), (HI10), (HI03), (HI06), 
(HI11) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investment Activities 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 145 

 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Subvote (HI11) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
Subvotes (MG01), (MG02), (MG07), (MG17), (MG03), 
(MG15), (MG16), (MG18), (MG05), (MG13) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 
Vote 24 

 
Subvotes (MG15), (MG05), (MG13) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvotes (PE01), (PE02), (PE03), (PE04), (PE07), (PE05), 
(PE06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 165 

 
Subvote (C101) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Vote 153 

 
Subvote (ST01) — Statutory. 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Vote 150 

 
Subvote (SE01) — Statutory. 
 
(2000) 
 

Motions for Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
make a motion as follows: 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2000, the sum 
of $212,421,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 

And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to move a motion that reads as follows: 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses for the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2001, the sum 
of $4,108,712,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I put the resolution, committee 
members, this is going to be my last chance where I control the 
microphone. And I do want to thank all hon. members on both 
sides for your diligence throughout this past session, and 
particularly, particularly in the last few days when things could 
have been significantly different than they were. I do appreciate 
the general co-operation that we received throughout, and I 
know I speak on behalf of the Deputy Chair when I say that. 
 
And I sincerely wish all members to have a very, very 
enjoyable time away from the legislature and I hope you’ll look 
forward as much as I do to us gathering again when we do. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 1 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: the amount of provincial funding in 1999-2000 
that is budgeted to go to on-reserve services in 
Saskatchewan; and provide what the services are. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for a return no. 2 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs . . .  

 
The Speaker: — Order, order, hon. member. Just one motion at 
a time. And may I remind the hon. member that you’ll need to 
name a seconder as well, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this would be seconded 
by the member for Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask the Assembly 
to move an amendment to this motion. This motion asks for 
information about on-reserve services. Everybody well knows 
in this Assembly that reserve services are primarily, almost 
exclusively, paid for by the federal government. 
 
And however, this government does enter into some agreements 
where the . . . with the federal government to pay for some 
services like policing and fire, but there is no way that records 
are kept in the way that this question is asked for. 
 
Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Dewdney, the following amendment. 
 

Amend return no. 1 by deleting all words after “Aboriginal 
Affairs” and substitute the following: 
 
the on-reserve services in Saskatchewan that the province 
provided funding for in the 1999-2000 fiscal year. 

 
And then we’ll be able to provide an answer to that question. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for a return no. 2 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: The amount of provincial funding that was 
provided for services on Indian reserves in Saskatchewan 
in 1998-99. 

 
Seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons that I 
mentioned in motion no. 1, I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Dewdney, that we amend return no. 2 by deleting 
all the words after “Aboriginal Affairs” and substitute the 
following: 
 

The on-reserve services in Saskatchewan that the province 
provided funding for in the 1998-99 fiscal year?” 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 3 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an Order of the 
Assembly do issue for a Return No. 3 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: the amount of provincial funding that was 
provided for services on Indian reserves in Saskatchewan 
in 1996-97. 

 
Seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, this is for the year 
1996-97. I move the amendment: 
 

Amend return no. 3 by deleting all words after “Aboriginal 
Affairs” and substitute the following: 
 
“The on-reserve services in Saskatchewan that the 
province provided funding for in the 1996-97 fiscal year?” 
 

Seconded by the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
(2015) 
 

Return No. 4 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 4 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: the amount of provincial funding that was 
provided for services on Indian reserves in Saskatchewan 
in 1995-96. 

 
Seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I move the following 
amendment. We amend the return no. 4: 

 
Amend return no. 4 by deleting all words after “Aboriginal 
Affairs” and substitute the following: 
 
“The on-reserve services in Saskatchewan that the 
province provided funding for in the 1995-96 fiscal year?” 

 

Seconded by the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 5 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 5 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Executive Council: (1) The role that the 
Department of Executive Council plays in calling and 
examining requests for proposals from communications 
firms, marketing firms, market research firms, and polling 
firms for work done by all government departments and 
Crown corporations and please give a complete rundown 
on the government’s policy in awarding contracts to such 
agencies for this type of work. (2) The contracts of this 
nature that have been awarded by the government through 
Executive Council during the 1998-1999 fiscal year. (3) 
Whether the tendering process in each case followed 
government policy. (4) The number of companies that 
tendered for each project. (5) The company that got the 
final contract. (6) The amount that the contract was worth. 
(7) The number of other companies that bid on the 
contract, in each case. 

 
I move this, seconded by my colleague from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I recommend that we pass this 
motion. It took a little while to compile all of this information, 
but I am very pleased on behalf of an open, accountable, and 
responsible government to give you this for homework over the 
summer holidays. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 11 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Humboldt, an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 11 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: (1) 
The organizations that each of Saskatchewan’s CIC 
Crowns have contributed money to in 2000 and the 
amount. (2) The organizations that have applied to each of 
these Crowns for contributions but were rejected. 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to recommend to 
the Assembly that this motion be defeated on the grounds that 
this is a motion which requests information that is protected 
under the freedom of information Act. We have to be careful to 
protect the right of third parties, Mr. Speaker, because section 
19 of the freedom of information Act obliges the government to 
obtain written consent from any third party to which any 
information relates. And a corporation must refuse under these 
conditions to give access to the record of the written consent of 
the third . . . if the consent of the third party has not been 
granted. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I recommend this motion be defeated. 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 12 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In an effort to gain 
some information from this government and to ensure it has the 
opportunity to be open and accountable and transparent, I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, that an Order of the 
Assembly do issue for Return No. 12 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: (1) 
The organizations that each of Saskatchewan’s CIC 
Crowns have contributed money to in 1999 and the 
amount. (2) The organizations that applied to each of these 
Crowns for contributions but were rejected. 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — For reasons that I have just mentioned, Mr. 
Speaker, I recommend this motion be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 13 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 13 
showing: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing: (1) in 1999-2000, the events and/or organizations 
that were approved by the Saskatchewan Arts Board for 
funding; (2) in 1999-2000, the events and/or organizations 
that were rejected by the Saskatchewan Arts Board for 
funding. 

 
Seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — A very good question, Mr. Speaker, and we 
now have the answer and I recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 14 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 14 showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: during the 
1998-1999 fiscal year, the names of all the employees of 
Executive Council; and for each employee, their title and 
the amount they were paid during fiscal year 1998-1999. 

 
Seconded by my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Again, Mr. Speaker, being open, 
accountable, and responsible, we will pass this . . . recommend 
this motion be passed so they can table the information. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 15 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 15 showing: 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: during the 
1999-2000 fiscal year, the names of all the employees of 
Executive Council; and for each employee, their title and 
the amount they were paid during fiscal year 1999-2000. 

 
Seconded by the hon. member for Arm River. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Right after we pass this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll be very happy to provide the information. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 16 
 
Mr. Gantefoer — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 
showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: the total number of 
trips made by ambulances to St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon for the month of April, 2000, and whether 
detailed ambulance logs could be made available for this 
period showing such trips. 

 
I move this, seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what they’re 
going to do with the answer but here it is. Let’s pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 18 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no 18 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: whether any of the 1999-2000 
annual Health District budgets initially submitted to the 
Minister of Health for approval were altered by the 
Minister or Department of Health officials prior to their 
approval; if so, the districts which had their budgets altered 
and the specific changes made or ordered by the Minister 
in each case. 

 
And seconded by my colleague from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I recommend this motion be 
passed and we will be able to give the member the answer she 
wants. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 21 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 21 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: in the 
last fiscal year, the amount of revenue that your department 
received from the sale of road building equipment either 
through private sale or public auction; and please provide 
detailed information on each item sold and the price. 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

Seconded by the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question from 
that member, and I want to give him the answer. So let’s pass 
the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 22 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for return no. 22 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: the 
amount of money that your department spent in this fiscal 
year on purchasing road building equipment and provide 
detailed information on what was purchased and what was 
the cost. 
 

Seconded by the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Roads and highways are important to us, 
Mr. Speaker. The opposition should have answers to questions 
about roads and highways. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 23 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for return no. 23 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: (1) whether the Department of 
Health has sold the provincial database of personal health 
and drug records to drug companies or health market 
research companies; if so, provide the names of the 
companies; (2) whether the Department of Health has sold 
the provincial database of personal health and drug records 
to any other company; if so, provide the name of the 
companies; (3) also, the amount that the Department of 
Health received for those sales and where the funds go 
upon receipt of payment; (4) the safeguards that are in 
place that will ensure confidentiality of those records 
representing Saskatchewan health care clients. 
 

Seconded by the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, a very significant question and 
I want to make a comment on this. 
 
Saskatchewan Health has not sold the provincial database of 
personal health and drug records to drug companies or any 
other companies. Saskatchewan Health responds to requests 
from researchers, including those from pharmaceutical firms, 
for use of selected information from portions of the databases. 
Upon receipt of a full description of the request and purpose of 
the research, Saskatchewan Health will compile edited and 
aggregated non-identifiable information for researchers for 
approved research studies. 
 
(2030) 
 
Costs for staff time and data processing charges are paid by the 

researchers. The data per se are not sold. Depending on the 
complexity of the request, extensive work may be required to 
extract information needed for an individual research study and 
to aggregate and summarize it to preserve confidentiality. 
Researchers pay for the costs involved in compiling the 
information and preparing it in a format that can be released in a 
non-identifiable manner. 
 
In the last fiscal years, Saskatchewan Health received $505,610 
for costs incurred for the research project and requests for 
aggregate reports on overall use on certain drugs. All revenues 
received go to the General Revenue Fund. Strict criterion and 
procedure ensure confidentiality is maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to submit the total answer once 
again in writing after we pass this motion. But it should be 
clearly understood that the databases are not sold and 
everybody’s personal record remains confidential. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — With leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to make a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to all the 
questions, there were 210 questions asked by the opposition 
members this year and I want to thank everybody in all the 
departments that assisted in compiling the answers to these. It 
takes considerable work. 
 
I want to also compliment the members opposite. We were able 
to answer 206 of the questions. We only had to amend only four 
of them because of the way they were asked and only had to 
defeat two of them to protect people’s confidentiality. So 
they’re getting better. They’re getting better. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, it was very much my pleasure to 
provide 206 answers, along with the deputy whip, to the 
government . . . to the opposition members from the 
government on behalf of an open, accountable, responsible 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by 
leave of the Assembly I move: 
 

That Bill No. 87, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 2000 and on 
March 31, 2001 be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill now be read a second and 
third time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:35 p.m. until 8:42 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 
The Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 8:48 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 55 - The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 
Bill No. 56 - The Land Titles Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 apportant des 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Land Titles Act, 2000 

 
Bill No. 57 - The Land Surveys Act, 2000 
 
Bill No. 58 - The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Bill No. 64 - The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
 
Bill No. 59 - The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 

Bill No. 87 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 
2000, and on March 31, 2001. 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 8:51 p.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move, and 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven days clear notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the session closes, I would like to make a few comments if I 
could please. 
 
We must not forget that it takes some time . . . to take some 
time and express our sincere thank you’s to those that have 
helped us in our daily lives in this legislature for the last three 
months or so. 
 
A special thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the Clerks at The Table; 
the Sergeant-at-Arms; the Law Clerk’s office, both Allison and 
Ken; to the pages here in the Assembly, a thank you; to the 
Legislative Library staff; the Hansard personnel; the security 
staff and commissionaires; my special favourite, Mr. Speaker, 
the cafeteria staff; tour guides, maintenance, and other 
legislative staff members. We’d like to thank them on behalf of 
both myself and the rest of the opposition of caucus. 
 
Please accept our very sincere and heartfelt thank you’s for a 
job well done. Your assistance and support is greatly 
appreciated. We look forward to working with all of you again 
in the next session. 
 
A special thank you also to our colleagues in the NDP and 
Liberal caucuses, especially the Leader of the Liberal Party, for 
the assistance in formulating a disastrous session for the 
government. Your attitude, Mr. Minister, and your ineptitude 
has made this a very good and successful session for all of us. 
Without your contribution this job would have been much more 
difficult. You have certainly been of value to us. 
 
To the Minister of Education, even the member for North 
Battleford says that he is seriously reconsidering . . . has some 
serious reconsiderations to do on the coalition and has some 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

serious soul-searching to do about staying in the coalition. 
Perhaps the Premier will release his soul from political limbo so 
he can make that decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, the 
member for Regina South, and the member for Regina 
Dewdney for giving us all the reasons to stay here, the reasons 
and the incentive to carry on this fight against the NDP 
government. 
 
To the member for Saskatoon Southeast. Thank you to our 
much beloved and special MLA. Thank you for the help. You 
have been an invaluable asset. 
 
To the Speaker, thank you. You have kept the sessions 
interesting and you have kept me on my feet with points of 
order. 
 
A very large and special thank you to our staff who have been 
of outstanding assistance to us and support, and especially as 
my colleague from Swift Current said, even he needs their help 
to look good. 
 
To everyone in this Assembly, to the people of Saskatchewan, 
have a good and safe summer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before I move 
adjournment of the House, I want to take a few moments to join 
with the Opposition House Leader in thanking a number of 
people. 
 
And I must say his comments are a little bit unusual. I’ve been 
here 23 years, and the normal process is to, I think in a very 
camaraderie way, thank each other for the work that we do 
together. So I just wanted to comment that this is the first time 
in 23 years that I’ve heard that kind of a negative speech at the 
end of a session. 
 
First of all, I want to thank all hon. members — you most of all, 
Mr. Speaker, for the great job that you have done in making 
sure that the decorum is kept in the House — and to all 
members of the opposition for their work. I know they work 
hard. I know their families put up with a lot when we’re away 
from home. So I want to thank each of you sincerely for the 
work that you do. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, to you and your staff, it’s great to 
work with each and every one of you. 
 
I also want to thank the Opposition House Leader, the member 
from Cannington, for the work that he did with his staff on a 
daily basis in getting the House work ready, and making sure 
that everything flowed on schedule. 
 
It’s my pleasure to . . . as well to thank the Clerk of the 
Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk, and Deputy Clerk Greg Putz, as well 
as Clerk Assistant Meta Woods, and all of their hard work 
during the session. And I know many days during estimates 
when things get a little raucous, you have to put up with a great 
deal. And I wish that you would also say thank you to Monique, 

Kathy, and Sandra in the office, who work behind the scenes for 
us. 
 
To our pages — Brooke, Rachel, Carla, Terry, and Charla — 
thank you very much, and especially for your words of wisdom. 
And I think all of us would want to give you a round of 
applause for the kind words that you give. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the dedicated staff in all three 
caucus offices, and in the minister’s office as well as Executive 
Council, who have assisted us in our daily duties, as well as 
constituency assistants — many of them who, behind the 
scenes, work quietly and diligently in making sure that things 
on the home front are kept in order. 
 
To you, Mr. Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, for your humour 
and for your involvement in the Assembly. I must say again in 
my 23 years it’s a very, very breath of fresh air, your 
involvement, not only here in the Assembly but around the 
building. And I know that you and your staff do a wonderful 
job, and in a very, very professional manner take care of the 
security of the building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to 
the staff in Hansard. And I don’t know why I’m the one that 
gets a message from them every day I’m up in question period, 
for the spelling of names. That was never one of my strong 
suits. 
 
And I must say that they work hard and do a great job. 
 
As well to the Journals staff, Visitor Services, Library staff and 
as well to all of those who have helped us as members and 
caucus staff. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Law Clerk, Ken Ring, and his staff for 
their work. And also to Ian Brown in the legislative drafting 
area, and as the member for Cannington has mentioned, of 
course the staff down in the cafeteria. 
 
Finally I would like to recognize the contributions of the staff of 
the officials from all government departments who have come 
here with us for estimates and Bills, and in passing 85 Bills and 
all the estimates. 
 
As well as going through an election, forming a coalition 
government, a session last fall and a session this spring, I think 
all of us should give ourselves a round of applause for some 
pretty impressive work in the last nine months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the media and you know the tough hours they keep. You 
see them all up there in the gallery watching. I know they keep 
track of our attendance here in the House on a daily basis. But I 
do want to say, although they don’t always get the story 
straight, a thank you to them for coming and being with us 
during the session. 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 29, 2000 

Finally I want to ask a very, very . . . or to say to members in all 
areas of the province to have a very, very safe and good trip 
home. But most of all, that you take some time to relax with 
your family and friends. 
 
And I know we’ll be back here sooner than you think. And to 
members of the opposition, three and a half years will go by 
very, very quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2100) 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before I put the motion 
forward, I beg your leave, hon. colleagues, to allow me to say a 
few words. You have not allowed the Speaker to say very 
much, and I would beg leave to make some comments as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you so much. And before we leave, I 
have a number of people, some that have already been 
mentioned, to thank sincerely. Our director of Visitor Services 
who greets the people and the public that come to our building. 
And Marianne, who’s the tour coordinator, and all the tour 
guides. 
 
As well as those, and you’ve mentioned the Sergeant-at-Arms, 
who provide the security for the building — Mr. Ben Block, 
who’s the head of our sessional security and who has been with 
the Legislative Assembly here now for 20 years, and the rest of 
his crew that so very capably and in a dignified manner take 
care of all of us. 
 
Also to Mr. Ken Ring, the Law Clerk, and Allison for all their 
help. 
 
And I also want to recognize people that we don’t often see or 
express any appreciation to. Folks like Steve Bata and the 
SPMC (Saskatchewan property Management Corporation) staff 
who look after the building. Trent Brears and the cafeteria staff 
who keep us in pretty good shape. 
 
And Marilyn Borowski from financial services and her staff, 
Linda Kaminski in personnel administration and human 
resources, Marilyn Kotylak and Pam Scott in Journals. These 
are the people behind the scenes that make things really work, 
hon. members. 
 
Judy Brennan and Donelda Klein and the staff at Hansard who 
listen very intently to every word that’s spoken in this House. A 
special mention to Barbara Lindenbach, the Hansard indexer 
who has served this Assembly and has been recognized for 20 
years of service. 
 
Jeremy Phillips, our LAO (Legislative Assembly office) system 
analyst — his computer expertise ensures that the Legislative 
Assembly web site is current and accurate and up-to-date. 
Marian Powell and the legislative staff — they certainly provide 
a great deal of help to us. And of course all the Broadcast 
Services people — Gary Ward, Ihor Sywanyk, Kerry Bond. 
 
Once again our pages, and we pay tribute to our Clerks and I 

sincerely want to say thank you to Gwenn, to Greg, and to Meta 
— very capable work and understanding and interpreting the 
procedures, the procedural rules of the House. And also the 
staff at the Clerk’s office, who serve them so well. 
 
I also want a special thank you to our Deputy Speaker and 
Deputy Chair of Committees for your work, gentlemen, to 
interpret and apply the rules of this Assembly. I thank you for 
your diligence and your wisdom. It’s been a privilege to serve 
with you. 
 
And now I want to thank the government and opposition House 
leaders. Their attention to detail ensured I carefully monitored 
questions, answers, and statements. I’m especially grateful for 
the points of order that were raised. This gave me the incentive 
to delve deeply into Erskine May and Beauchesne’s (1st 
Edition, 2nd Edition, 3rd Edition, 4th, 5th, and 6th Edition. I 
owe my new-found knowledge of parliamentary procedures to 
you, and I thank you sincerely for that. 
 
Seriously, I do want to congratulate all members for their 
participation in our system of democracy. I recognize your 
passion and commitment to make this province a better place, 
better place to live. You may not always agree with each other, 
you may not always speak one at a time, and sometimes I’ve 
noticed you even interrupt one another. 
 
However, I do know and we all know that you have a strong 
shared belief in this institution, a strong belief in our system of 
parliamentary democracy, and a love of our country and its 
people. We may not agree on everything that is said here, but 
we do agree on the importance of this institution and our right 
to speak out freely here in this Chamber regardless of our 
beliefs. This is a place we come on behalf of our constituents to 
speak out. Commitment and passion are always appropriate and 
welcome in this Hon. Assembly. 
 
Before we adjourn tonight, I want to tell you that I acknowledge 
and respect your respect for this institution. I acknowledge and 
share your respect and commend you all for your hard work and 
dedication in this first session of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
And now that the House will be no longer sitting, I know you’re 
anxious to get back to your constituencies, to your families, to 
meet with your constituents and other groups throughout the 
province. 
 
On that note I would like to acknowledge your constituency 
assistants as well as mine, Kim Emerson, who takes care of the 
shop back home while you’re here diligently working on behalf 
of the people of this great province of ours. 
 
I and my office have had the good fortune of inheriting some 
very special staff, and I want to acknowledge them as well: 
Margaret Kleisinger, who is the assistant to the Speaker; Linda 
Spence is the secretary; and Garva Gottfried who’s come to 
assist while our real good friend Rhonda Romanuk is home 
looking after her new son. 
 
And, hon. members, I sincerely want to wish each and every 
one of you a tremendous summer, a tremendous time with your 
family, your friends, your loved ones, and I do really want to 
see you all again back safely. I want to wish you all the very 



June 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

best of luck. 
 
And on that note I would ask the Assembly if they would take 
the motion as read from the Government House Leader. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned until the 
call of the Speaker. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:06 a.m. 
 
 
 
 


