





























































Hansard: April 14, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 727 
 April 14, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I rise to 
present a petition requesting the reduction of fuel tax by 10 
cents a litre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens of the Cypress Hills area 
— in Eastend, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, and Climax, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so do present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by the good folks 
of Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It won’t surprise you 
this morning to know that I am rising on behalf of people in 
Swift Current who are concerned about their hospital. I’m 
presenting a petition on their behalf. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer calls on the provincial government to assist in the 
regeneration plan for the Swift Current hospital. 
 
It is signed by people in Swift Current; people from Pennant, 
Neville, and Wymark. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
too on behalf of citizens from Saskatchewan regarding the fuel 
tax — reducing the fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by the people from the Silton area. 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce fuel 
tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Davidson, Bladworth area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
bring forth a petition regarding the reduction of fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 
I have petitioners signed from Southey and Cupar. I so present. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about 
enforced municipal amalgamation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from Moose Jaw, 
Pense, and Belle Plaine. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have 
been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

the grade 2 class from St. Dominic Savio School with their 
teacher accompanying them, Ms. Dionne. I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings today. 
 
A special introduction to my son, Craig, who is sitting in the 
gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery. A bit of a show-off maybe, 
like some people say his dad is. I’m not sure. 
 
But anyway it gives me great pleasure and I would like the rest 
of the Assembly to welcome this grade 2 class from St. 
Dominic Savio. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
welcome the group from St. Dominic Savio School in the 
constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
As is mentioned, there are 23 grade 2 students in the gallery 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Marge Dionne, and 
chaperon, Ms. Linda Geni. 
 
We’re going to be able to meet after their tour. I hope they 
enjoy the proceedings of the morning and I’ll look forward to a 
visit with them later this morning. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to warmly welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
a group of very hard-working constituency assistants sitting up 
in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
They’re here from our offices today to observe the proceedings 
of the House and to learn how procedures and Bills move 
through the House. I’m hoping that they appreciate just how 
hard each and every one of us work in this Assembly on their 
behalf, and I would ask that all members in the House welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce today somebody who is joining us in the 
government gallery, and that is my father. He has come down 
from Shellbrook. My dad, David Thomson, lives in Shellbrook. 
He’s down accompanying his wife Pat who’s at a conference of 
English teachers I’m told. 
 
And so with the Sask Party constituency assistants here and my 
father here, it should be a very quiet day in the House. 
 
So if you’d join with me in welcoming my dad. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the House, the air cadets 
from the Wilkie area, Air Cadets No. 399 and there’s 17 
students . . . 17 cadets, sorry, and four chaperons. 

And the chaperons are Terry Massett, Carol Delainey, Betty 
Evason, and Trent Walton. Welcome them there. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the House, 
the other good-looking fellow up in the west gallery there, and 
that’s Bob Ivanochko, who’s . . . If all people were as interested 
in democracy and the democratic process as Bob Ivanochko, we 
would have a much better society. 
 
So I just thank Bob for joining us today; he’s been a visitor 
before. And ask you to help me welcome him to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to also 
with the member opposite welcome his dad here. His dad is 
from Shellbrook and I want to thank you for being here. And 
also for voting for me. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And to you and through you I want to introduce a couple of 
guests in your gallery. With us today is one of my staff 
members, Vicky, and she has her father visiting from Alberta. 
And his name is Wayne Heinemann. 
 
So I’d like to take this minute here just to ask the Assembly to 
join me in welcoming Mr. Wayne Heinemann, who is visiting 
his daughter, Pumpkin, who works in my office. So thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Plant Breeding Group Moves to in Saskatchewan 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to those 
who say that Saskatchewan’s economy is suffering and to those 
who say that Saskatchewan cannot attract any new business, 
and that we have a lacklustre record of job creation, I offer 
some good news. More good news for the people of Saskatoon 
and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Svalof Weibull Ltd., one of the largest plant breeding and seed 
groups in Europe, has relocated its Canadian headquarters from 
Ontario to Saskatoon. So much for the supposed out-migration 
of all high-tech jobs. 
 
Svalof Weibull is one of the largest plant breeding and seed 
groups in Europe. Svalof Weibull of Saskatoon conducts and 
coordinates all North American research trials, variety 
registrations, and registering varieties for protection under the 
plant breeders’ rights. 
 
This company has over 50 varieties registered in Canada and 
has bred some of the most successful varieties of canola, peas, 
and forages. 
 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

The new Saskatoon headquarters will be located at Innovation 
Place where numerous other high-tech projects are also located. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this relocation speaks to the vitality of the 
Saskatchewan economy and to the opportunities the 
Saskatchewan economic climate offers. 
 
I wish to congratulate Svalof Weibull on their new business 
venture here in Saskatchewan and also wish to welcome him to 
Saskatoon and to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Cars 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform the hon. members about an ad that appears in today’s 
Leader-Post, an ad that indicates the growing level of frustration 
that many in the province are feeling over the government’s 
March 29 so-called historic budget. 
 
The ad from an independent used car company called Car Corner 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Because of the recent budget by the NDP and Liberal 
Government, we are forced to collect PST on vehicles we 
have already paid PST on. We are now forced to sell these 
vehicles at a loss. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these independent car dealers have nothing to 
hide. They are simply stating the fact — they will lose money 
because of this budget. They are considering other business 
options because of this budget. The Saskatchewan association 
of independent auto dealers have two main issues, Mr. Speaker. 
One is the $3,000 exemption given to unlicensed dealers. Why 
wasn’t this amount applied to licensed dealers? Why were they 
not given the same exemption? 
 
The other concern, Mr. Speaker, is that these independent car 
dealers have a very large inventory of cars purchased. Business 
decisions that would have been made on the basis that there 
would be no additional taxes to be paid. Now they find the 
inventory subject to 6 per cent increase. Some pass on to 
customers, some will absorb these costs — either way no one 
wins, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are good business managers making good decisions. 
Thanks to this government budget, these business owners are 
now looking to look at other options. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gail Bowen’s Work Aired on TV 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As everyone knows, my constituency of 
Regina Lakeview has the most creative talent per square metre 
of any in Saskatchewan. Further evidence of this fact is on the 
front page of today’s TV Times, published in The Leader-Post 

and The StarPhoenix and all across Canada. 
 
The first two mysteries set in Regina by Lakeview writer, Gail 
Bowen, have been transformed into made-for-TV movies and 
will be shown on the CTV (Canadian Television Network 
Limited) network this Sunday evening and next Sunday 
evening. 
 
The movies star Canadian actor Wendy Crewson as reluctant 
sleuth, Joanne Kilbourn. Members will remember her as the star 
of the recent Sue Rodriguez Story. Other well-known actors 
include Victor Garber from Titanic and Simon Callow from 
Shakespeare in Love. The films are directed by George 
Bloomfield, director of the TV series Due South. I’m told that 
the movies bear some small resemblance to the books but are 
fine TV viewing nonetheless. 
 
Members will remember that Joanne Kilbourn has stalked the 
halls of our legislature, finding more than one still warm MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), or in her case, recently 
former MLA. 
 
Seriously, Mr. Speaker, these movies are good news for the 
Canadian movie industry, for Saskatchewan literature, and for 
Regina. We’re proud to have Gail in our midst and eagerly 
await the next movies based on her work. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tele-Health Project in North-East Health District 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to report some 
more news for health services in Saskatchewan. 
 
The North-East Health District is showcasing its new and 
innovative tele-health technology. Tele-health technology 
allows for diagnosis of patients in remote parts of Saskatchewan 
by specialists, and these patients can receive health services 
without leaving their own communities. This technology also 
supports continuing medical education for health services staff 
located in these areas. 
 
In the North-East Health District this link will be used as a 
patient-to-family physician application from Cumberland House 
to Nipawin. Residents of Cumberland House will now be able 
to avoid the long trip to Nipawin to consult with family 
physicians. Ultimately it is planned to link Nipawin and 
Cumberland House with other communities such as Beauval, 
Ile-à-La-Crosse, La Ronge, Meadow Lake, North Battleford, 
Pinehouse Lake, Prince Albert, and of course Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Health, seeing the benefit of this 
technology, has supported this project with over $100,000. The 
member from Melfort-Tisdale will be pleased to know that this 
tele-health project is fully complimentary and compatible with 
SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network), providing 
modern and innovative health care. 
 
Projects like this one show the innovation and determination of 
this province to meet the challenges of changing health care. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Winner of National Earthwise Video Contest 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a story 
today that I think will be of particular interest to some of the 
students in our gallery today because this story is about a 
student. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Dawn Corbeil of Loon Lake on winning 
the National Earthwise Video Contest. Dawn, a 13-year-old 
student at the Ernie Studer School, produced a three-minute 
video focusing on the amount of garbage that people produce. 
 
The Earthwise National Video Contest is both a competition 
and a learning experience for Canadian school students. The 
contest focuses on environmental concerns and encourages 
better understanding of today’s complex relationships between 
society, technology, and the environment. This year’s theme 
dealt with the importance of resource conservation — using less 
and leaving more. 
 
Dawn’s video was selected by judges from the government, 
environment, and educational communities, and even the 
media. 
 
As a result of her win, Dawn will be very busy this spring 
attending environmental conferences. She has already attended 
the Global 2000 Conference in Vancouver. Then she will 
represent Canada at the United Nations Conference on the 
Environment for Children in Eastbourne, England. 
 
And in late May Dawn also — in late May I should say — 
Dawn also receives a $1,000 scholarship and a $1,500 award 
for an environmental trip for her school’s recreational . . . or for 
her school’s environmental recreation club. 
 
Congratulations to the national winner, Dawn Corbeil from 
Loon Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ranchers and Farmers Coming to Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. In my short time in this legislature, I have 
discovered one incontrovertible fact: if the opposition says 
something is so, then most likely the exact opposite is true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — It’s good to have them around, because you 
automatically take the opposite position, and you can be pretty 
sure you’re right. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a case in point — everyone is going to 
Alberta they say. Well I saw a story from an opposition riding, 
from an opposition constituency in the paper titled: 
“Saskatchewan: Land of Opportunity.” Land of opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker. It talks about Alberta ranchers coming here — not 
the reverse. 
 
One ranch couple says we’re surprised and delighted to find 

exactly what they were looking for in southwest Saskatchewan, 
near the town of Frontier. They’re not alone. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say that not all 
the new Saskatchewan ranchers and farmers are from Alberta. 
They’re coming from England and Scotland. They’re coming to 
Saskatchewan because the opportunities are great, the 
bureaucracy is less, and — get this, Mr. Speaker — there are 
fewer subsidies. 
 
On this side of the fence where the grass is truly greener, we 
welcome these new contributors to the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Amendments to The Irrigation Act, 1996 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Minister responsible for Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first the NDP (New Democratic Party) gave us no 
fault insurance. Now they invent the no fault potato policy. The 
NDP government lost millions of taxpayers’ dollars on 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). They single-handedly destroyed the potato industry, 
and they left hundreds of unpaid creditors who are out $35 
million. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, instead of taking responsibility — what 
do they do? They bring in legislation to protect themselves from 
legal action. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is this necessary? Why should you get 
immunity from legal action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
many of these questions we’ll be able to answer when we deal 
with the legislation in committee, but I’d be happy to respond 
right now as well. 
 
The amendments that are being recommended, Mr. Speaker, 
deal first of all only with the functions and duties of The 
Irrigation Act, 1996. In 1996 when The Irrigation Act was 
passed . . . this legislation, I should say, is going to replace The 
Water Users Act, The South Saskatchewan River irrigation 
district Act, and The Irrigation Districts Act. And what we’re 
attempting to do is provide uniform legislation and in the best 
interests of the irrigators of Saskatchewan who have been very 
intimately involved in development of this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister failed to 
mention is that some of the SPUDCO fiasco was financed under 
The Irrigation Act, 1996 and that’s why he’s trying to cover his 
tracks. 
 
This is exactly, Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with the 
government in injecting itself into the economy. They pass 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

legislation like this and they have nothing to lose. They wheel 
in and they blow millions of taxpayers’ dollars; they destroy the 
potato industry; they destroy dozens of businesses and leave 
hundreds of creditors out millions of dollars. And then when 
someone decides that they have a right to take them to court to 
recover some of those losses, they bring in a Bill to give 
themselves immunity. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re just trying to protect yourself. Why is this 
necessary? Why won’t you take responsibility for your actions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I need to tell the 
member that a similar provision under The Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation Act has existed since 1984 and there’s nothing new 
under this legislation. 
 
Also, ironically, Mr. Speaker, we included all 28 irrigation 
districts and 2,400 individual irrigators were involved in the 
consultation. 
 
And I also want to point out to the member opposite, ironically 
— I don’t know if he knows this or not — but several of the 
members who sit behind him, including the member from Arm 
River, Mr. Speaker, was at the meetings involved where the 
amendments were discussed with all of the irrigators. 
 
So they individually had ample opportunity for input as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister, we 
know you have these clauses in other pieces of legislation, but 
why do you have those clauses? 
 
Mr. Minister, it shows what hypocrites the NDP are. You know, 
they’re always talking about big business and how irresponsible 
they are. They’re talking about how business owners operate 
without a conscience. But there isn’t a business in Canada today 
that could get away with what you’re trying to pull in this Bill. 
 
If this was some private business that had wheeled into 
Saskatchewan and ruined the potato industry and left millions 
of dollars of owing, you’d be leading a charge, Minister, to take 
him to court. But when it’s you — then you just pass a law — 
wash your hands of all responsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is that fair? Why do private businesses have 
to take responsibility for their actions, and you can walk away 
scot-free? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I remind the 
member that a similar provision exists under The Water 
Corporation Act that was passed in 1984. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to remember right now which 
government was in power in 1984. It seems to me that Mr. 
Devine and the party that he is associated with — and many of 
the members present, across the floor — were involved in 
passing the very legislation that he’s being critical of right at 
this moment today. 
 

I also want to again say that as I recollect . . . because I was at 
the meetings where we discussed the amendments with many of 
the irrigators, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the member from Arm 
River, as I remember, was also there and had ample opportunity 
for input on these amendments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, again we see the NDP 
refusing to take responsibility for anything. They’ve destroyed 
health care, they’ve destroyed the highways, they’ve destroyed 
agriculture, they’re trying to destroy local government, and now 
after meddling in the potato industry and destroying it, they 
want to walk away just like nothing’s happened and bring a Bill 
in to absolve themselves of any blame. 
 
Mr. Minister, your meddling in the potato business hurt 
hundreds of people in the Lucky Lake area: farmers, business 
owners, people with real lives, people raising families who 
made the mistake of trusting your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is this fair? Why do businesses have to be 
responsible for their actions but you don’t? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, all 28 irrigation districts 
and the 2,400 individual irrigators from the area that the 
member opposite represents, many of those irrigators 
themselves were involved in the development of these 
amendments. Many of the amendments they themselves 
requested. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how he can be critical of this defies logic from 
my perspective. 
 
As well again, I remind the member that in 1984 when The 
Water Corporation Act was passed, similar legislation that deals 
with exactly what we’re dealing with here under this legislation 
was passed at that time. There’s nothing new in this legislation 
that doesn’t already exist in The Water Corporation Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Children’s Advocate’s Report 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, after the Child Advocate’s review was released 
Wednesday, many questions were raised about the comments 
from the people who participated in the review. The comments 
and quotes from foster parents, children, and social workers 
really emphasize a great number of problems within the system 
and your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you said your officials would be 
investigating some of the specific allegations made in the 
report. The Child’s Advocate says her office has already 
investigated these cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, were you or was your department 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

involved in investigating any of these allegations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, just to let the public 
know that the report is based on a review of files from the 
Department of Social Services, and after that review the 
Children’s Advocate makes a number of recommendations. 
 
Interspersed throughout the report are a number of quotations 
that are attributed to individuals. Some of those quotations are 
statements of opinion and we can accept those, whether we 
agree or not, and some we do agree with. But having said that, 
there are also some specific quotations that raise questions 
about the professional conduct of individual social workers, Mr. 
Speaker. And bearing in mind that the advocate wants us to 
concentrate on the recommendations in her report, we 
nevertheless feel that we must find some way to resolve those 
specific allegations that have been made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people who 
participated in this review process did so on the condition of 
anonymity. They spoke from the heart in the interest of 
improving the foster care system in this province. But in 
speaking out, they raised issues of deep concern, and all of 
these concerns point to poor policy, mismanagement, and 
neglect within your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, the first day this report came to light you didn’t 
want to give the comments much credibility, but you’ve done 
an about-face saying investigations are underway. The lives of 
the children in your care and improvement of foster care system 
is more important than a manhunt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, it’s obvious these problems within 
your department are deep and disturbing and have been ongoing 
for years. Why are you so concerned about the individual 
statements when you should be concentrating on repairing the 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
for the question. I want to point out to the member that we 
asked for this report because we have concerns about the 
system that we have for children in care. We wanted an 
independent third-party perspective on how we might improve 
that system. 
 
We have the advocate’s report. The report contains a number of 
very good, substantial recommendations that we look forward 
to implementing to improving the system in care. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, there are some specific 
quotations in the report that reflect poorly on the professional 
conduct of people in my department. And we would like to see 
an opportunity to resolve that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, there are some serious allegations suggested in the 
report. And your comments this afternoon aren’t making people 

feel very comfortable. 
 
The Child’s Advocate says they’ve suggested or already 
investigated some of the situations described. And she’s very 
concerned about protecting the foster parents, children, and 
social workers who participated in the review process. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to a social worker who’s 
worried about, and more concerned with, the fact that you are 
looking to punish social workers for raising the concerns than 
actually trying to fix the problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you guarantee there will not be disciplinary 
action taken against the people who have spoken out in this 
report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, our primary 
concern, our primary concern as a government, as a department 
is with the needs of children in care. This is the reason that we 
asked for in independent review, Mr. Speaker, of the system 
that we have. 
 
We look forward to implementing many of the 
recommendations that the Children’s Advocate puts before us. 
And we look forward to doing so, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
convinced in doing so, we will improve the system of care for 
children in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday the official opposition asked if you and your Liberal 
colleagues support the NDP government’s plan of forced 
municipal amalgamation. But as usual you hid under your desk 
and let the NDP speak for you. 
 
So let’s try again. Mr. Minister, your own Liberal Party 
president says you’ve got to stand on your own two feet. 
Liberal Party President, Greg Gallagher, says you should 
publicly — publicly — oppose the NDP plan for forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you agree with your party president, do you 
support the NDP government’s forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First I want to say to the member opposite, 
that on this side of the House — on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker — we’ve always talked about a coordinated approach, 
a co-operative approach, when working with municipalities to 
reach a resolution on municipal reform in this province. 
 
But I’m extremely interested in the member opposites quoting 
of Mr. Greg Gallagher, because Mr. Greg Gallagher is the 
Liberal president for the riding in the province. And Mr. Greg 
Gallagher had a number of discussions with the member 
opposite, when he said to the member opposite, you know what, 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

you shouldn’t force amalgamation of the two parties. And at 
that time the member opposite was a member of the Liberal 
Party. 
 
And Mr. Greg Gallagher says, Mr. Member, don’t force 
amalgamation of the Saskatchewan Party — of this new 
Saskatchewan Party — of the Conservative, and the old 
Liberals. No, he didn’t listen to that because, Mr. Speaker, 
where we see, where we see amalgamation and forced 
amalgamation is over there led by the king of amalgamation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the parties over there amalgamated, they must have also 
stapled the Liberal leader’s lips together because he can’t speak 
for himself. Mr. Speaker, once again the Liberal leader crawls 
under his desk and once again he’s allowing the NDP 
government to speak for him. 
 
But fortunately it looks like the Liberal leader did find his 
tongue for the media yesterday. Mr. Speaker, according to the 
Liberal leader, municipal councillors can’t think for themselves. 
He says municipal councillors are not capable of having a 
rational conversation about amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, how would you know? You haven’t been to a 
single task force meeting in this province. You haven’t 
answered a single question on amalgamation in this legislature. 
Would you explain why you think municipal councillors aren’t 
capable of understanding forced amalgamation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to just take a moment to say to the 
House and to the member opposite, because I’m reading with 
great disturbance what’s happening across the province these 
days, Mr. Speaker, reading with great disturbance . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. There’s an awful 
lot of noise on both sides of the House and we’re unable to 
hear. Either the questions are difficult being heard and the 
answers as well, so please, hon. members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite that I hear with . . . I read with a 
great deal of disturbance what’s happening in the province 
today as people travel and meet with the Garcea committee. 
 
And I read from an article, Mr. Speaker, in the Melfort review 
just of a couple of days ago, and it really troubles me, Mr. 
Speaker, about what I hear. And here, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
people are saying that Mr. Garcea who leads the committee is in 
fact a puppet of government, is a puppet of government. 
 
And then I hear, Mr. Speaker, the member from Carrot River 
standing up, Mr. Speaker, the member from Carrot River and he 
goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Garcea is in fact, is in fact 
has no ideas, that he’s confrontational, that he’s stubborn. And 
this, Mr. Speaker, comes from the party opposite because what 
they do, Mr. Speaker, is they go to these meetings and what 
they do is they attack, they attack the chairperson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of behaviour is completely, completely 
intolerable . . . 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Liberal leader, the Minister of 
Education. Mr. Minister, the debate over forced municipal 
amalgamation has been going on for weeks and the minister 
hasn’t lifted a finger to say where he stands. Well that’s not 
right, Mr. Speaker. He did lift a finger yesterday at one point. 
 
But according to the Liberal leader, the Saskatchewan Party and 
rural councillors are whipping up opposition to forced 
municipal amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what rural councillors and the Saskatchewan Party 
MLAs are doing is representing the views of most people in 
Saskatchewan. If the Liberal leader would actually be bothered 
to attend one of the public hearings on amalgamation, he’d 
know that. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to stop hiding. Will you come out from 
behind the NDP and will you clearly state where you and your 
Liberal Party stand on forced amalgamation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to keep 
in mind here, Mr. Speaker, is that throughout the province, over 
the last couple of weeks, what we’ve seen is we’ve seen some 
leadership provided by the opposition party in riling all of rural 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
In fact, the article here says . . . the article in the front page 
says: Opposition riling the RMs, Mr. Speaker. That’s the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and all over the province today is what they’re 
doing. They’re going to the individual meetings, and they’re 
fearmongering with the business community. They’re 
fearmongering with the individual counsellors. They’re telling 
the communities what they’re going to lose. 
 
This is about you dividing rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan, which is what your party is synonymous and 
famous for — dividing and conquering people. That’s what 
your party is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, the Saskatchewan Party didn’t have to rile up SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). You’re the 
guy that riled them up with what you’re planning to do to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. I would ask all 
hon. members to please, please allow members on their feet to 
be heard. I thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday the Education minister told The Leader-Post that 
rural councillors were incapable of understanding 
amalgamation. You said these rural leaders were not capable of 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

having a rational conversation about the NDP’s plan for forced 
amalgamation. 
 
I guess that’s because they’re opposed to your NDP 
government’s plan. Well does that plan also apply to dozen of 
city businesses that are also opposed to the NDP’s plan of 
forced amalgamation? I list some of those people: Village RV, 
Botkin Construction, Maxwell’s Amusements, IPSCO, Brandt 
Industries, Wascana Greenhouses, Precision Industries. 
 
Mr. Minister, are these city businesses also incapable of having 
a rational conversation about forced amalgamation? Tell us, 
Jim. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I watched the member 
ask the question, and the behaviour of the member hardly seems 
to be rational, in my view. And he uses the term rationality. 
 
I would say to the House and to the member opposite, Mr. 
Member, this is your quote that comes out of the paper of 
StarPhoenix, April 14, Friday of April 14, 2000, this morning, 
where you, where you say, Mr. Member, that hysteria, hysteria 
doesn’t happen on its own. It was a wonderful speech. 
 
This relates to what you’re doing across the province — going 
out to the community, whipping up the RMs (Rural 
Municipalities) — whipping up the RMs, telling communities 
and telling business that they all should be moving to Alberta. 
Soon I see the member putting up his Alberta flag and you’ll be 
going with him, you’ll be going with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortages 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Madam Minister, ever since the NDP’s don’t ask, don’t 
tell budget was released, we’ve been hearing about what a 
disaster your Finance minister has cooked up. The latest group 
to condemn your budget is the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s been a year since nurses went on strike to 
protest your failed health reform process. But according to the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, nothing has changed — same 
brutal working conditions, same shortage of nurses, same 
disrespect from the NDP. 
 
Madam Minister, SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) says 
your government has not done enough to improve working 
conditions, conditions for nurses. What is the holdup? Why 
hasn’t the NDP taken action to address the brutal working 
conditions that are driving nurses out of the profession? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I want to say to the House is that since February, 1999, 
Regina has attracted over 200 nurses. But I also want to say in 
the city of Saskatoon, they’ve attracted over 100 nurses to the 
health district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps to recruit and retain nurses. 
We’ve increased the numbers of seats in the nursing education 

program from 180 to 260. And, Mr. Speaker, we could now see 
qualified nurses completing their degree in a three-year period. 
 
As well, we have Lifestream which is going across the country 
and into North America and across the globe to attract nurses to 
the province. And in fact, just last week, Mr. Speaker, more 
nurses arrived in Regina from New Zealand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it seems strange that we have more 
nurses in Regina, yet we’ve just closed an operating room at the 
Regina General because of a shortage of nurses. It doesn’t sort of 
add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question for the Health minister. Madam 
Minister, according to SUN, one of the problems is that you are 
not telling the truth about the health budget. The head of the 
nurses’ union says you are manipulating the health budget. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Just to remind all 
hon. members to choose their words judiciously with respect to 
members of the House. Please withdraw that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it was a quote from the head of the 
nurses’ union, Rosalee Longmoore. And she told the SUN that 
your government is cutting health care funding. 
 
Madam Minister, that doesn’t square with your comments that 
health care is a major priority for the NDP. How can that be if 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is saying your government 
is cutting health care? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member, you 
indicated that was a quote that you were using. You didn’t 
indicate that as a quote initially when you read it. And . . . okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to 
answer the question on behalf of the government. 
 
Last night I had the distinct privilege of being in Weyburn, 
speaking to about 200 people or so at a public function . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, probably more than 200 people. 
And at the time somebody pointed out to me that on October 
20, 1999, in the Weyburn Review, under the headline, “MLA 
Bakken given critic duties in shadow cabinet,” that the 
following story was written. 
 
And I’ll read it to you, sir. This is the answer of our government 
to the question: 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. 
 
“I think it should be an option.” 
 

Now the hon. member from Weyburn says in her question to 
the Government of Saskatchewan, in effect, that her solution 
and her leader’s solution is privatization — Alberta style, Bill 
11, two-tier, private for-profit hospitals. 
 
I tell you and the nurses union — we’re for medicare. 
 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I can understand 
the exuberance because members are anxious to get to the home 
constituencies, however . . . 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, being an open, honest and forthwith government, 
we would like to table the answer to question no. 127. And 
we’re happy about doing it, Mr. Speaker — very happy about 
doing it. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to be able to rise today in the Assembly to speak to the 
proposed amendments before us to The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of the impending regulation of 
SaskTel by the Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission, the CRTC, which begins on 
June 30 of this year. 
 
SaskTel is the last telecommunications company in Canada to 
become federally regulated. In 1992, Mr. Speaker, the province 
negotiated a moratorium from federal regulations. This 
moratorium was to last for a period of six years and was then 
extended until the end of June 2000. 
 
Saskatchewan resisted federal regulation and negotiated the 
moratorium due to its concerns with the federal regulatory 
model. That model required the subsidization of new 
competitors which didn’t make sense for a province such as 
Saskatchewan with a large percentage of rural and northern 
customers. 
 
It is absolutely crucial, Mr. Speaker, that service to these areas 
remain affordable. The actual cost to provide communication 
services to rural and remote areas is quite high, but SaskTel has 
always been committed to partial subsidization of telephone 
service to these areas. However the federal regulatory model 
would have meant that in addition to SaskTel subsidizing rural 
and northern areas, it would also have been required to 
subsidize AT&T. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, that just didn’t make any sense to the 
people of this province. With these points in mind, SaskTel and 
the government agreed to use the moratorium period to meet 
national policy objectives, but to do so in a distinctly 
Saskatchewan way, a way that would ensure that access to 
communication services is equitably achieved throughout the 

province. 
 
So over the past eight years, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has 
essentially been following rules that mirror the federal 
regulatory framework but without subsidization of new 
entrants. And over the ensuing time period, the federal 
regulatory model has changed and subsidies of new entrants 
have been virtually eliminated by the CRTC. 
 
In the preparatory years and months before regulation, SaskTel 
and its employees have worked diligently to help ensure that the 
transition is a smooth one. Their goal was to ensure that they 
could continue to quickly and adequately respond to market 
demands and pressures. 
 
They have been working to ensure that the more than 450,000 
people around this province who are SaskTel customers see 
little difference in how quickly SaskTel provides them with 
products and services. As a corporation whose number one 
priority is its customers, SaskTel is committed to continuing to 
provide the best level of service and the most innovative 
products available. 
 
Section 43.1 of the Bill eliminates the necessity of the 
Government of Saskatchewan approving interconnection 
agreements between SaskTel and its competitors. This also 
includes any limitations there are on competitor’s equipment 
that may be attached to SaskTel’s network. When SaskTel 
becomes regulated by the CRTC, this regulatory body will 
oversee the interconnection of SaskTel’s communication 
system with those of other long-distance companies. The 
Government of Saskatchewan will no longer play a role in 
determining which outside companies interconnect with 
SaskTel’s infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill to amend The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is indeed a very, very important Bill for all of the people of 
Saskatchewan, especially for those who lie further from the 
centre, further from Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
We’ve already seen a significant shift in basic service costs to 
people residing across Saskatchewan. In particular, to those 
people residing outside of the major metropolitan areas. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been contacting us, as I’m 
sure they have been contacting the government members, with a 
great amount of fear and trepidation with the rising costs of 
telephone service. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency and across the 
southeast, the Southeast Regional Library based out of 
Weyburn — and I believe it’s the Isabelle Butters library that 
it’s out of . . . in Weyburn — were extremely concerned that the 
cost of telephone service being provided to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan in this particular case, to the libraries across rural 
Saskatchewan, was going to amount to a base price of $130 per 
telephone line. This would have virtually shut down every 
library in every small town across rural Saskatchewan, had this 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

happened. And there is no assurances yet that that is not going 
to happen from SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hopefully this piece of legislation will ensure that 
the prices paid by people for their basic telephone service will 
be realistic, will be affordable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s not just your basic service, Mr. Speaker, that needs to 
be concerned. It’s also long distance, access to long-distance 
services, and access to all of those other services that 
telecommunications now provides for us. 
 
One of those services is the Internet service, Mr. Speaker. A 
resident in Regina can access unlimited Internet service for $20 
a month. A resident of rural Saskatchewan accessing Internet 
services through SaskTel has to pay a minimum of 80-plus 
dollars to access 180 hours. And that’s for a residential service, 
Mr. Speaker. For a business service the maximum allowable 
time is 120 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are entering into a very, very competitive age 
in telecommunications. Part of that telecommunication service, 
Mr. Speaker, will be satellite communications. And SaskTel 
must prepare themselves for that competition; a competition 
where there is no need to be tied to a land line. You can pick up 
your cellular telephone and contact anyone in the world at any 
time and not utilize a land line and not utilize SaskTel. 
 
SaskTel has to place themselves in a competitive position to be 
able to meet that competition head to head. They have to be 
able to meet that competition when it comes to Internet 
services. It will only be a matter of weeks, if not days, that 
Internet services will be provided to the people of Canada, to 
the people of Saskatchewan, to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan over their TV satellite dishes. It’s only a matter 
of weeks before that happens. 
 
Is SaskTel then prepared to compete? That’s a good question. I 
don’t know that they are. They certainly haven’t been giving 
any indications yet that they have a service in mind to provide 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So if this Bill is providing protection for SaskTel, it also has to 
provide protection for the people of Saskatchewan . . . that the 
services that are available to people both in rural and urban 
Saskatchewan are compatible. And that the services available to 
the people in Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, Newfoundland, or the 
Northwest Territories is also available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s very critical that we talk with the 
third parties that are interested in this telecommunication Bill to 
determine whether it serves the needs of the customers of 
SaskTel, whether it serves the needs of SaskTel, and whether it 
serves the needs of all the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
be able to rise again today in the Assembly to speak to the 

proposed amendments before us to The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. SaskTel 
Holding Corporation is the corporate entity responsible for the 
assets of SaskTel Mobility and the wireless services that it 
provides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan opened its doors to long-distance 
telephone competition in 1996. Competition has been good for 
Saskatchewan consumers. It’s provided people with choice and 
it’s helped make SaskTel stronger and more competitive in the 
marketplace. 
 
While operating in this highly competitive environment, 
SaskTel developed various long-distance plans that were built 
on a foundation of value and service. During this period, 
SaskTel has continually lowered its long-distance rates, has 
reinforced its commitment to excellent customer service, and 
has maintained more than 90 per cent market share — the most 
of any telecommunications company in Canada. 
 
During this past four-year period, SaskTel familiarized itself 
with CRTC guidelines by operating in a manner similar to 
federal regulations. This gave the company ample time and 
experience to prepare itself for June 30 of this year when 
SaskTel becomes fully subject to the regulation of the CRTC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that SaskTel’s shareholders, the people 
of this province, have benefited from this environment; and 
when SaskTel becomes fully regulated by the CRTC at the end 
of June, it is imperative that customers continue to receive the 
best possible service and value from SaskTel and SaskTel 
Mobility. 
 
The current version of this Act does not contain any provisions 
that would create a framework for a legally binding tariff — a 
tariff that would form a contract between SaskTel Holding 
Corporation and its customers. 
 
I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the impact of these 
changes on customers are minimal. The majority of SaskTel 
Mobility’s customers already have written contracts. As well, 
when necessary, the terms and conditions of the contract are 
provided to the customers at the point of sale. 
 
There are only a few customers with SaskTel Mobility services 
who do not have long-term contracts such as some wireless data 
customers who receive their service on a month-to-month basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must make provision for a tariff governing the 
relationship between SaskTel Mobility and its customers, just as 
a tariff is provided for SaskTel and its customers. These 
amendments will allow SaskTel Mobility to fully comply with 
the terms and conditions of federal regulation as set out by the 
CRTC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill to amend The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act, 
2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is another 
one of the moves that is necessary because of the changing 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

environment that we live in with telecommunications today. 
The minister is talking about bringing SaskTel Mobility into 
line and meeting the requirements of the CRTC regulations. 
 
That’s very important because even the province of 
Saskatchewan, however reluctant they may be, must live under 
the laws both of Canada and of this province, although it’s 
certainly does seem at times that they are most reluctant to do 
so and habitually change the rules and deem them not to have 
been in place when they actually broke the law that was there. 
 
(1100) 
 
So I think it is important that this government recognize that 
they can’t continually do that kind of thing — retroactively 
change the laws so that they suit what the government has 
already done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is also talking about tariffs, tariffs on 
telecommunication services and service to customers. One of 
the things that needs to take place in this province when we’re 
dealing with tariffs of monopolies, when we’re dealing with 
tariffs of Crown corporations is that there be a review process 
put in place that allows for input and allows for information to 
be gathered and disseminated as to the actual requirements of 
the corporation to have those tariffs at (a) the level that they are 
at, and (b) at a level they may wish to adjust them to. 
 
So far, we have not had a meaningful review process put in 
place. The government has tried their 45-day sham process 
where they would allow the Crown corporations to propose rate 
adjustments. Very few times that I can recall have they ever 
gone down, if any. They have always been rate increases. And 
the sham process would go out and hold public hearings at 
which no one would attend and come back and say, yes, they all 
need to have these rate increases. 
 
Well they finally recognized — even Jack Messer when he 
was the head of SaskPower . . . Jack Messer, who was the 
campaign manager for the NDP in 1991, the provincial 
campaign manager, recognized that there needs to be a 
review process in place. There was a Crown corporation task 
force that toured this province back in 1994-95. I attended 
one of the meetings in Regina here, which Allan Blakeney, 
the former NDP premier of this province, stood up at that 
meeting and said, there needs to be a public review process 
put in place. 
 
And so far the government has failed to provide a public review 
process that is independent of the government. They have made 
a small move in that direction, dealing with 
telecommunications, with the last rate hike. Again though, it’s 
extremely limited and has not proven to be effective. 
 
The government — since this government is not capable of 
doing that — I think the next government, the Saskatchewan 
Party government, will provide people with an independent 
review process to judge the value and the service being 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan by the Crown 
corporations. 
 
This particular Bill, when it comes to bringing Saskatchewan 
into line with the requirements of the CRTC is important and, 

also though, we should be looking at how this reflects with the 
tariffs and how those will be adjusted. 
 
There again are, Mr. Speaker, a number of third parties 
involved in this particular piece of legislation. They need to be 
consulted. They need to have their views heard, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Therefore, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Department of Justice Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on this Bill today, Bill No. 15, The Department of Justice 
Amendment Act, 2000. And I think it’s . . . for the most part, 
the amendment is mostly housekeeping in nature. They’ve 
added a few clauses that would deter any action being taken 
against carriers or court house courtworkers. 
 
This is a good thing, particularly when it protects someone who 
is operating in good faith. And so as to that, like I say, as I 
mention, it’s mainly a housekeeping Bill. 
 
There are a couple of things, however, that do cause some 
concern that we want to talk about. And some concerns of the 
Act are the part of the Act under the confidentiality when it 
talks about confidentiality about an individual who has been 
charged with an offence, and it talks about individuals the age 
of 18 who was alleged to have committed an offence. 
 
It makes me wonder why there is a differentiation for a person 
who is an adult status being charged, and a person who is not an 
adult status being alleged. And so there are some concerns with 
that. A courtworker should also be available to someone 
deemed an adult to explain to them all of their rights. 
 
And I think the whole thing of the Bill and certainly with the 
whole justice system is to try and achieve some equality and 
achieve fairness. And I think that is the biggest point. And I 
think with some of court cases that have gone on today and 
things that have happened through the court system, whether 
it’s the Milgaard case, whether it’s . . . whatever case, it’s an 
extremely important issue. And the whole intent of it is to 
achieve some sort of fairness and justice . . . fairness in the 
system. 
 
And the Aboriginal community has identified the need for 
complete confidentiality in court cases to ensure that the trial is 
completely fair. And as I mentioned before, that is the whole 
intent of the justice system is to make sure that it is as fair as 
possible. And the confidentiality is a huge part of it. 
 
As soon as there are leaks and problems with that, with 
confidentiality, you’re going to have problems with trying to 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

get the truth out. Because they’re unsure that they can state 
what they want to state without some sort of problems. 
 
I was watching the news the other day when the person . . . 
which a person was . . . it was a murder case, and it was all 
through the fact that according to the news, that the person was 
killed because he had testified in a case many, many years prior. 
And so that whole confidentiality part of it is so important. 
 
As an official opposition, we appreciate the fact that there needs 
to be some special needs or requirements regarding the 
Aboriginal and Metis communities’ specific cultural aspects. 
And it is good to see that the government is acknowledging this. 
And I agree with that. 
 
But as I mentioned before, there are some concerns with the 
whole . . . the part — and I mean the Bill is only one page long. 
There’s a lot to it, but there are some concerns in one or two 
areas and that’s what I want to address today. 
 
It is also important to note that any of the information that 
courtworkers . . . that a courtworker does receive is kept in 
accordance with their duties. In too many instances we have 
seen some damage . . . some dangerous offenders left to do . . . 
let go through technicalities. And that’s a concern. 
 
So as I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, there’s not a lot in the 
Bill, but we do have a couple of concerns and I’ve raised those 
concerns. And that’s about all I guess that I’d have to say, and I 
will adjourn debate on the Bill for now. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 16 — The 
Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege this 
morning to enter into the debate on Bill 16, an Act to amend 
miscellaneous consumer protection statutes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had some occasion as the Justice 
critic for our caucus to discuss this Bill with some people in the 
legal profession. And for the most part, the minister’s remarks 
that were made on April 12 in the Legislative Assembly during 
second reading accurately describe the Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and also highlight the fact that, for the most part, the 
provisions in the Bill are reasonably non-controversial. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill does clarify the legal framework 
for the practice whereby the registrar, the consumer protection 
branch under each of the amended sections of this Bill arranges 
for the distribution of proceeds of a bond to the claimant. 
 
The case I guess could be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
is perhaps a positive development as it will ensure that 
consumers under these Acts are able to receive the protection 
afforded in the Act without having to go through a lot of court 
wrangling to get that protection, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some concerns though that have 
been raised to me by people from the profession with respect to 
the powers that are given by this Bill to the registrar. For the 
most part, the Bill takes power previously held with the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council and places it in the hands of the 
registrars in these various Acts. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so people understand — we’re 
talking about a Bill that actually amends The Collection Agents 
Act, The Credit Reporting Agencies Act, The Direct Sellers 
Act, The Motor Dealers Act, and The Sale of Training Courses 
Act. And so the registrar in each of these instances is given 
some significant sweeping powers under the Act. And to the 
extent that a registrar of course is either an official, an unelected 
official fundamentally, of each of these areas with the 
Department of Justice, I think it’s reasonable to have some 
questions about the powers that will be vested with these 
officers. 
 
Under each of the sections and under each reference to the 
various Acts that are affected by this particular Bill, the Act 
lays out the power of the registrar to — and I quote from the 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The registrar may pay any money recovered under a 
forfeited bond or realized from the sale of any collateral 
security to: 
 

(a) the local registrar of the Court of Queen’s Bench . . . 
 
So in other words to the court. 
 

(b) (To) any trustee, custodian, interim receiver, receiver 
or liquidator . . . 

 
But finally though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s worthwhile 
noting that the final provision is that: 
 

(c) any person that the registrar considers entitled to the 
money for a claim . . . 

 
In other words anyone that the registrar deems fit. And I think 
it’s going to be interesting in committee, when this Bill is in 
committee for a very, very long time — perhaps the member 
from Elphinstone will want to know — but when this Bill does 
go to committee I think we’ll want to, I think we’ll want to talk 
a little bit about that third power given to the registrar in each 
case of the Act. 
 
We’ll want to talk a little bit more about the amount of 
authority given to the registrar to pay the proceeds, redistribute 
the proceeds of a bond, apparently that would have been 
defaulted on to any person that the registrar deems fit. I think 
it’ll be an interesting discussion, we’ll have many questions for 
the minister in committee. 
 
In principle of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side of 
the House have absolutely no problem at all with any particular 
piece of legislation from the minister or from the government, 
the intent of which is to afford greater protection for consumers. 
 
And if indeed the Bill does make it easier for consumers and the 
general public, creditors in general, to collect on the proceeds of 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

bonds that have been defaulted on, then I think you’ll see this 
side of the House support those kinds of changes completely 
and wholeheartedly. 
 
I think though it would be irresponsible if we didn’t ask some 
of the questions about the power given to the registrar. Because 
in accomplishing this, in accomplishing this added protection, 
or at least the ease with which people can now move through 
this process, the Act does vest considerable power with the 
registrar in all five cases of these Acts. 
 
And so we’re going to spend a very long time in committee, the 
member for Regina North will like to know, we’ll spend a long 
time in committee discussing the intricate details of each of the 
Acts that are affected and the powers that the registrar has to 
now make some decisions in regards to bonds that have been 
defaulted on. 
 
And so with those comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with the 
assurance that I will continue to consult with people in the 
profession on this particular Bill and the changes that it’s going 
to make to various Acts, I would again move adjournment of 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1115) 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 1 — The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 seems to be a bit of a 
misleading title. I’ll read from comments made by the minister by 
way of explanation of this Act. 
 
He says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

These amendments are required to strengthen the procedures 
where producer associations are winding down or where 
guarantee has been paid by the government to the lender. We 
want to authorize a producer association to be able to deduct 
from the proceeds of sales, the amount a producer owes to 
that particular association. 

 
And he goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say: 
 

. . . by strengthening the procedures, the risk to the 
association, the lender and the government are reduced. 
These amendments were developed in consultation with 
lenders. 

 
He doesn’t mention anything about producers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Most importantly, from across the province, and of 
course the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association, these groups 
are in agreement with the amendments that I have mentioned 
here. 
 
As I understand the minister’s clarification of this Act, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it appears on the surface that this Act 
incorporates some principles that we may be able to support. 
Generally, it appears that the Act is designed to enhance 
creditors’ powers in dealing with producer associations, and this 
could also be a positive thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if not taken 
too far. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will be up to us in this 
Assembly to make that judgment. 
 
Quite a title, Mr. Deputy Speaker — The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 1999. You know, farm financial 
stability seems to be elusive under this administration. I look at 
the situation on my own farm — a fairly substantial, diversified, 
grain, oilseed, pulse crop, specialty crop, and cattle operation. 
This government seems to be operating under the delusion that 
the farm financial crisis is something that popped up in 1999. 
 
I can say, as someone who has farmed since the early ’70s, that 
the farm situation has been growing steadily worse in this 
province since 1980 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . When Mr. 
Wall was in grade 1. When the European Economic 
Community began subsidizing export sales. And the situation 
grew worse in 1984 when the United States began to subsidize 
their export sales in retaliation for what the Europeans had been 
doing already for four years. 
 
I’ve seen my bottom line deteriorating gradually, particularly 
over the mid-to-late ’90s, and this is not something that came 
up as an emergency in 1999, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
everybody knew it except for the then minister of Agriculture, 
Mr. Upshall. 
 
Up until . . . or for a few years preceding 1992, we had had a 
program called GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) which 
was possibly . . . it was, it was a revenue guarantee, 
insurance-type program, which may have been a little too rich. 
I’ll be first to admit that. 
 
But this government cancelled it, tore up the contracts that had 
already been signed. They cancelled it in the spring of the year 
— about this time it was, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and they tore 
up those contracts that had already been signed leaving farmers 
absolutely in the lurch, took hundreds of millions of dollars out 
of that program, used it to balance the budget; promised to 
replace it with a new program, and never did. To this day there 
has never been any kind of a long-term safety net program 
developed in this province. And we see no evidence that there 
ever will be, quite frankly, as long as this government’s in 
power. 
 
Under GRIP — GRIP was a program that you could, you could 
take to the bank. It was a bankable program. That means, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you could take the GRIP forms to the bank 
and the banker could understand that you had a guarantee of a 
certain minimum income for that year. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that gave the bank a solid basis on which to base 
operating money loans and so on. This government destroyed 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And now they talk about farm 
income stability. 
 
I noticed about 1996 that although the farm industry had been 
getting more and more difficult all along since— as I 
mentioned, 1980 — but I noticed about 1996 a tremendous drop 
in my bottom line as a farmer. And ’97 was worse, and ’98 it 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

continued. And of course ’99 was a disaster with even lower 
commodity prices and all sorts of weather problems like 
flooding in the southeast and even in my area. 
 
And in the spring of 1999, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when farmers 
were looking for a little guidance from this government and 
maybe a little help . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’d they get? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — They got . . . I’ll tell you what they got. They 
got Mr. Eric Upshall saying that there was no farm crisis. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No farm crisis? And Eric got tossed at 
the polls. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — That’s right. And I wonder, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if the taxpayers of this province are supporting Mr. 
Upshall in some obscure appointment in the style to which he’d 
become accustomed? 
 
I think this government has lost touch with rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t think . . . There’s not one member 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what I would call a bona 
fide farmer — including the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister says he’s more of a bona fide farmer than I am, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I take issue with that. I live on my farm. I 
check cows. I checked my cows this morning before I came in 
here and it looks like one of them is going to calve. When’s the 
last time I wonder that the Minister of Agriculture was actually 
on his family’s farm? Christmastime . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . You live . . . the minister seems to live on an acreage, 
adjacent to a golf course north of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I live on a farm, there’s 1,500 acres 
on my farm. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes, a hundred acres I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, adjacent to a golf course north of Regina. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — On a point of order, I recognize the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t normally 
do this but the member’s information, the information that he’s 
saying about my farm, which is north of Regina where my 
family and I have about 1,200 acres of land, which we own and 
operate, where I live, I would like him to correct the record 
because he’s giving out a series of misinformation about my 
family. And I would also ask him to apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — What we have here is, frankly, is a 
disagreement between two members and not a point of order. I 
know that the hon. member feels aggrieved but we have no 
technical breech of process here. 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If I’ve 
breached the process in any way, I apologize. 
 
But I did that to strengthen my point that most of the MLAs on 
this side of the House are active farmers — and I certainly am 
myself — and I feel that there’s precious little of that on the 
other side. 
 
All agriculture received from the former Ag minister and this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was a federal program called 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) with some 
provincial contributions. AIDA has been an absolute disaster, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as a newly elected MLA, AIDA 
complaints have taken up a great deal of my time and I’m sure 
everybody on this side of the House, all members, can say the 
same thing. 
 
Rural people in Saskatchewan, in fact the whole province, sent 
the government a clear message on September 16 that they 
wanted a government . . . they wanted a government that would 
be responsive to agriculture. And unfortunately, the voters 
elected three Liberals, and they believed at the time that those 
three Liberals would hold the balance of power. 
 
And of course they joined with the NDP government and they 
promised — the Liberal Party — had promised during the 
campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have money in the hands of 
farmers immediately. I think it was within two weeks of the 
election. 
 
Actually, within two weeks of the election, they signed an 
agreement with the NDP to form a coalition. And that’s the 
only thing they did in two weeks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They had money in their hands. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes, exactly. 
 
In the fall, immediately after the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we called upon this government to initiate an emergency debate 
on agriculture, to try and resolve some of the problems that 
were causing the agricultural crisis. 
 
They refused at first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we thought it 
was quite an urgent matter, and we pushed it as hard as we 
could in the media and in every forum we could get. And 
finally, in December, we had our emergency debate on the 
agricultural crisis. And it brought the issue to the attention of 
the public and that’s what we wanted out of it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We only regret that it took so long to get there. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, this government has granted . . . has 
removed the cap on the farm fuel rebate program. Of course that 
only applies to gasoline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a fuel that’s 
pretty much only used in grain augers and pick-up trucks on 
farms these days. And there was already a $900 exemption for 
each farmer per year, and now the cap’s been removed, so if a 
farmer used more than 900 . . . or paid more than $900 worth of 
tax on his gasoline, he can now have that rebated. And that’s a 
positive thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I commend the 
government. But nobody in the farming industry thinks it’s a 
big deal. 
 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

Also, this government has announced a rebate on education tax 
paid on property — $25 million a year for two years. That 
amounts to about 400 or $440 for the average farm. And again I 
commend the government on that. That’s a fine thing. We’ve 
been to many tax revolt meetings, and people agree with this 
government that they’re paying too much education tax on 
property. 
 
However the other side of the coin, and this is where the other 
shoe falls, the government underfunded education in this budget 
again. And education tax increases on property will likely more 
than eat up that 400 or $440 on the average farm. 
 
Right now school boards are setting their mill rates for the year, 
and they’re virtually all . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve been listening very 
carefully to the hon. member from Thunder Creek and I just 
wish to remind you . . . I know the hon. member will want to tie 
his comments on the situation in rural Saskatchewan into The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999, and I look 
forward to the member addressing the Bill before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Farm 
Financial Stability Act is the subject of my discussion and I’ll 
tie it in again right away. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I was saying, the fact that school boards are going to have to 
increase the property tax mill rate, on the education portion of 
property tax of course, is undermining to farm financial 
stability. And that was really my point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have received many petitions on tax relief and municipal 
amalgamations. And the people of this province wanted this 
government to reduce gasoline and fuel taxes 5 cents a litre, and 
the federal government offered to match that. So we could have 
had a 10 cent a litre reduction in fuel tax in this province and it 
would have only cost the revenue of Saskatchewan 5 cents a 
litre. 
 
And that would have been a stabilizing factor for agriculture as 
well as the rest of the economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But this 
government wouldn’t do it. I don’t know if it was because they 
didn’t think it was a good idea or they thought it was too 
expensive, or because they just didn’t think of it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But this government to date has done precious little to 
assist farm financial stability. 
 
I believe the farmers in this province held out great hopes for 
the Liberals’ influence on this government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as it affects farm financial stability . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems that if the 
Liberals have any influence in this government and they’ve 
forgot what they promised in the election campaign, which is to 
get money in the hands of farmers quick. 
 
The farmers of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to 
enhance farm financial stability, need a bankable, long-term 
safety net program and short-term policies that will help to 
reduce taxation and increase their bottom line. That’s what’s 
needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to promote farm financial 
stability, not a lot of rhetoric about how to assist lenders in 
dealing with producer groups. 

(1130) 
 
Farm financial stability. If anyone should not be addressing this 
issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the members opposite. Their 
record on it is absolutely appalling. This NDP government has 
been having problems dealing with agriculture and farm 
financial stability since it was elected to power in 1991, 
breaking GRIP contracts with producers and taking hundreds of 
millions of dollars to balance their budget. 
 
When the farm financial crisis started to become full-blown 
over two years ago, where was this government? The 
Saskatchewan Party was bringing up the issue on a daily basis, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, offering solutions and suggesting 
meetings while the members opposite sat on their hands and did 
nothing. 
 
Comments by now defeated Ag minister Eric Upshall last 
spring that there was no farm crisis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a sign 
of just how out of touch this government is on rural issues. 
 
Then along came AIDA. We all know how popular and how 
successful this program has been. It’s a bureaucratic nightmare 
that didn’t help most producers at all. And in fact many 
producers had a huge bill at their accountants to show for their 
participation in the AIDA program and that is all. 
 
The people of rural Saskatchewan and in fact all the province 
sent this government a clear message on September 16. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the election the Premier called in the middle of 
harvest to keep farmers away from voting. Well the farm 
population came out in droves to vote against this government 
and everything it stands for. And now it has failed in helping 
producers. 
 
Almost every rural MLA is gone from that side of the House. 
And you know what’s going to happen in the next election, 
which probably isn’t too far away, judging on how things have 
been since the coalition was formed, the people of 
Saskatchewan will indeed watch and participate with interest. 
 
The members opposite were starting to listen, you would think, 
when an emergency debate on the farm crisis was finally called 
in December. And it seemed like there might finally be some 
attention paid to farm financial stability. Actually, our party, the 
Saskatchewan Party, proposed such a meeting two years ago. 
 
And history was made in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when farm group after farm group came forward to the floor of 
the Assembly to present its case on how the crisis is affecting 
the entire province, and particularly agriculture and specifically 
your own operations. 
 
Do you think the government listened, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It 
doesn’t seem so. We get yet another flavoured program with 
barely enough cash to help farmers get through spring seeding. 
This may be in fact the last spring for many of our farmers, 
thanks to this NDP government and its failed programs. 
 
Much of the money farmers might actually get will go towards 
increased fuel costs. This NDP government had every 
opportunity to help farmers by voting in favour of a motion put 
forward by the Saskatchewan Party to cut gas taxes 10 cents a 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

litre. The federal Liberals were willing to meet us halfway. 
 
This government is sitting on a huge slush fund, but when it 
comes time to help people by giving immediate cash relief, 
nothing is there to help. There’s no real farm financial stability 
when it’s needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government announced in its budget a program to rebate 
farmers $50 million in property taxes. Where will they make up 
this money? More hidden taxes? Oh, they let the school trustees 
do it by downloading on them. 
 
The establishment of the Liberal-NDP coalition has done 
nothing to help the farm situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or farm 
financial stability. The leader, now Education minister, could 
have called on the Liberal Prime Minister for help but all 
farmers ended up getting was a headache called AIDA. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest also suggested if 
school boards don’t like what they got in the budget they could 
raise taxes. This will lead to further erosion in services in rural 
areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and cause more headaches for those 
of us who are interested in farm financial stability. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Government House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
for the promotion. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask leave to present 
notices of motions for private members’ day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — My first task is to apologize to the 
House for the inadvertent promotion to the Hon. Opposition 
House Leader as opposed to the Hon. Government House 
Leader. 
 
The Opposition House Leader has asked leave to present 
notification of motion. Is leave granted for private members’ 
day? Is leave granted? That’s carried. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 — The 
Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to get up 
to address a few concerns on Bill No. 2. 
 
Deputy Mr. Speaker, any time this NDP government brings 
forth legislation pertaining to agriculture, people in rural 
Saskatchewan are always somewhat hesitant. They wonder if 
there are any hidden agenda or what plan the members opposite 
may have to further erode rural Saskatchewan. 

The proof behind this is how this government has treated the 
farmers of this province since coming to power. The first sign 
we saw, how the GRIP contracts were broken and that money 
was used to balance a budget. 
 
Farmers’ mistrust of this government started from almost day 
one. A further sign of this government lack of commitment to 
agriculture in this province is the state of highways that farmers 
including livestock producers have to drive on. 
 
This NDP government has also been off-loading education 
taxes onto rural ratepayers. This has been disastrous for 
farmers, although in the budget the government has now some 
form of a rebate. Farmers wonder if they’ll actually follow 
through or some sort of hidden tax will be introduced to offset 
that income. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many livestock producers have concerns 
with the direction this government is taking in regards to Bill 
No. 2. They have serious questions about animal identification, 
and what they’re seeing is the possibility of ear tags. The 
unfortunate part of that is anyone who has been involved in the 
livestock industry through the past years knows we still haven’t 
come up with a good, sound program. 
 
We’re wondering about a system that has tags that do not get 
lost. There are lots of issues with producers regarding this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
In his speech addressing the Bill, the Minister of Agriculture 
talked about people’s safety concerns and where the food they 
eat come from. The packing and feedlot industry shares these 
concerns as well. Many feedlot operators are doing all they can 
in setting up a system where they are thinking about the 
consumer at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was also a lot of questions from 
farmers about whether this system may even help at all. There 
are also questions about system enrolment. What happens if the 
livestock producer chooses not to. Will he be treated unfairly in 
this system? Will he be able to buy or sell in the marketplace? 
Will the producer even be able to continue raising livestock if 
he chooses not to enrol? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are also questions that many 
producers may not even be around to see this proposed 
amendment if it passes. The flawed AIDA program is the first 
example of what could be the beginning of the end for many 
farmers, thanks to this socialist government. 
 
This program is a nightmare; many producers didn’t even see a 
penny from it. Then came the recent announcement of more 
money for farmers, which in the end amounts to a drop in the 
bucket. Many farmers will use this money paying for high gas 
prices, higher fuel, higher fertilizer costs, and an 
ever-increasing tax burden. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government had a chance to make 
things right and get back on the right side of the voter. Ottawa 
offered a program to match the province to drop gas taxes by 10 
cents a litre. That would help immediately and maybe even help 
some of the farmers survive. 
 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

This government chose to vote against it and instead raised 
taxes for farmers. What makes matters worse is the fact that 
there’s no longer no long-term safety net in place. When will it 
come? With this government, probably not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may, I have several letters from cow-calf 
producers but I will only read one. They have many concerns 
about this. This is from a cow-calf producer from the Kenaston 
area, Mr. Lammie Pavelich. 
 

This cattle ID system was brought in with very little notice 
to producers. I learned of it in January, and other producers 
I’ve talked to know little, if anything, about it. Must I join 
every association to cast a vote not to “fix what ain’t 
broke.” Leave the cattle industry alone. 
 
A tag for $1, come on, look how much affordable gun 
registry is over budget. It won’t be long until we may need 
a “cow acquisition permit” to deal with cattle. Maybe even 
a cow safety test will be taken before one gets a license. 
Will we need a license, or permit book, because quota’s are 
coming. How can more rules, regulations and fees heaped 
on cow/calf producers be vital to the future of the cattle 
industry? 
 
As for the United States implementing a registry, sure, just 
like they were changing to the metric system 25 years ago. 
The “John Wayne’s” in Texas, who produce more cattle 
than all of Canada, are not going to back this impotent plan 
made up by “do gooders”, “university cowboys” who need 
research money . . . An article in the February 2nd issue of 
The StarPhoenix said a cow was found with Tuberculosis 
when slaughtered. That means it was tracked down with 
the resources we have now. But hang on, what if that cow 
was bought and sold a dozen times, and lost it’s tag half of 
those times? The new owners would just retag it so it could 
be sold again and the original owner would be lost in the 
shuffle of tags. But even worse, what if that cow kept it’s 
original tag and somewhere between owners #2 and #12 it 
was abused or picked up a disease? The original owner 
could be liable for something he or she knows nothing 
about. It’s like the AIDA program, are you going to be 
picked, or not? Also, an article in the March 2nd Star 
Phoenix stated half of all cattle in U.S. feedlots have the 
Ecoli bacteria on their hides. (And that) . . . can be 
removed (easily) with a hot water rinse. Should I be 
accountable for the diseases on a calf that left my farm a 
year ago or because Larry, and his brothers Daryl and 
Daryl didn’t wash the meat after it was dropped on the 
floor of the packing plant. I could go on about this scheme 
but space is restricted. 
 
This system cannot be run for the price quoted or 
monitored properly for any practical purpose. Mr. Block 
and others like him in this “democracy” have already made 
up my mind for me on this issue, (supposedly) it’s law. 
The last true free enterprise system is about to become 
another government regulated agency that used the gun 
registry, AIDA, and the CWB for their guidelines. 

 
And that was from a cow-calf producer. I have other letters, but 
I will refrain from reading them. 
 

(1145) 
 
With this Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing right now 
is the idea of possible ear tags. And the unfortunate part in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker, anyone who’s been involved in livestock 
industry through the years has found that we still haven’t come 
up with an ear tag system that is fail-proof. And what I mean by 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a system or a tag that does not get lost. 
And whether it’s an ear tag or a brisket tag or a larger tag or 
even just a small metal tag, there are still some issues that arise 
from that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about consumers wanting to 
know where the product that they’re eating or consuming is 
coming from, the minister is quite correct — the consumer is 
becoming more demanding and certainly looking for someone 
that would identify the food that they’re eating is coming out of 
a base, that they are a lot of additives in the product, and that 
it’s coming out of an environmentally friendly atmosphere. 
 
But I know the packing industry and the feedlot industry in this 
province, certainly in Western Canada, are quite concerned 
about that as well. And that’s why I believe you’ll find many 
feedlot operators are doing everything in their power to 
establish a feeding system that really treats the livestock in their 
care with a lot of regard and respect. They are thinking about 
this consumer at the end of the day. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise about it is the 
licensing of these tags. Where will they be bought? Where will 
they be distributed? 
 
And if they’re only going to be out of the cities, I mean a 
producer has to drive 60 or 100 miles to get these tags. And the 
costs of them. Right now, they’re saying $1 a tag but we know 
when government says anything, it can always go up. I propose 
that since this government brought this forth, if at least . . . if 
they’re going to push this through . . . they should at least pay 
the price of the tags to the producers. 
 
Because cost is another thing. If I may read a little bit of 
another letter about a wheat producer . . . or a cattle producer 
from Alberta where that system is already in. He says: 
 

Cost is one reason were each tag now, tags only costs $1 
but it adds up to 1.8 million a year for Alberta beef 
producers and 5.7 million for Canadian beef producers. 
That’s a lot of money taken out of the producers’ pockets. 

 
Said Wheat who runs a 250 cow-calf herd in eastern Alberta. 
As a producer who must buy the tags he objects to the cost 
when large feedlots will reap the benefit instead of buying their 
own ear tags. 
 

Feedlots can save thousands of dollars by using the 
existing agency tag for identification to feedlot. 

 
Said Art Wheat. He also believes, which many cow-calf 
producers do, we have a system out there — a branding system 
— which has worked quite efficiently for the last 100 years that 
you can trace animals. 
 
There are many concerns basically from a lot of the cow-calf 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

producers about it. When you’re shipping cattle, if the tag is 
lost, if it shows up at the market, will that calf be refused or will 
the government maybe just take it? They’re not sure about that. 
Will that be a cost or will it be sent back which is extra cost in 
trucking. 
 
It is also . . . I don’t know if this Bill even addresses the exotic 
issues of animals that . . . does that mean when they’re shipped 
for meat do they have to be tagged? I know personally, Mr. 
Speaker, I have never run a full-grown buffalo into a chute and 
tagged it. And personally, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I had one over there, and I’ve got one 
of two buffalo producers in my constituency and I will contact 
you when he needs, when he needs help. 
 
I’m glad that the members on the other side are volunteering to 
help with this program since they’re implementing it. And I 
hope when I am running cattle though my chute this year, I 
hope I can call on a couple of you to come out and help tag 
them. But the big cost is passed on again just like everything in 
the farming issue is back to the original producer, to the 
cow-calf person, the guy that’s originally raising them. 
 
Although I say this Bill may not be 100 per cent wrong, but I 
think there’s issues that should be addressed especially at the 
cow-calf industry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, Mr. 
Minister, I’ll agree that there . . . but it should be maybe 
voluntarily. It should be worked at the feedlot where the cattle 
are tagged, where they’re shipped right from there to the meat 
not when they’re leaving the farm. 
 
Because like the one person wrote in a letter, an animal can be 
traded 2 to 12 different times, a yearling, as it goes along. If a 
disease shows up years back, years ahead, will that producer be 
originally come back for the costs on them? And that concerns a 
lot of producers out there, and I hope the minister will address 
these concerns as time goes on, as he looks maybe a little more 
closer at this Bill. 
 
And if anybody that has worked with cattle, it’s not easy to run 
them through the chute. It causes them a lot of stress and this is 
just another added stress to the animals when you’re shipping 
through . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Members over there are 
giving some suggestions but obviously they’ve never worked 
with cattle. 
 
You just don’t exactly walk into his chute. You don’t exactly 
. . . they’re not like . . . some of the members over there, the 
only thing they’ve probably ever tagged is rung a little bell or 
put a little bell on their cats. Well this isn’t quite as easy — I 
can guarantee you that. That’s probably the most experience of 
all the members on the other side of the House have ever had to 
deal with. 
 
But when you’re dealing with a 4 to 500 pound yearling calf 
and you’re trying to put a tag in it, it causes it a lot of stress and 
it is just another added feature to it. And also when you’re 
shipping something to the meat packing plant, just one cow, 
does that mean that it has to be tagged before the meat packing 
plant will take it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to review this Bill somewhat more 
carefully to indeed to make sure that all farmers’ concerns are 

looked after, which I’m sure that the members on the other side 
will totally agree with me on that, so, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my 
right is Ron Styles, the deputy minister from the department; to 
my left is Barry Martin, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations; seated directly behind me is Carl Neggers, the 
assistant deputy minister in charge of policy; and Don 
Wincherauk, seated behind the deputy minister, is the assistant 
deputy minister in charge of corporate services. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the minister and his officials for coming to the House 
today. I appreciate the opportunity to talk to them about the 
Highways budget and to ask them some questions for our 
elucidation and some clarification that might result because of 
that. 
 
I noticed with interest that the budget figure this year is $250 
million, claimed to be the highest amount ever for the 
Department of Highways. And while that figure is an 
impressive figure, the fact that we’ve reached that, that height 
of expenditure for the Department of Highways is not without 
its critics. And I would just refer quickly to some of the things 
that were said by the critics in The Leader-Post edition of 
March 30, at which time Neal Hardy, the vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, said that the 
province still has a lot more work to do. And he said: 
 

The highways are in terrible shape. If the highways 
deteriorate, then they start using more and more municipal 
roads. 

 
And he said that resources for road repair in rural municipalities 
are already scarce. 
 
And of course our deputy commenting about the budget said 
that at $2.5 billion over 10 years, this is the first year we’ve 
actually achieved the average for that period and that we’re 
falling behind. 
 
So I think that we need some clarification in this particular area. 
And I would like to start our questioning this afternoon by 
referring to the budget’s most glaring feature. When I, when I 
talk about glaring, I’m not necessarily using a pejorative term or 
a negative term, it’s just that it jumps out at us when we look at 
the highways and transportation estimates for the coming year. 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

There is a significant reduction in money allocated to new road 
construction, but an additionally significant increase in money 
allocated to preservation procedures. And I would like the 
minister to explain the rationale for this decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Since 
I didn’t actually have the opportunity during the budget debate, 
I hope you’ll indulge me a little bit because I want to do a little 
bit of a summary as well, and then get to the question 
specifically. And I do this more for the people of Saskatchewan 
than anyone. 
 
First of all, I want to talk a little bit about the $250 million 
investment that the member referred to for this coming budget, 
2000-2001. At a quarter of a billion dollars it is in fact, as he 
describes it, the largest highways and transportation budget that 
we have ever had. That’s an increase of 6.6 per cent or 15.4 
million from the previous year’s spending level, and it’s an 
investment that I think meets, to the best of our ability, all of 
our commitments. 
 
It’s also about balancing and meeting priorities within 
transportation. As we enter a new century we are particularly 
aware of how important it is to transform Saskatchewan’s 
transportation systems to meet new challenges and 
opportunities. We are setting our focus on strengthening the 
economic development, Mr. Chair, and in strengthening the 
North, and creating a safer and more reliable transportation 
system for all Saskatchewan people. And we think by 
maintaining that focus we’ll serve the social needs of our 
province even better. 
 
Because I think it is important, I want to review some of the 
accomplishments from last construction season as well. 
 
We saw twinning efforts on both sections of Highway 1 and on 
Highway 16. Obviously the highest profile twinning effort was 
the opening of 27.5 kilometres, I believe in that member’s 
constituency, along Highway No. 1 just west of Gull Lake. 
 
Grading started also on Highway No. 16 between Lashburn and 
Marshall. There was progress on the rural TMS (thin membrane 
surface) highway system with 280 kilometres improved at a 
cost of nearly $27 million. 
 
We opened the Athabasca seasonal road. This was a significant 
achievement for northern community access. And we’ve also 
improved . . . improvements there were, I should say, to 45 
kilometres of other northern roads which helped the forestry 
industry considerably. 
 
In the rural road strategic initiatives fund, the department 
partnered with 25 municipalities and First Nations last year on 
20 different projects in addressing 250 kilometres of highway. 
Resurfacing was done at a cost of 21 million on 265 kilometres 
in 28 projects. 
 
(1200) 
 
And I’d also like to talk a little bit about the commitments our 
government has previously set out and that we are meeting in 
this budget. Our government is committed to maintaining and 
improving Saskatchewan roads and highways. In so doing, we 

are committed to improving safety on our highways for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Part of that commitment was to spend 
$2.5 billion over 10 years on such improvements. 
 
We have been increasing our transportation spending every year 
in order to meet those commitments. Since the 1995-96 budget, 
Mr. Chair, our investment has risen by 48.7 per cent — that’s 
48.7 per cent — or $81.9 million. And as I said earlier, this year 
we’ve reached the $250 million mark. Our budget level will 
continue to grow to meet the $2.5 billion commitment that we 
made. 
 
We will also access other sources such as the Centenary Capital 
Fund that was referred to in the budget. And we have increased 
our transportation spending while meeting, I think, our needs 
and obligations in health care, education, and social programs. 
And I think all of this while remaining fiscally responsible 
during an agricultural crisis. 
 
We’ve done this in . . . We have done all of this, I should say, 
while putting forward a balanced provincial budget. We’ve not 
imposed a debt on the future of our province. 
 
At this spending level, this is also the first step in meeting our 
election commitment from last year that said . . . where the 
Premier said that we would spend $1 billion over four years in 
improving transportation. The Canadian Automobile 
Association of Saskatchewan in its annual highway funding 
review has acknowledged that we will in fact fulfill our 
commitment. 
 
There’s another commitment that is being met in this budget, 
and that’s our commitment to twinning our national highway 
system in Saskatchewan. We promised, as I referred to earlier, 
to twin all of Highway No. 1 — that’s the Trans-Canada 
Highway — from the Alberta border to the Manitoba border. 
 
And we promised to twin the Yellowhead highway — Highway 
16 —from the Battlefords to the Alberta border as well. In all, 
that’s a total of 379 kilometres of twinning and we promised to 
meet that commitment by 2012. It is in order . . . it is in the 
order, I should say, of $200 million to complete that work on 
our national highway system. 
 
We’ve lobbied the federal government hard on this, as recent as 
yesterday actually, for over a decade to share responsibility for 
that work and as of yet that obviously has not happened to any 
large degree. To date, all of the twinning has been done without 
federal government assistance. Their help would free up money 
for us to tackle other issues and it would help speed the 
twinning process obviously. This year we will be spending 
$13.3 on twinning on our national highway system. 
 
Also we will . . . Our twinning efforts, if I didn’t allude to it 
earlier, represents efforts on two sections of highway — 1 and 
Highway 16. I think I did refer to that. 
 
At the start of my remarks I also spoke about a balance of 
meeting our goals and achieving our priorities. 
 
Our construction schedule includes for the coming year, 101 
major road projects on 53 different highways with 13 
bridge-improvement projects as well. That is 101 projects at a 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2000 

cost of $88.4 million and 13 bridge-improvement projects at a 
cost of 5.6 million. There are also 17 grading projects valued at 
$19.1 million and 5 grading and paving projects valued at 9.4 
million, and 11 paving projects for a cost of 16.1 million. 
 
We’ll undertake 30 surfacing projects at a total cost of 27.6 
million and there will be 22 strategic spot-strengthening 
projects valued at 14.3 million. We will also be spending almost 
$99 million on highway maintenance. That shows a balance I 
think, and that’s how we came up with the biggest budget for 
Highways and Transportation in our province’s history. 
 
We are also addressing, Mr. Chair, traffic operation and safety 
on high-volume highways. To that end, $4 million will be spent 
to complete the Pasqua Street interchange at Highway 11 here 
in Regina; and $6.5 million will be spent to complete the 
twinning of 8.5 kilometres on Highway 16 just east of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The department will spend about $600,000 to start construction 
on the second bridge over the North Saskatchewan River just at 
the Battlefords. These projects will help address our concerns of 
high-volume highways. 
 
We are investing in the restoration of our rural highways as 
well. We’ll spend 18.4 million to improve our rural 
thin-member surface highways., and in total there will be about 
430 kilometres of highway that will see resurfacing and 
strategic spot-strengthening. 
 
In partnership with the province of Alberta, Mr. Chair, we will 
start the construction of 11 kilometres of Highway No. 17 from 
the Meridian bridge to Onion Lake. We will construct . . . I 
should say we will complete surfacing at Fond-du Lac and 
Wollaston Lake airports as well. 
 
There’ll be 4.2 million safety improvement project at the La 
Ronge airport under the federal government’s Airport Capital 
Assistance Program. And La Ronge airport is owned and 
operated by the town of La Ronge and is operated under the 
partnership agreement with Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
This budget is seeing us create opportunities in the North as we 
improve access to northern communities and as we improve the 
efficiency for the timber industry. 
 
A financial investment in our transportation system of a quarter 
billion dollars is considerable, but there certainly are things that 
we have to do beyond that. And though I proudly stand here to 
talk about this $250 million budget for Saskatchewan Highways 
and Transportation, we must all understand that in 
Saskatchewan we will need prairie ingenuity and innovation to 
meet our transportation challenges. 
 
And our policy objective is to achieve substantial transportation 
infrastructure to work for transportation efficiency as well as to 
improve the safety in transportation. We will pursue the greatest 
economic opportunities for our primary highways system. 
 
On our local system we will maximize the potential of 
partnerships. We will capture the local knowledge and insights 
through the area transportation planning committees. And, Mr. 

Chair, I’m very excited about the good work that they have 
done. 
 
In 2000-2001 our policy initiatives will work to improve 
transportation efficiency and effectiveness in road, rail, and air. 
Our pursuit of federal funding will be to benefit both the 
primary and the local systems. 
 
We are looking beyond money as the only answer in 
transportation. And we continue to build transportation 
partnerships, we continue to assist short-line development, we 
continue to build on the concept of area transportation planning. 
It is only through initiatives like these that we can meet the 
challenges that face us in transportation in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have, Mr. Chair, 20 per cent of our nation’s roads and only 
3 per cent of the population of Canada. That is a simple fact and 
that requires us to work and achieve strategic solutions. 
 
I’d like to talk briefly yet about the area of transportation 
planning committees that are working along with our 
department to come up with innovative ways to develop, 
manage, and plan the transportation systems in their areas. We 
have nine right now, area transportation planning committees in 
our province, and two most likely forming fairly quickly. 
 
Area transportation planning committees are building local 
consensus as they study the needs and priorities of their areas 
and as they consider the important and tough issues like grain 
handling and transportation. 
 
Saskatchewan faces two major issues related to federal funding 
of Saskatchewan roads. The first issue is the federal policy 
changes in grain transportation which have resulted in branch 
line closures and increased grain hauling on our local highway 
system. We have called on the federal government to share the 
cost of these policy changes and provide funding to repair these 
highways. 
 
The second major issue is, as I mentioned earlier, the twinning 
of Saskatchewan’s portion of the national highway system. The 
federal budget provided for $100 million in this fiscal year and 
that was for a wide-range of infrastructure projects, not simply 
roads and highways. And that was not for Saskatchewan, but 
for the entire country. 
 
Federal Transport Minister, David Collenette, has indicated to 
us that when a grain reform package came forward it would 
have an accompanying road compensation package. However, 
our conclusion has to be that since the federal government 
hasn’t made up their minds on the grain reform yet, then that 
the road package is still coming. 
 
That conclusion is supported by the reference that Finance 
Minister, Paul Martin, made, Mr. Chair, to grain roads when he 
delivered the federal budget speech. 
 
So I want to, again, thank the members for allowing me to just 
give a rough overview of what took place last year and what we 
are anticipating for the coming year, since I did not have to do 
that. And again I say I do that as much for the people of 
Saskatchewan as anyone. 
 



April 14, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Now, in response to the specific question, the . . . if you just 
give me just one second, please. 
 
Okay, thank you for that indulgence. First of all the reduction 
that you had referred to is actually a federal reduction. It’s a 
reduction to the ACAP (Airport Capital Assistance Program) 
program and of about $3.3 million or 3.5 million I should say. 
And also when the province constructs roads. I mean as we 
continue to construct roads as I alluded to earlier, the 27.5 
kilometres of divided highway in your constituency, obviously 
the amount of maintenance that is required on new roads also 
goes up correspondingly. And so logically we’re going to reach 
a point where there’ll be, I suspect even though not in the near 
future, there’ll be a time when the maintenance will always be 
in excess of the capital construction. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We’re just going to make a little 
comment. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I wish we 
were in a position to pursue this line of questioning, but I’ve 
just been advised that there’s been a horrific accident in my 
constituency on the No. 1 Highway, involving loss of life. 
 
And I would ask that we discontinue this procedure so that I can 
look after the issues that might arise out of this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to join with 
my friend from the constituency of Cypress. I understand there 
was a tour bus, a fiery bus crash which has just happened, just 
very, very recently. 
 
And with that in mind, and so our colleague can go and make 
proper calls and that, I would move the committee rise and 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Please have an enjoyable and pleasant 
weekend, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:14 p.m. 
 
 
 


