





























































Hansard: April 10, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 601 
 April 10, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills in 
opposition to the concept of forced amalgamation of rural 
municipalities. 
 
And these signatories are from the communities of Gull Lake, 
and Tompkins, as well as Webb and Abbey. 
 
I so do present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and this one deals with some of the things that are 
happening in our province dealing with court houses. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen Bench services in the community 
of Weyburn. 

 
And this is signed, obviously, by the people from Weyburn, as 
well from other places such as Yellow Grass and Midale. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions to the Assembly on behalf of people 
throughout Saskatchewan who are opposed to forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Burr, 
from Lanigan, from Humboldt, and from Guernsey, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today regarding a Weyburn court house: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen Bench services in the community 
of Weyburn. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Weyburn and 
Yellow Grass. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased on behalf 
of the residents of Weyburn as well to present a petition in 
support of their court house: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue the Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon 
and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf of the 
citizens of Weyburn and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench service in the community 
of Weyburn. 
 

And it is signed by people from Radville and also Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
Weyburn court house closure, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
The signatures are from people in Midale, Weyburn, Trossachs 
and Griffin. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 
behalf of people in Swift Current concerned about their 
hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital for approximately $7.54 million 
thereby allowing the Swift Current District Health Board 
the opportunity to provide improved health care services. 
 

And Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people in Swift 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Current and Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the great people from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are concerned about their court 
house. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 
 

And this is signed by constituents from Weyburn and Yellow 
Grass. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have petitions to present to keep the Weyburn court house 
open. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And the signators are all from the community of Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I stand too to present a petition 
regarding the court house closure in Weyburn. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this one’s signed from people from Weyburn, Yellow 
Grass, Fillmore; a number of areas in my constituency also. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition concerning the loss of court house services in Weyburn: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the lack of cellular service in the 
Watson area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Watson, Melfort, and 
Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the 
citizens of Weyburn and Midale area. It’s concerning the 
Weyburn courthouse. I’ll read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present dealing with calling for reduced fuel taxes. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures to this petition come from Southey, Regina, 
Raymore, and Wynyard, and also Earl Grey. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition regarding forced amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petitioners signed are from Spiritwood, Mildred, and 
Holbein. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here as well from citizens concerned about the closure of the 
Weyburn court house, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is with great responsibility that I rise to present a petition to 
keep the Weyburn court house open. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good folks of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt any plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To ensure reliable cellular service to Watson and area; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; and 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

With reference to the Humboldt court house: how many 
Court of Queen’s Bench trials or other Queen’s Bench 
proceedings took place in the Humboldt court house in 
1999; please give the dates of each proceeding and or trial; 
what is the detailed breakdown of cost savings the 
provincial government will experience through the removal 
of Court of Queen’s Bench services from Humboldt; what 
will be the increase in costs for other court houses in other 
communities as a result of the closure of the Humboldt 
court house; how many jobs will be lost as the result of this 
closure; and how many of the current employees have been 
offered other jobs within the justice system; and how many 
applications for trial are currently before the Humboldt 
court? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, some very 
distinguished guests sitting in the east gallery; three people that 
have been very instrumental in bringing accountability to the 
Metis association of Saskatchewan and they are to be 
commended for their work. 
 

We have sitting in the east gallery, Mr. John Melenchuk, who is 
the CEO (chief executive officer) of the new Metis Party of 
Saskatchewan. And accompanying John is his mother, Elder 
Bernice Allery and a special friend of John’s, Jodi Neudorf. 
 
And I ask the Assembly to please join with me in extending a 
very, very warm welcome to John, to his mother, Bernice, and 
to Jodi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the House, four individuals seated in your gallery. They are Mr. 
Gillis MacDonald of Leroy, Saskatchewan, president of the 
Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association; Jennifer Ennis, of 
Grenfell, Saskatchewan, a director for the Saskatchewan 
Regional Parks Association; Mr. John Froese of Swift Current, 
an SRPA director; and Mr. Rick Gardiner, the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the community volunteers that 
coordinate the activities of 101 regional parks in our province 
that generates over $10 million worth of revenue, employs 700 
people, offers to 1,000 volunteers. And I’d like you to join with 
me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and through you to the members in the 
House, two people that are sitting in your gallery. These are two 
executives from the Saskatchewan Independent Auto Dealers 
Association. 
 
I’d like to introduce Linda Klassen, a business manager, and 
Bob Roy, the secretary treasurer of that association. They’re 
very interested in what is going to be happening in the 
upcoming debates in the times to come. And I want to welcome 
them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — And if I could, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on 
my feet, I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce 
to you and through you of course to the members, my wife, 
Carrol. She’s the one that rode with me last night — a nice, 
leisurely drive to Regina that turned out to be something in 
stark terror. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a couple of 
people in the gallery that I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members in the House. 
 
Mr. Tom Hengen, who is a friend to many of us in this 
Assembly and a gentlemen from Saskatoon. And also Mr. Gillis 
MacDonald. I think I’d like to join with my colleague in 
welcoming him here as well. He used to be my boss for a 
number of years, so I’m really pleased to see him here today as 
well. 
 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you a good friend, Irene Connaughty from Sedley. 
She’s here today to view the session. 
 
And she is a member of WECADA which is the Weyburn 
Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, a very good organization 
in our community. And their main focus is a commitment to see 
an in-patient treatment centre in the Weyburn area and they 
have worked diligently for many years towards this end. And I 
hope that this government will somehow make their goal 
achievable. 
 
And I would like you to welcome her today. She’s up in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t join with 
members in welcoming Mr. Froese, John Froese here to the 
Assembly and your gallery. 
 
When he is not busy employing people and creating wealth in 
Swift Current at his small business Kruse Glass he is busy 
building Lac Pelletier Regional Park, along with an army of 
volunteers. And he does great job at both I assure you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I just ask members to join again in welcoming John here to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week of April 9 to 
15 is National Volunteers Week, a week during which we 
officially recognize the crucial role that volunteers play in the 
daily life of our communities, our province, our nation, and in 
fact, our world. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan in particular know the value of 
volunteers and the necessity of their work. For example, in 
Saskatoon, 1,400 community volunteers contributed over 
70,000 hours last year. These volunteers are the foundation of 
Saskatoon’s 43 community associations that provide 
neighbourhood-based sport, culture, and recreation activities to 
their community. 
 
Thousands of volunteers give of themselves to make our 
communities and our world a better place to live. Estimates for 
the worth of volunteer efforts for the entire province exceed $20 
million annually in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us recognize how all our lives are enriched in 
every sense of the word by the efforts of volunteers. We 
appreciate their efforts and we thank them for all their hard 
work. 
 
Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Skills Canada Competition 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday I had the 
opportunity to watch a number of students from across the 
province in a Skills Canada competition in P.A. (Prince Albert), 
Carlton and Woodland Campus. I’d been invited by instructor 
Tim Paetkow from L.P. Miller in Nipawin, whose students have 
won the nationals on a number of occasions. 
 
Very impressive — 27 different areas that the kids competed in, 
from flower arranging to welding. L.P. Miller incidentally won 
10 of those. 
 
And personally I was most interested in the automotive section 
where they had about a dozen different areas that the students 
had worked through. The first of those areas was identification 
of parts on a parts board. And I challenged the test and did 
better than some students but not as good as some other ones. 
The Minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) would be pleased to note that answers, big parts and 
small parts, do not give them a correct answer. 
 
The one disappointment though was that there were members of 
organizations from outside of Saskatchewan there busy hiring 
our Saskatchewan students away to other provinces, and 
students were, unfortunately too, interested in other provinces 
when they should have rather had opportunities in our own 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jack Wiebe Named to Senate 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
everyone knows by now on Friday a former member of our 
legislature — and more recently, our former Lieutenant 
Governor — the Hon. Jack Wiebe was named to the Canadian 
Senate. He was named, along with well-known Alberta jazz 
pianist Tommy Banks — a farmer and a musician. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can think of worse pairings in the past. 
 
Of course, we all know and admire Senator Wiebe. He served 
as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for two 
terms during the 1970s here, and was by all accounts a 
formidable member of the opposition. And he served the 
province with tireless distinction as our Lieutenant Governor 
for the last five years. 
 
I think I can say that — regardless of what our opinion on the 
Canadian Senate is — we wish Jack Wiebe well, and he is a 
good choice for this position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wish Senator Wiebe well in his new career as a 
continuing spokesman on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And once, and I’m sure I speak on behalf of us 
all, to thank him for his tireless years of service as our 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Thank you very much. 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Junior Hockey Series 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week in the legislature, the member from North Battleford lost 
hold of his good sense and actually made a challenge to me. It 
seems his local hockey team, the North Stars, find themselves 
in the SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) final 
against the Weyburn Redwings. While it’s not surprising that 
the Redwings are in the final game, I think people are a little 
surprised by their opponents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wings are now up two games to none after 
beating the North Stars twice right in North Battleford. The 
series now moves back to Weyburn where I’m sure the 
Redwings will continue to outshine the North Stars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from North Battleford wanted to be 
fairly safe in his bet — something about a jersey — but I’ve got 
a better idea. How about the winning city gets the other’s court 
house? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Historical Model Legislature 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report 
to the Assembly in preface to Volunteer Week that along with 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, and the member from Moosomin, I 
helped perform a volunteer service that was most educational 
and enjoyable. We served this weekend as Speakers for the 
annual Historical Model Legislature sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association. 
 
I think it safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that your job is not in 
jeopardy. But it is also safe to say that neither the member from 
Moosomin nor I caused a legislative incident. We too ran a tight 
ship. 
 
As is the custom of the model legislature, the high school 
debaters introduced and debated actual Bills from the 1980s 
during the Devine government. For the member from 
Moosomin, of course, this was a trip down memory lane; for me 
it was a dramatic re-living, re-playing of a part of our history 
that I had read about and seen on TV. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when those of us in today’s Assembly decide to 
hand in our Hansards and head for the pasture, we can rest 
assured that our traditions, our Assembly, and our province will 
be placed in capable hands. Along with some good fun the 
debates were skilful, informative, articulate, and passionate. 
 
I can think of no better training for future leaders than to get an 
actual taste of the real process in the people’s arena. These 
students were up to the task, Mr. Speaker. I congratulate them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial High School Girls Basketball 
Championship Winners 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight residents of 

Wishart and area will be gathering in the community hall to 
recognize the success of the Wishart Marauders girls high school 
basketball team. The team won the 1A provincial high school girls 
championship at Hoopla 2000 held last month in Saskatoon. 
 
En route to their victory the Marauders defeated teams from 
Hepburn and Birch Hills, winning the final game 66 to 55. 
 
Tonight a community supper will be held to honour the girls, 
their coach, parents, and fans. The championship banner will be 
presented to the team in recognition of their success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
in congratulating the Wishart Marauders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, 83 years ago yesterday an episode 
in Canadian history — both terrible and wonderful — took 
place. The World War I battle of Vimy Ridge was fought with 
Canadian troops achieving what earlier British and French 
troops could not do, and that was to capture Vimy Ridge. 
 
As with nearly every battle in the first war, we should 
remember this victory was achieved at a terrible cost on both 
sides. Canadian troops suffered over 10,000 casualties with 
3,600 killed. 
 
But this battle for Canada, more than any other, is significant 
because it was just that — a Canadian battle and a Canadian 
victory. As a result of Vimy Ridge, it is said, Canada came into 
its own as a nation, not just as another adjunct of the British 
Empire. It is perhaps said that our passage into national 
maturity had to be a bloody one, but there’s no denying the 
crucial significance of Vimy Ridge in melding Canada into a 
country. 
 
Yesterday there were ceremonies across the country honouring 
the soldiers who fought at Vimy Ridge, only a handful of whom 
are still alive today. I’m proud to stand in this Assembly and 
make this statement because my grandfather was there, as was 
the grandfather of the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Eighty-three years ago is a long time, but we must remember 
our historic achievements. And I’m proud to do so today. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

65th Anniversary of the Head Office of the Ukrainian 
Museum of Canada 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure this 
weekend of attending a 65th anniversary. It was the anniversary 
of the head office of the Ukrainian Museum of Canada. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the head office is actually in Saskatoon, and we 
were very pleased to welcome people from other parts of the 
Canadian hinterland like Toronto and Edmonton to come to this 
event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the sponsors and the 
founders of the Ukrainian Museum of Canada because they 
have done some work which all people of Ukrainian heritage 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

are very proud, and something that reminds us of the trials and 
tribulations that our grandparents went through. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was a special joy to see Luba Goy there 
because I took a lesson from her at how to impersonate Pamela 
Wallin so that I too could join the Air Farce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, last week the official 
opposition took the minister up on his challenge. We uncovered 
hidden fees and secret tax grabs of all kinds and shapes within 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) budget. 
 
And we have some more questions today, Mr. Speaker, 
specifically on the rules of charging the PST (provincial sales 
tax) on used vehicles. Mr. Minister, here’s my question. A 
grandfather wants to give his used vehicle as a gift to his 
grandson who will be going off to university. The vehicle’s red 
book value is $8,000 but no money will change hands. It is a 
straight gift. When the young man registers the vehicle in his 
name, will he have to pay the PST on the book value of that 
vehicle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I firstly want to point out that 
there are some situations where family transfers of vehicles are 
exempt from the PST. And I don’t have a copy of the bulletin in 
front of me but I’ll be pleased to clarify that with the member. 
But I want to say to the member that when the book value is 
applied with respect to the sale of a used vehicle, the book value 
is applied with respect to the wholesale value not the retail 
value. 
 
And it won’t be very often that a vehicle is purchased at less 
than the wholesale value; and when it is, Mr. Speaker, it has 
been the practice of SGI for many years, having nothing to do 
with this recent budget, to charge tax on the basis of the 
wholesale value when the PST has not previously been paid on 
the used vehicle. 
 
That is nothing new, Mr. Speaker. And I might add that the 
Canadian Automobile Association said on Friday, and the 
member will be aware, that this is the only appropriate way to 
calculate value in instances where the tax needs to be paid, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP policy on taxing used cars is fundamentally flawed. 
People of Saskatchewan are having to pay tax on money that 
they don’t even spend. Only the NDP could find a way to tax 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the independent auto dealers association is also 
very concerned about the used car tax policy. There are 

approximately 550 licensed used car dealers in Saskatchewan. 
These businesses are now at a disadvantage due to the $3,000 
tax free exemption on private sales of used vehicles. They 
believe this unfair policy will create an underground market and 
drive many of their members out of business. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you extend the $3,000 tax exemption to auto 
dealers who are selling used vehicles? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is trying to 
play both sides of the street here and I’ll tell you why. Because 
what they will not say in this House, Mr. Speaker, is that both 
the Saskatchewan Automobile Dealers’ Association and the 
Saskatchewan independent auto dealers association have both 
come out in support of the PST on used cars . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is 
that in many instances — and I have many letters supporting it, 
Mr. Speaker — in many instances there is a considerable saving 
for the consumer. For example, Mr. Colin Gaudry of CAPITAL 
PONTIAC BUICK in Regina says — this is on CKRM: when a 
person is trading in a vehicle they only pay the PST on the 
difference rather than the entire purchase price of the vehicle, 
which of course that applies to all new vehicles, and also 
nowadays because of leasing, a majority of used vehicles 
because the PST hasn’t been previously paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a tax saving . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the Minister 
of Finance that the independent auto dealers are listening to his 
answer and I don’t believe they agree with the minister who did 
not consult with them in any way, shape or form. And in fact, 
these dealers were caught off guard when you delivered your 
budget. Those 550 dealers have a combined tax-paid inventory 
on their lots of — now get this — $300 million. These dealers 
stand to lose millions of dollars on this inventory due to your 
short-sighted tax policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, you could have given them until July 1 to clear 
out their existing inventory. Or you could have given them 
some notice so they could make business adjustments but 
instead you chose to ram the PST expansion through. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you consider negotiating an input tax credit 
for used car dealers or at least grandfather their existing 
tax-paid inventory? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s 
first question about the gift to a relative, I can confirm that this 
would not be taxable. First-degree relative is considered to be a 
spouse, a parent, step-parent, child, step-child, grandparent and 
step-grandparent. And in none of those cases is tax payable, Mr. 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

Speaker. So I say to the Leader of the Opposition, get your facts 
straight before you raise these questions in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I want to say something else, Mr. 
Speaker. When the Leader of the Opposition stands up and says 
there should be no $3,000 deductible on used car sales, he’s 
calling for a tax increase to consumers not a tax decrease, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s calling for a tax increase, so he’d better get his 
numbers straight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister quite, I think 
possibly on purpose, avoided answering my question. These 
dealers have a combined tax-paid inventory of $300 million on 
their lot and they have to pay that because they were given no 
prior warning of what was coming in your budget. 
 
I asked you, Mr. Minister, if you would make some 
adjustments, give them some time to clear out this inventory, or 
give them an input tax credit so that they can deal with this 
unexpected cost to their business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member wants to get up 
in this House and suggest that in representing the dealers he’s 
on the side of the consumer because he’s implying the dealers 
are opposed to PST on used cars. Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 
further from the truth. Both automobile dealer associations in 
this province have indicated to me that they support the PST on 
used cars because it will save the consumer money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is not talking about saving the 
consumer money, Mr. Speaker; he’s talking about the profit 
margin of the car dealer. He’s talking about, Mr. Speaker, a tax 
increase to consumers — that’s what he’s talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, there are 550 businesses in 
Saskatchewan that are at risk because they were caught by this 
budget with inventory and tax paid that they now have to pay 
again, Mr. Speaker. They are expected to eat millions of dollars 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I’m not sitting 
that far away from the Leader of the Opposition and I can 
hardly hear him. Please, order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the Minister of 
Finance if he will answer my question. Will he make provision 
for these 550 important businesses in Saskatchewan so that they 
will not be caught with this tax grab in this budget because they 
weren’t warned that they would have to eat the sales tax that 
they’ve already paid on these vehicles — some $300 million in 
inventory. Will he at least do that for these 550 businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the new system is supported 
by both automobile dealer associations in Saskatchewan 
because it involves a tax on difference, Mr. Speaker, which is 
good for the consumer. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, when he comes into this House 
and says that there should be no $3,000 deductible on used car 
sales for private sales, is advocating, Mr. Speaker, that 
consumers should pay more tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s come into this House the last number of days saying that 
there’s a tax on ordinary people because of the expanded PST. 
Now he says the PST should be expanded further, Mr. Speaker, 
so I’d like to know, whose side is he really on, Mr. Speaker? 
And I think we see by the questions here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Parks 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Finance as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association is 
very concerned about the lack of a long-term commitment in 
your budget. They say that your budget does not live up to 
statements made by your government over the last year, and 
now they are being forced to consider a number of difficult 
measures, including the closure of some regional parks. You 
received a letter last week outlining these concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps have you taken to address the serious 
concerns raised by the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll advise the member in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that I met with the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association some time ago. And one of their — they had 
several concerns actually — but one of their concerns was the 
need to improve capital infrastructure in the parks. And what I 
did in the budget — which was delivered on March 29 — was, 
among other things, to create a $5 million fund per year for four 
years to improve infrastructure in parks and heritage sites. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I received a letter on Friday, Mr. Speaker, 
and I have already communicated to the president of the 
regional parks association that I would be pleased to meet with 
him and his colleagues to discuss how they might access some 
of that money, and that’s what we should do. And I invited 
them, Mr. Speaker, to join with us in a positive and proactive 
way to try to resolve some of the issues that are outstanding. 
And I invite the member to be proactive and positive as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Minister, the response that they 
got from you at about 2 p.m. last Friday afternoon was not the 
response that you just indicated and the one that they were 
looking for. 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

The minister phoned the association’s executive director Rick 
Gardiner. At first, Mr. Gardiner thought the minister was 
calling to discuss the concerns outlined in his letter. Instead, the 
minister proceeded to blast Mr. Gardiner for even sending a 
letter in the first place. He demanded an apology. He called Mr. 
Gardiner rude. He told him to clean up his act. And he said he 
was giving his board bad advice. In short, Mr. Minister, you 
tried to bully and intimidate Mr. Gardiner into changing his 
position outlined in the letter. 
 
Mr. Minister, the person who should apologizing is you. Mr. 
Minister, will you apologize to Mr. Gardiner and his association 
for your confrontational and inappropriate phone call? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I will invite Mr. Gardiner to 
release the letter that he sent to the Minister of the Environment 
to the media, and people can be their own judges as to the tone 
of the letter. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that I had a very 
pleasant conversation with the president of the association at 
approximately 9:30 p.m. on Friday evening, Mr. Gillis 
MacDonald, where I indicated to Mr. MacDonald that we 
needed to have a positive and proactive approach, that I did not 
think the letter from Mr. Gardiner indicated that. 
 
And I invited Mr. MacDonald to, notwithstanding the tone of 
the letter, sit down with us and develop a criteria whereby we 
could assist the regional parks to get on with the job of finding 
some funds for needed capital infrastructure improvements. 
 
I invited Mr. MacDonald to do that. He’s here. He is confirming 
that; he can confirm that. It was a perfectly pleasant 
conversation, and we’re going to do it, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
going to play politics like the member over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, for nine years now this 
NDP government has bullied and intimidated anyone who 
disagreed with them. Well it’s not working any more. You can 
only push people so far before they start to push back. 
Saskatchewan people have had it with this budget, they’ve had 
it with this minister, and they’ve had it with this government — 
and they’re not going to take it any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people finally stand up to the schoolyard 
bully, he usually winds up getting the beating of his life. That’s 
exactly what the NDP is headed for in the next election. 
 
Mr. Minister, your call to the regional parks association was 
completely inappropriate. Will you apologize to Mr. Gardiner 
and his association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat to the member 
opposite in the House that Mr. Gardiner can release his letter to 
the media. I suggested to Mr. Gardiner that his letter was 

somewhat threatening to the Minister of the Environment and I 
thought did not display a positive or proactive tone. I then 
indicated I would take the matter up with the president of the 
association. 
 
I had a very cordial conversation with the president of the 
association; there was no problem whatsoever. And we agreed, 
contrary to the member’s tone, that the association should sit 
down with us, talk about the criteria for the capital fund that has 
been created, and we should get on with the job of repairing 
some of the infrastructure in the regional parks. 
 
Now what is this about? Is it about actually helping the regional 
parks association — is that what this is about? Or is it about the 
member playing politics in this House, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I say let’s get on with the job of working on the infrastructure in 
a positive way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My next 
question is for the Premier. 
 
These are not the facts as they have been relayed to us by the 
Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. And I have no idea 
who it is that the minister thinks he was speaking to. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, obviously your Finance minister is 
completely out of control here. First he raises taxes and tries to 
pass it off as a tax cut. Then he tries to hide dozens of fee 
increases and back-door taxes in his budget. Then when he gets 
caught, he says it’s not his job to tell the people what’s in the 
budget, it’s the opposition’s job. 
 
Then instead of conducting an independent review to decide if 
fee hikes are fair, he says we should go to court. And now the 
regional parks association writes a letter raising legitimate 
concerns about the budget; he phones up their executive 
director and tries to bully him into retracting his letter. 
 
Mr. Premier, this budget is a disaster, this minister is a disaster. 
Will you tell your minister to apologize to the regional parks 
association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 
member opposite and to the House that I find it extremely 
hypocritical for the members opposite to get up and talk about 
anybody talking about going to court, because on Thursday of 
last week, the Leader of the Opposition said that he was going 
to get up and take the taxpayers and the public and the 
government to court over certain disagreements about fees. 
 
I said to the Leader of the Opposition on Thursday that if he had 
any problem whatsoever with our fees and charges, he should 
do his job and bring it up in the legislature — that’s what I said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was the Leader of the Opposition that is talking 
about going to court — not me and not this government. And as 
far as we’re concerned, parliament should be respected, the 
legislature should be respected; and let’s resolve our differences 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

on the floor of the legislature, not in the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Municipal Government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. 
Minister, the task force on municipal amalgamation is meeting 
in Yorkton tonight and we understand it’s going to be a full 
house. But some of us are a little concerned about your travel 
plans. You see there’s talk that you plan to boycott your own 
meeting, Mr. Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the official opposition wants to make sure 
there’s no reason for you to miss tonight’s meeting. I’m heading 
out to Yorkton right after question period and there’s lots of 
room in my car. You’re welcome to jump in with me. 
 
Will you confirm for the people back home — in Yorkton, in 
your constituency — that you’ll be in Yorkton tonight? Mr. 
Minister, are you planning to attend tonight’s task force 
meeting in Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to, first of all, thank the member for the 
opportunity for the trip to Yorkton, but I’ve seen the kind of trip 
that this member’s been on and I’m not sure I want to be part of 
that. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Garcea and his committee are travelling the province and this is 
now their second week of consultations. In their first week of 
consultations, Mr. Speaker, I had staff available at all of those 
meetings. And this week, when they’re consulting across the 
province, I’m going to have staff there at those meetings as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an opportunity for the committee to hear the 
public’s view. This is a non-partisan opportunity for the public 
to speak about a consultation process that was established in 
this province for us to get a better appreciation of where we 
should be going with legislative reform in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I can see 
why the minister would have reservations about going out to 
Yorkton even though it’s his own constituency; I think he 
knows the reception that he’d get tonight if he did show up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question for the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve probably been briefed in what’s been 
happening at the task force meetings. But I can summarize for 
you — people across Saskatchewan are strongly opposed to 

forced municipal amalgamation by your NDP government. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit in the legislature today, and at 
tonight’s meeting in Yorkton, that your government will not 
introduce legislation in this session that forces municipalities to 
amalgamate? Will you make that commitment today, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very . . . actually 
amazed by the question that the member asks. Because the 
member first says that what should happen in this province is 
that you should have a group of men and women who should go 
out and consult about what the future of municipal reform 
should be in this province. 
 
And so that’s what Mr. Garcea and his committee are doing — 
they’re out there consulting. And they’re a committee, Mr. 
Speaker, that has been assembled by the government. And 
they’re out there doing the consultations. 
 
Now the member opposite says I should go to the meeting and I 
should sit down and I should make a presentation to the 
committee on what the government expects should happen with 
municipal reform. Why would the government do that, Mr. 
Speaker, when in fact, we’re asking the people of Saskatchewan 
to direct us what we should do in this province with municipal 
reform. 
 
It’s a foolish kind of request for me to be a part of that — the 
government consulting with itself, Mr. Speaker. How can that 
be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this minister doesn’t realize that consultation works 
two ways. The task force has consultation with the public, but 
the public should have input back. This task force is on its 
second trip around the province but is making no attempt to 
listen to what people are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next week Saskatchewan’s rural municipalities are 
holding an emergency convention. It’s on forced amalgamation. 
They feel it’s that important. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, some municipalities are also asking us about 
a NDP plan to freeze municipal reserve funds. Is that true, Mr. 
Minister? Are you and your government about to freeze these 
reserves that municipalities have built up in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, last week on Friday I stood 
before the member in the House and provided for him some 
information of four different reports that are done in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, about what we should be doing in terms 
of restructuring and reform in this province and giving 
municipalities greater responsibility. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I now have a fifth report. It was done in 
1992, and it says something like this. It says changes are 
inevitable. Urban municipalities must provide leadership. Then 
it goes on to say, this report is not merely a call for discussion, 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

it’s a call for action. And then it goes on to say this, Mr. 
Speaker. It is vital that this process begin immediately, in 1992. 
Too often when important changes are made necessary, people 
wait for the perfect moment to begin — when they have enough 
money, when they have completed an agreement, or when they 
are certain they have all of the answers. All of these conditions, 
this writer says, will never exist. And who wrote this? Mr. Reg 
Downs is a party to writing that one. It was your chief of staff 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
question was short and should be easy to answer — yes or no. 
Is this NDP government planning to freeze municipal reserve 
funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to say to the member opposite 
in the House. This government has always said that there is a 
process in place today to review and study what will happen 
with municipal reform in the province. That’s our commitment, 
that’s been the Premier’s commitment, that’s this government’s 
commitment, and we’re going to continue to honour his 
commitment in spite of all of the documentation that has been 
provided to us — by even good learned people on your side of 
the House. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you’ll forgive the people of Saskatchewan if they don’t trust 
your NDP government. This same NDP government that 
amalgamated the hospital boards and then confiscated their 
reserve funds by the millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, those hospital board reserves were raised locally 
through family gifts and community charities, but that didn’t 
stop the NDP from confiscating that money. Now 
municipalities are facing the same thing. An NDP government 
that’s going to force amalgamation and then take municipal 
reserve funds. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you stand in the House today and make a 
clear statement that your government will not now, or in the 
future, confiscate the reserve funds of Saskatchewan 
municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important here is that, as 
Mr. Garcea and his community have been doing their work, the 
Saskatchewan Party has been travelling across the province in 
small little pockets and also having their own discussions about 
what’s going to happen in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And they talk about, Mr. Speaker, communities not having an 
identity. And they talk about communities losing their 

resources. And they talk about communities not being able to 
provide any leadership. And what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’re out there scaring and dividing people in the way in 
which the Saskatchewan Party knows how to do. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, tell us what your plan is. 
Tell us what your plan is about municipal reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, please, order, 
please. Order. The Table officers are calling out Bills, 
Introduction of Bills, and with all the noise going on, I’m sure 
members aren’t able to hear what Bills are being called. Please 
call the Bills once more. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22 - The Local Improvements 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Local Improvements Amendment Act, 2000 be introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2000 be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17  The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Child Care Amendment 
Act, 2000. 
 
We often hear it said that our children represent our hope for the 
future. Research leaves little doubt that the quality of care we 
provide for our youngest children today will have a significant 
impact upon the quality of that future both for them and for us. 
 
Every day thousands of children in this province are cared for 
outside of their own homes by people other than their parents. 
This alternate care may be provided in the home of the 
caregiver or in a child care centre. As the government we 
believe we have a responsibility to do all that we can to ensure 
the safety and well-being of all these children while meeting the 
needs of their parents for reliable, affordable child care. 
 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

For some time we have heard concerns expressed over the lack 
of child care, particularly in rural areas. Often child care is 
needed while parents work at part-time or full-time jobs. 
 
For others, the absence of quality child care during peak periods 
on the farm such as seeding and harvest time means trying to 
balance child care and supervision with the demands of the 
farming season. As we’re all aware, despite the very best efforts 
of the most devoted and loving parents, this balancing act can 
lead to significant safety concerns both for children and adults. 
 
Rural families tell us there is often no child care available 
within a reasonable driving distance because most of those 
willing to care for children also live on farms which may be 
many miles away. Although they may have a second home in 
the nearest town, they cannot operate from that home because 
the Act, as it currently exists, states that a family child care 
home must be operated out of the operator’s principal residence 
only. 
 
To respond to these concerns, Mr. Speaker, we propose to 
amend The Child Care Act to permit individuals to provide 
family child care in residential settings other than their principal 
residence. This would provide the family child care home 
operator with the option of providing child care from a location 
which is more convenient for those who need the service. 
 
Another issue for many communities involves their inability to 
sustain year-round, centre-based child care either because of the 
seasonal or part-time needs or because of smaller child 
population bases. At the same time traditional family child care 
homes for eight or fewer children cannot accommodate larger 
families and flexible needs. 
 
While two local individuals might like to jointly provide child 
care for more than eight children, they have unfortunately been 
prohibited from doing so by the Act because such a service does 
not fall within the existing definitions of either a child care 
centre or a family child care home. 
 
In 1995-96 funding was provided to pilot child care programs in 
rural and northern communities which may not be able to 
sustain year-round, centre-based child base. One model which 
emerged was group family child care, a model which allows an 
individual to be licensed to care for up to 12 children provided 
there is a second adult caregiver when there are more than eight 
children present. 
 
This new model can be, at times, superior to the traditional 
family child care model in that there may be fewer children in 
the care of one caregiver, providing for closer supervision and 
greater interaction between child and caregiver. Parents like this 
model and said they felt more secure knowing there were two 
adults caring for and available to their children. 
 
As a result of its success as a pilot, Mr. Speaker, we propose to 
amend the Act to allow for the operation of group family child 
care homes for up to 12 children with two caregivers. To ensure 
the safety and well-being of children attending group family 
child care homes and because of the higher number of children 
who may be enrolled, all group family child care homes, unlike 
family child care homes, must be licensed. 
 

To further protect our children, Mr. Speaker, we will amend 
The Child Care Act to clarify and strengthen the legislation 
governing the number of children who can be cared for in 
family child care homes. 
 
We will continue to enforce the limit of eight children with 
further limits by age in family child care homes whether 
licensed or unlicensed. While there are some who may feel 
there should be no limit on the number of children a family 
child care home can accept, I think we have to keep in mind that 
the safety and well-being of the children must be our first 
priority. The ability of a caregiver to evacuate children in the 
case of a fire, for example, is of primary importance. 
 
(1430) 
 
Realistically, Mr. Speaker, young children require a great deal 
of individual care and attention. Even the most capable, loving, 
and responsible caregiver would find it trying at times to care 
for, supervise, and ensure the safety of more than eight young 
children of varying ages. 
 
In addition to those I have described, we are proposing several 
minor amendments which are of a housekeeping nature and 
which do not change the policy direction of the Act. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments to The Child 
Care Act will help to address the child care difficulties 
experienced by rural families. They represent as well one small 
step towards ensuring the safety and well-being of every child 
who spends time in a licensed or unlicensed child care facility 
whether it be a family child care home, a group family child 
care home, or a child care centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Child Care 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, this is a important piece of legislation that requires 
careful study to determine certainly the intent and direction of 
the legislation. 
 
The minister will know that in urban areas there is largely good 
and very adequate child care facilities. 
 
In rural parts of the province it’s a little more challenging to say 
the least and I know of numerous situations in my constituency 
where people have difficulty both in terms of finding care and 
finding care that can provide them and meet their needs as 
parents as well. 
 
And I’m sure the minister is aware of some of the 
circumstances that surround these types of facilities — concerns 
about part-time employees being able to, on very, very short 
notice, go into work; but also to be able to find a caregiver that 
is able to look after their child or children in a very short period 
of time. And that’s the challenge, Mr. Minister, that we have to 
meet in terms of this piece of legislation. 
 
While we certainly understand and agree with the general 
direction that you’re going here, there’s also concerns about 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

whether or not, as I say, a part-time employee who may be 
called in on a few hours notice is able to find adequate care for 
their children in that very short period of time. 
 
And it’s not only the parent in this, and the child in this 
circumstance, there’s also the caregiver themselves trying to 
schedule additional help to come in to maintain the ratio of, I 
believe it’s 8:1 — one caregiver for every eight children in the 
facility. So there’s certainly a great deal of thought that must be 
given to this piece of legislation before we see that it moves 
forward. 
 
In basic principle, we have not that many disagreements here in 
this legislation. But we want to have an opportunity certainly to 
speak to the minister and speak to the department, as well as 
caregivers and parents around Saskatchewan about the 
circumstances that they are faced with, with respect to this type 
of legislation. 
 
So, in order to facilitate the opportunity to speak with those 
people across the province, and with the department as well as 
the minister further on it, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 34,671 people with account balances 
totalling $2.17 billion in the Public Employees Pension Plan as 
at March 31, 2000, and 98 participating employers. 
 
Benefits Canada has reported that the Public Employees 
Pension Plan is the largest defined contribution plan in Canada. 
That’s actually quite amazing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The larger employers with employees participating in the plan 
are the Government of Saskatchewan, SaskTel, and SaskPower. 
The proposed Bill allows members to transfer their pension 
assets from their previous employer’s pension plan to the Public 
Employees Pension Plan through a portability agreement. The 
transfer option is only available to members who are changing 
employers and pension plans and are seeking to move their 
asset from another pension plan. 
 
At present, a reciprocal agreement is the only means available 
for transferring the member’s pension money and pensionable 
service. Effective April 1, 2003, employers will be required to 
remit employee and employer contributions to the pension plan 
within 15 days of the member’s date of pay. 
 
The earlier remittance of contributions allows members to earn 
investment returns on contributions sooner rather than later. At 
present, employers are required to remit contributions within 15 
days after the month for which the contributions pertain. 
However, most participating employers currently adhere to the 
new standard. 
 

The Bill, as proposed, vests members upon the earlier of one 
year of membership in the plan or two years of employment 
with the participating employer. Once vested, members are 
entitled to any contributions made by the employer on the 
member’s behalf. 
 
Upon the passing of this Bill, members can withdraw voluntary 
contributions made after January 1, 2001, within one year of 
termination of employment. The money can be taken as cash or 
moved to a registered retirement savings bond. Money received 
from a locked-in retirement account, a life income fund, or a 
locked-in retirement income fund must remain locked in for 
transfer purposes. This enhancement provides members with 
more flexibility regarding their voluntary contributions. After 
one year, the voluntary contributions revert to their locked-in 
status to protect the member’s money for retirement purposes. 
 
One of the goals of the Public Employees Pension Plan, Mr. 
Speaker, is to offer members as much flexibility as possible 
with respect to their pension asset in accordance with governing 
legislation. Upon the approval of this Bill, the retirement age 
for members will be reduced from age 55 to age 50. This 
benefit provides members with more flexibility for retirement 
planning. It may also mean a lower pension, of course, Mr. 
Speaker, and since it’s a defined contribution plan it does not 
mean more cost to the public treasury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll address the major amendments proposed to the 
Public Employees Pension Plan Act. Amendments of a 
housekeeping nature are also included in the Bill. All proposals, 
however, allow the plan to provide improved benefits while 
adhering to the scope and intent of other governing legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Finance minister 
certainly moves an important piece of legislation forward and 
we’ve had opportunity over the last months and indeed, years, 
to talk to public service employees about their concerns in this 
area of portability when it comes to their pensions. 
 
As we know, in modern society today, Mr. Speaker, people are 
moving employment around . . . moving as employees around 
to various different operations and in government and outside of 
government. And, as a society we are doing everything we can I 
think to encourage people to take their future in their hands and 
certainly be responsible in terms of their pensions and the 
direction of that. We’re not so confident that we will see 
pension plans from the province . . . well, not the province but 
the state, eventually in place. So there is certainly a degree of 
importance in what is happening here. 
 
In order to have opportunity to continue the dialogue and 
continue the discussion with members of the public service, we 
would want to take some time to look at this Bill in its entirety 
and certainly speak with them to see if there is further concerns 
and whether this piece of legislation meets the needs of people 
that are in this type of circumstance of looking for portability in 
their pension. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn Bill No. 18 to 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

facilitate that discussion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill 
No. 14 amends The Film Employment Tax Credit Act of 1998. 
After the implementation of the film employment tax credit, the 
film and video community made representation to the 
Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing, 
identifying areas of concern in The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Act. 
 
Department officials reviewed these items and concurred that 
changes needed to be made. The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2000 proceeds the following amendments: 
 
Change the audit provisions of the Act to allow small producers 
under 200,000 the option of providing an affidavit, and 
medium-sized productions under 500,000 the option of 
providing a review engagement instead of a complete audited 
financial statement . . . a complete audit statement. 
 
Secondly, add the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, CBC, 
and the National Film Board to the list of organizations whose 
financial assistance is excluded from the definition of 
government assistance. 
 
Thirdly, revise the declaration of residency requirements which 
eliminate the need for witnessing by a Commissioner for Oaths, 
notary public, or Justice of the Peace, and establish a minimum 
salary paid, under each a declaration of residency would not be 
required. 
 
And fourthly, change the Canada television and cable 
production fund to its new name which is the Canadian 
television fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Act of 1998 has greatly contributed to the growth of the 
film-video industry in Saskatchewan. In 1997 the film and 
video productions in Saskatchewan was 26 million, and in 1998 
with the implementation of the film employment tax credit, film 
and video productions increased to 58 million. 
 
This not only contributed to the economic growth of the 
province, but created employment in the industry which 
continues to contribute to the cultural expressions of our 
province. 
 
With this growth in the industry, many production companies 
are now also developing and producing larger and more 
expensive drama projects, often in co-operation with other 
Canadian and international companies through production 
agreements. This evolution is positive from both the corporate 
and cultural perspective as it enables the development of crew 
and personnel resources, strengthens the companies, and helps 
to establish Saskatchewan’s presence on the national and 
international marketplace. 
 
The film employment tax credit will continue to enhance the 

strengths of the film and video industry in its ongoing growth 
and development in the industry, establishing production 
volumes that could reach a hundred million dollars in the next 
few years. As well, at this productive level, the industry would 
generate over 1,000 person-years in direct employment and 
almost 3,000 people-years of direct and indirect employment. 
 
We recognize that the film employment tax credit has been, and 
will continue to be, a critical element in the film and video 
industry infrastructure. And we want to congratulate the 
industry on its growth and success. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to move the second reading of Bill 
No. 14, An Act to amend The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and to the minister opposite, certainly this is again another piece 
of legislation that requires some in-depth discussion and 
certainly an opportunity to speak with the stakeholders to 
determine whether they feel that this Bill meets their needs as 
well. 
 
The film industry is growing in Saskatchewan and also it’s 
growing very much so in its importance to our economy in this 
province. I’m encouraged when I hear the minister say that the 
growth from $28 million to 58 million in a one-year period, it 
certainly, I think, is a great step forward for the industry here in 
Saskatchewan, that we are looking forward to seeing further 
growth in the future. 
 
I’ve had occasion over the last number of years to attend a few 
of their productions and found them to be . . . the quality of 
production to be indeed first rate. And all, I think, in the 
Assembly would be very proud of the work the industry is 
doing here in this province, and the expansion I think speaks to 
the need and also to the opportunity that the industry has for 
growth in the province now and well into the future. 
 
So it certainly is — from our side and from our perspective — 
an important industry and growth opportunity for a business and 
business activity as well as indeed growth for the arts 
community in our province. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in order to have opportunity to speak with 
members of the general public about the importance of the 
industry and of this piece of legislation, we’d want to take the 
adequate time to go through the legislation and determine 
whether it meets the needs of everyone involved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn Bill No. 14 at 
this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 3 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with great pleasure that I rise to participate in the debate about 
The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the House is no doubt aware, this legislation 
really in essence is an extension of the legislation that was 
passed in 1996, and it really extended the provisions that were 
implemented in the Act in 1996 as a result of the Dorsey 
commission in health care reorganization. 
 
In the Dorsey commission report and the legislation that 
followed, there was a major reorganization in the bargaining 
units in the health care field where there was, I believe, I recall 
something over 500 individual bargaining units, and the Dorsey 
recommendation process suggested that there would be better 
labour harmony in the health care workplace if these units were 
reduced in number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since that time we have certainly seen anything 
but peace in the health care labour force. Mr. Speaker, it 
certainly is fair to say that the government has, in an attempt to 
bring a peace in the health care working field, in many instances 
has alienated those very workers. And because the government 
has done that, the improvements that were envisaged by the 
Dorsey commission are pretty hard to understand as really 
becoming reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that this government has with 
their workers in the health care field is the fact that they simply 
do not understand what stresses and what pressures are 
occurring on the front-line worker front. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to review some of these issues. 
 
And certainly the issues were brought to a boiling point last 
year when the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses engaged in a 
strike in an attempt to improve the conditions in the workplace, 
in attempt to make sure that the issues of recruitment and 
retention were going to be sufficiently addressed. And everyone 
in this province will remember how absolutely convinced the 
nurses are that these issues are fundamentally important to 
improvements in the health care delivery system in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it sort of strikes me as bizarre is that in many 
instances where this government seems to lose track of the 
connection between what’s happening in the workplace in 
health care and what some theoretical model should be as 
proposed by Dorsey. Mr. Speaker, what happens in many 
instances is there simply is no understanding at all of what 
front-line care workers are attempting to struggle with day after 
day as they struggle to provide first-rate services in a system 
that is entirely under pressure and in many instances badly 
underfunded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is an everyday occurrence 

for front-line health care workers is the issue of overtime. We 
are certainly . . . we have certainly come to realize that we are 
short of qualified front-line care workers. And it really was a bit 
of a concern that we had earlier on this year, when the 
government solution to that was going to be to simply override 
the requirements for entry-level nurses in their field and simply 
say to the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association what 
standards you and your members have decided were appropriate 
were renounced a decade ago are no longer going to be valid 
and we simply are going to override your responsibilities. 
 
And I’m really pleased that the pressure that was brought to 
bear on the government resulted in an accommodation and a 
backing away from that position. And so the legitimate 
credentials and the responsibilities of the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association were acknowledged and 
realized. And I think that it again is one of those examples of 
saying the government knows what’s best, the government 
comes out with something that is an ill-thought out, 
ill-conceived idea for what the problems are in health care in 
the labour force, and then had to back away from the position 
when they realized it was simply untenable. 
 
And too often, time and time again, these same kinds of 
arbitrary decisions are happening and it is not conducive to 
building a better workplace and building more harmony in the 
workplace. Recently as well we observed with, I think everyone 
with great deal of pain, to see the licensed practical nurses 
engaged in lawsuits against the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
and the registered nurses’ association in order to deal with the 
issues of scope of practice. 
 
And again it just indicates the level of frustration that is 
happening out in the health care workplace that these types of 
actions are felt to be the only recourse that an association has in 
redressing some of the outstanding issues that confront the 
workers in the front line in our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think is important to 
recognize is all across this province every single day literally 
thousands of nurses and licensed practical nurses and front line 
care workers that belong to other bargaining units are working 
diligently, 8 and 12 hours a day, and sometimes into overtime, 
to try to provide the very best health care that they’re capable of 
providing. They’re the unsung heroes in the whole health care 
field that are toiling under some pretty adverse conditions, in 
many instances, to see that health care is delivered appropriately 
and effectively in a caring and a compassionate way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite often what happens is that instead of 
the government assisting that process, in many instances they’re 
part of the problem rather than being part of the solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recommendations in the Dorsey report that this 
is an extension of, were envisaged to be put into practice within 
a three-year period, and that three-year period essentially is 
expiring. And the purpose of this legislation is to extend the 
operational provisions of the Dorsey report and the 1996 
legislation for a further three-year period of time. 
 
In discussion with some of the people that are affected by this 
legislation, they are certainly understanding that it’s too late — 
you can’t put the genie back in the bottle, that you can’t undo 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

what has been done three years ago — and they acknowledge 
that. 
 
They also have though expressed a concern about the 
requirement that this should be doubled in length and that it 
should be taking so long to get these recommendations 
approved and passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is always of interest in this exercise that there 
always seems to be perceived that there’s winner and losers. 
And certainly, by and large, we would hope that the winners in 
this kind of an exercise are the people of the province and the 
people that are affected by the changes that this legislation and 
the Dorsey report’s provisions address. 
 
But that still is sort of an ongoing question and it still . . . there 
are a lot of people that still express grave concerns about what 
is happening in a practical way in the health care field as 
compared to the theory that was announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess that’s what makes us so nervous when we 
hear of going from large numbers of units to a small number on 
basis of a theory. When you see what happens in practice, it 
doesn’t meet expectations in many instances. And I think that 
the move towards amalgamation in health care and the 
bargaining units has not completely lived up to its billing. There 
has been some progress made, and I think that that is important, 
but much more work needs to be done. And this government 
has to take an attitude of being helpful rather than a hindrance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we still have a number of people that are calling 
us and contacting us about situations in the workplace that they 
want to bring to our attention. And we think that that process 
and dialogue and the opportunity to meet and discuss with these 
individuals what is actually happening in the workplace as a 
result of the 1996 legislation and is envisaged to be continued 
under this legislation, we think it’s very important for health 
care workers to be able to have some time to continue to raise 
the concerns that they have about what’s happening in the 
workplace with ourselves as the official opposition. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we know that this discussion has to be 
ongoing, and so at this time I would like to move adjournment 
on debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 4 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1999 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation surrounding changes to the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan is certainly of great interest to the official opposition and I 
think of interest to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
You may know, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan operates out of Kindersley. And so, it’s certainly a 
valuable contributor to the economy in Kindersley and certainly 
provides an important service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

It is a pension plan that has been in place for sometime. And it 
is the only pension plan, only tax-deferred pension plan, open to 
Saskatchewan residents that are not eligible for RRSP 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan) contributions such as 
stay-at-home parents. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, as we know, there are a large number of 
people in that type of a situation. And it certainly follows on the 
Minister of Finance’s piece of legislation about the importance 
of pension contributions and the importance of having pensions 
and the portability of pensions. 
 
Well, I would want to certainly bring to the attention of the 
Assembly that there are many people in Saskatchewan that this 
is the only opportunity they have to contribute to a pension 
plan. Otherwise they simply would be out of luck when it 
comes to operating and having the opportunity to contribute to a 
good strong pension plan in Saskatchewan. There is no other 
opportunity for them. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has some 30,000 members and 
about $173 million invested into the plan. So it is a very, very 
large investment of Saskatchewan people in Saskatchewan, and 
indeed into their futures. 
 
The minister has called within this piece of legislation very 
minor changes; at least he characterizes them as minor 
housekeeping in nature. He has not made specific changes that 
will not change the makeup of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
The plan continues to be a very popular savings tool for 
Saskatchewan residents and we certainly support that pension 
plan here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The pension plan, however, was significantly harmed, I believe, 
by the government’s actions a number of years ago when they 
took away the contribution from the province of Saskatchewan 
— the matching contribution. While we certainly understand 
the fiscal restraints within the province of Saskatchewan, I think 
it is also important to do everything we can to encourage people 
in the initial years of start-up contributions to making 
contributions to pension plans. And you know, the years seem 
to slip by for all of us, and I think many people that at age 25 or 
age 21 or something like that find themselves now 50 years old 
or more and wish they had of contributed to pensions over the 
years. 
 
And so anything that a government or a society in general can 
do to encourage people to make contributions to a pension plan 
I think is important. And indeed it is important to the individual 
and society as a whole if a person . . . and I think people gain a 
certain amount of self-respect and self-esteem from the fact that 
they have been able to, on their own, make contributions to a 
pension plan and see it and watch it grow over the years. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has done just that — has 
grown very, very well and has been managed very efficiently 
for people involved in the plan. I’m told that the plan will return 
something in the neighbourhood of 10 per cent to people who 
have money invested over the last year. And that is, given the 
volatility of the markets these days, it’s certainly is a very 
respectable rate of return for people here in Saskatchewan. 
 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

The changes here in this legislation appear to be administrative 
in nature. However, when there are changes in the legislation 
certainly there needs to be concern about the type of plan 
changes that the government is look at here. 
 
They’re talking about introducing a modest administration fee, 
and that’s the key that we have some . . . we have concerns 
about administration fees or that type of thing being introduced 
into the plan. 
 
(1500) 
 
We also have a great deal, far more concern about this 
government’s nature when it comes to the introduction of these, 
starting them out at a very modest amount — a very nominal 
fee almost — and then quickly rising to where they are a very 
big part of the administrative costs of operations of this type. 
And so there is concern in this instant when it comes to that. 
 
And particularly we have to keep in mind, as I said, not 
everyone contributes to a company funded pension plan or a 
government funded pension plan. And if we are to look at 
people in that circumstance, quite often they are of 
lower-income people in Saskatchewan and there needs to be 
protection given to those people as well. After all, not 
everybody can work for the Government of Saskatchewan. I 
would remind members opposite of that fact. 
 
The right to charge fees will be added in this legislation, given 
the government’s . . . given the current controversy that’s 
swirling around the government and its habit of reaping 
millions of dollars from service fees and its habit of upping the 
fees without letting anyone in this province know. 
 
Certainly I can see why there is concern from pension plan 
holders here in Saskatchewan about this now being introduced 
for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We have many questions 
about the fee and we will want the minister, certainly when we 
get to Committee of Whole on this piece of legislation, we will 
want to question the minister about the fee, how it’s going to be 
applied, and how much the fee will be. 
 
And that’s critically important. We want to know what the 
government’s vision for the future is with respect to this 
pension plan. Is it something that they intend to have funded 
entirely by the pension plan members or is the government in 
the future going to contribute to the plan? And we'll certainly be 
asking the minister with respect to that when we reach 
Committee of Whole. 
 
The people of this province have been and continue to be 
nickeled and dimed to death by the members opposite. In fact 
we have so many fees and structural charges built into these 
types of . . . many areas of this government, that people are 
beginning to wonder whether the government really has a 
handle on it. And I think that’s why the need to review some of 
the charges and fees is important. 
 
And I note that the Supreme Court of Canada in a recent 
judgment is saying that a service fee, if it is in excess of what 
that service actually costs to administer the service, is 
essentially improper and is a tax that would have to be brought 
before the legislatures all across Canada in order to gain 

approval from the legislatures before we could go forward with 
it. 
 
And we would hope that the minister isn’t looking down that 
road rather than introducing a modest administration fee for the 
operations of the pension plan here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a little bit of what the government has had problem with 
in the past, Mr. Speaker. And the editorial writers of this 
province are now referring to the ineptitude of the government 
opposite and how they’ve torpedoed their own budget 
essentially because of their less than forthrightness with the 
people of Saskatchewan about the budget. Less than 
forthcoming information, statements by the Minister of Finance 
that it’s the official opposition’s job to find and bring to the 
attention of people in Saskatchewan any fee changes, I don’t 
think provides people with any great deal of optimism about the 
government coming forward in a straight forward manner on 
legislation of this type. 
 
Another section of this amendment deals with the investment of 
these funds and we’ll have some questions about the safeguard 
in place for the investors. There is over $170 million invested in 
this plan and it’s important that it be invested on behalf of 
Saskatchewan residents as prudently as possible. 
 
Is this plan doing as well as it should be doing in 
Saskatchewan? Well that’s a question that we will want to ask 
the minister responsible when we have the opportunity. And are 
the rules set up to the best advantage of investors even though 
the government no longer puts any money into the plan? 
 
The rates of return, the historical, what kind of rates people can 
expect in the future from the plan? Is there plans of a similar 
nature that people could look at? Are people continuing to put 
their money into a plan at the similar rate as to what they once 
were put into . . . what people once put into the plan? And these 
are questions all, Mr. Speaker, that are important and we will 
want to explore with the members opposite and the government 
when we have opportunity. 
 
Again, the heart of this Bill, we’re going to have to have a real 
look at it and determine whether or not another fee for a 
government service is appropriate. Do people of Saskatchewan 
support the introduction of another service charge into areas 
like this? 
 
So in order to facilitate that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important 
that we continue the dialogue with people across Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan pension plan holders, as well as actuaries to see 
what their thoughts are on the plan and how it has being 
performing now and well into the future. 
 
So in order to facilitate those questions, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that we adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 7 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 1999 be 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased on behalf of the official opposition to speak to this 
piece of legislation. It’s an important change to the student aid 
fund. 
 
In the budget the government claimed that they were renewing 
their commitment to post-secondary education. Certainly we 
have concerns about their commitment and their so-called 
concern about secondary education in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the biggest obstacles that students face upon graduating 
from grade 12 is whether or not they want to further their 
education. And as parents certainly we do everything I’m sure 
to encourage our young people here in Saskatchewan to further 
their education, to provide opportunity and experience certainly 
for them into the future. 
 
As we have seen throughout further scrutiny through this 
budget, the government has actually cancelled the program that 
has left many students without summer employment or the 
opportunity to rely on summer employment to help pay for their 
education. And I think many students across Saskatchewan are 
faced with that kind of difficulty. 
 
I’m told that when you look for jobs in Saskatchewan these 
days, young people are finding a great deal of difficulty finding 
any kind of employment that might be helpful for them to 
provide an opportunity to work through the summer months and 
build up a little bit of a reserve to help as you go into the fall, 
either to help fund their education and help their parents pay for 
the cost of it, or to keep the cost . . . or keep the amount of 
student loan down that they would be requiring to further their 
studies next fall. 
 
And I would want to talk to the government about their promise 
during the election campaign to pay for the first year student 
tuition. We will be certainly asking the ministers responsible for 
this legislation what happened to that commitment. Indeed we 
see pretty much a turnaround from the government from 
looking at paying, looking at providing a student tuition 
program and a bursary essentially to students, and now finding 
that the government is actually removing programs from 
students rather than enhancing programs as they promised 
during the election campaign. 
 
And I see the Minister of Post-Secondary Education nodding 
his head there. We will be very interested in your comments 
with respect to this, sir, about your commitment during the 
election campaign. Even though it failed miserably in terms of 
vote-getting, it certainly speaks to your level of commitment to 
post-secondary education . . . (inaudible) . . . post-secondary 
education and the concerns about that. 
 
And the member from Albert South is chirping from his seat. 
He was one of the ones that were promoting the plan — 
certainly promoting the plan. 
 
The problem with the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it 
might be something that indeed could be looked at. And if we 
did look at it in the future, I would guarantee you, Mr. Member, 
that we would come forward with a more thoughtful plan, and a 

more carefully addressed and thought-out plan than you guys 
came up with in the election campaign. And that’s clearly why 
in the election campaign it was roundly booed to the extent that 
it was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you may think it was 
popular. 
 
It wasn’t very popular and the reasons were very simple — 
because it wasn’t very well thought out, it wasn’t something 
that many people thought was necessary. Or if they did believe 
it was necessary, they didn’t believe it would be administered 
very well. They also looked at what second-, third-, fourth-year 
students were going to do. Well there was many, many, many 
holes in your plan during the election campaign, and it’s no 
wonder that the people of Saskatchewan in the end rejected the 
plan and rejected the idea. 
 
But I think the important consideration here, Mr. Member, is 
not just that you came forward with a plan, but now you’ve 
actually reduced support to post-secondary students in 
Saskatchewan rather than enhancing — even though it was a 
poor plan — attempting to enhance student employment or 
student opportunities for student loans or the like into the 
future. 
 
Upon graduation from their chosen fields of study, students 
incur very, very significant debt loads in many cases from loans 
that they’ve received for their studies. The NDP did nothing to 
address this in this budget or in this legislation and that is of 
concern, I think, certainly to us and I think many people across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we look at opportunities in the field, many of them, 
first-year students and beyond that for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
are having a great deal of difficulty finding employment in 
Saskatchewan for the summer. And any changes that there may 
have been to these types of program only make it more difficult, 
certainly aren’t making it any more easy for the young people 
of this province. 
 
And your commitment to education is a little bit lacking. Even 
though it may be there in spirit, it’s certainly there isn’t in deed. 
And all of the rhetoric from the opposite side isn’t going to do 
anything to change that level of commitment unless you put it 
forward either in the budget or in sound legislative changes. 
 
Another concern is what sort of job opportunities will there be 
for graduating students when they complete their studies here in 
Saskatchewan, and that’s always been a difficulty for this 
province and it hasn’t been turned, hasn’t been turned, hasn’t 
been turned around by the members opposite after 10 years of 
governing this province. 
 
And yes, there are some opportunities — no question about it. 
 
I was out in Calgary here a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, 
attending a dinner out there for the energy producers and had 
occasion to talk to six young students from Saskatchewan, all 
who had graduated from the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) with a Bachelor of Commerce. Incidentally, all 
of them are very close friends. All of them packed up and 
moved to Alberta. All of them now employed in the oil industry 
in Calgary. And I think that it was a real shame to see these six, 
young, bright faces from Saskatchewan — born and raised in 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

the province of Saskatchewan — packed up and left our 
province. 
 
Yes, you may be able to point to some successes in terms of 
employment here in Saskatchewan recently but there are . . . we 
are still falling very, very short of what is needed to employ all 
of the students from our educational facilities here in this 
province. And that is something that we, all, as legislators 
should be very conscious of and be working towards changing. 
 
One of our most . . . Some of our most brightest and youngest 
are leaving the province. And we’ve recently seen an 
announcement here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — you will 
know that the Canadian Bible College here in the city of Regina 
is leaving. And I’m told that it’s some 500 students and about a 
hundred employees that are leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan, only to set up facilities and operations in 
Alberta. And I don’t hear the members opposite talking about 
that a great deal and their concerns in that area. 
 
Rather than just simply trumpeting your successes and standing 
in member statements every day and bringing the good news 
stories that are happening largely as a result of the activities of 
people outside of government mostly and in spite of the efforts 
of this government, they’re not speaking about the problems 
that we are faced with or addressing some of those concerns. 
 
(1515) 
 
And we find it ironic when members opposite claim that they 
are not willing to mortgage our children’s future when it is them 
who have managed to take away the scholarship money from 
students when they receive funding from the Canadian 
millennium scholarship fund. If you’re truly, as you say, trying 
to do everything you can, why are you moving in the opposite 
direction when it comes to providing support for our young 
people here in the province? 
 
It’s not very difficult to comprehend about how this government 
can go on and on and on about investing in our future when 
they are doing everything possible to stifle students’ 
productivity here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined some of the concerns that we 
have surrounding this piece of legislation. I’m sure there will be 
many more concerns about the legislation and questions that we 
will have about the legislation as this Bill proceeds through 
third reading and into committee. 
 
But in order to facilitate the opportunity to speak with students 
and student leadership at various educational institutions in 
Saskatchewan, and to speak with students and parents in this 
province about our concerns in this area, we feel that we require 
and need more time in order to have those discussions. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 7. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — The 
Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I understand the 
agreement currently in place, Mr. Speaker, if someone from 
another province comes to Saskatchewan and requires medical 
care, it’s provided; and if someone from Saskatchewan requires 
treatment in another province, they will receive it, 
compensation for services later paid to that province or 
Territory. Measures of reimbursement are currently outlined in 
two Acts — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act and 
The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to consolidate recovery methods into 
one Act — The Department of Health Act. It’s proposed that 
where payments are received from other provinces, it is 
reported as a refund to the health budget, not as new revenue. 
This process also applies when insurance companies repay 
health costs as part of a liability claim. Name of the process is 
refund their vote. 
 
A few comments on this. A reciprocity agreement is already in 
place, Mr. Speaker, and to our knowledge there have been few 
problems with this current agreement as to payments received 
from other provinces. Therefore we’re wondering about the 
proposed amendment. If there’s no significant change, what is 
the real purpose of the Bill? 
 
Health care, Mr. Speaker, under this administration has received 
some serious blows. And I wonder if maybe some of these are 
more important to discuss than this Bill at hand. The Plains 
hospital was closed and $50 million over budget; Regina Health 
District chief executive officer resigned claiming government 
interference led to the cost overrun. The nurses’ strike, nurses 
legislated back to work. 
 
When the NDP wellness model for health was introduced, the 
government laid off 600 nurses. Now there’s a nursing shortage. 
The NDP were told about this a number of years ago and 
refused to address the issue — they were told by the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, among others. 
 
The situation has now reached a critical point. We’re now 
experience . . . Nurses now experience mandatory overtime. 
They’re overworked, exhausted, sick days are up, exacerbating 
the problem further. There are serious issues of recruitment and 
retention. There doesn’t seem to be any plan in place at all. 
What are the government’s plans in these areas? Nobody 
knows. We just don’t have a clue. What’s in place now is not 
effective. 
 
Nursing education in the province was given a shakeup when it 
was announced that the Health department was thinking of 
letting nurses opt out of a four-year degree program to become 
diploma nurses. This met with such resistance they had to 
withdraw the original plan. 
 
This year there will only be 130 to 150 new grads from the 
four-year program. Total nurses trained in Canada will be . . . 
over the last 10 years has dropped from 10,000 a year to 5,000. 
Obviously there are less nurses to recruit in other parts of the 
country; it makes me wonder why we’re not trying to train more 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

here. The cost of nursing education has risen substantially — 
I’ll grant you that. 
 
Rural areas suffer severe lack of physicians. Many of the small 
areas have no doctor at all. Some with one doctor. What 
incentive is there for a doctor to come here? What incentive for 
a doctor to stay? The pay in Saskatchewan is certainly no higher 
than any place else. In fact, it’s on the low end of the scale. 
 
They can’t incorporate. The system’s in turmoil and decay, and 
the government now admits that. I think the minister’s words 
were the system has hit the wall. And this is the second highest 
tax jurisdiction in the country, Mr. Speaker, and therefore North 
America. 
 
At the annual SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) convention this past February, Health Minister Pat 
Atkinson . . . the Health Minister said that she couldn’t promise 
that the NDP wouldn’t close more hospitals. The latest casualty 
was the Carrot River Hospital. Some rural hospitals are being 
converted to health facilities. No acute care or other critical 
services available. 
 
We see the closure of operating rooms; the closure of intensive 
care units; 21 our of 32 health districts in debt; a debt totalling 
more than $50 million. The Yorkton Health District CEO 
resigned, citing frustration with the government’s handling of 
the health care system. 
 
The president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association says 
they hear of delays in treatment every day, that the health of the 
people in the province is being compromised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses have been warned about rabid bats at the 
Regina General Hospital. The province has one of the longest 
waiting lists in the country for medical services. Reports, 
reviews, investigations, recommendations — when will the 
government start listening? 
 
The Health department has refused to put Aricept on the 
formulary, a drug that has been medically proven to effectively 
treat Alzheimer patients. In Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta 
there is trial prescription program offered by the manufacturer 
of Aricept at no cost to the provinces if the drug doesn’t help 
the patient within the first 12 weeks. 
 
There’s decreased funding for chiropractors in the years 2000 
and 2001 budget. This shortfall will undoubtedly be passed on 
to patients. With increase to payment at point of service, fewer 
patients will seek chiropractic treatment, resulting in decreased 
productivity at work, and probably an exodus of chiropractors 
from this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations 
(SAHO), the body that represents the province’s 32 health 
districts, has a new CEO — none other than Louise Simard, 
former Health minister, whose wellness plan for the province 
resulted in a deplorable state of the province’s health care. But 
she’s back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Licensed practical nurses and registered nurses have been at 
odds over scope of practice issues for years, yet the problem has 
not been properly addressed or resolved. The 2000-2001 budget 

spending on health care increased by a paltry 17 million. 
 
Concern over the Health Transition Fund, $150 million in 
federal money, but the Health department has not indicated 
where or how it will be spent. Will it be used to close or convert 
rural hospitals, Mr. Speaker? 
 
No mention yet of an Ombudsman in the budget. No mention of 
an audit of the health districts in the budget. No funding for 
those health districts facing deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In recent weeks both the Health minister and the Premier 
himself have said that medicare is in trouble and that public 
dialogue was needed as to its sustainability and viability. The 
Health minister has even gone so far as to say they may have to 
look at what services people want and what services people 
would be willing to pay for. 
 
The NDP are now talking about a review of the health care. 
They say it’s not sustainable in its current state. The 
Saskatchewan Party has been calling for an independent, 
complete, value-for-money audit for two years. The NDP has 
scoffed at the idea. Now it appears that they are finally starting 
to think about it. And they’ve tried it in Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
and they found that they can save 10 to $12 million from that 
one audit of the Regina Health District. 
 
It’s too bad, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t audit health districts 
before they get deep into debt. 
 
Harvey McLane, an ousted Liberal MLA, has been named a 
special health advisor to the Executive Council. When Mr. 
McLane sat in opposition to this government, the NDP derided 
him as a proponent of private health care, even going so far as 
to nickname him, two-tier Harvey. 
 
Long-term care fees hiked by as much as $5,600 per year, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a direct hit for seniors and those on fixed 
incomes. Those already at the poverty level will be expected to 
fork over around $465 a month, money that could have gone to 
pay for prescription or non-prescription drugs and other 
amenities. 
 
More and more people are seeking treatment elsewhere — 
Alberta, Manitoba, United States. 
 
The current health care system is collapsing under the strain. 
Forty per cent of the government’s total budget goes towards 
health care. We cannot keep throwing money at it without first 
finding out what’s going wrong. 
 
It’s crucial, Mr. Speaker, that the five principles of health care 
as outlined in the Canada Health Act remain intact. 
Accessibility to quality health care is paramount for all 
Canadians. 
 
For those here in Saskatchewan, residents must be able to 
access medical treatment wherever they may be, whether it’s 
here at home or in another province. As well, if someone 
visiting from another province needs treatment here in 
Saskatchewan, reciprocity allows for that. People have come to 
expect that certain things will be there for them, quality health 
care being one of them. 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Concerned with the increasing number of residents who have 
been transferred to other provinces to receive medical 
treatment, Mr. Speaker, we also have concern with the number 
of residents who, frustrated with the extremely long waiting 
lists and lack of front-line services, have on their own decided 
to seek treatment elsewhere. What happens to reciprocity for 
these people? 
 
It seems that when they take their health care into their own 
hands, the health care system turns its back on them. No one 
should have to wait for two months for a biopsy. No one should 
have to wait six months to see a specialist. No one, Mr. 
Speaker, should have to wait for 12 months for a diagnostic test. 
 
In this age of technology, medical advancements, and 
accessibility to information, it’s difficult for everyone to fully 
comprehend why Saskatchewan has the health care problems 
that it does, and there are a number of issues that must be 
addressed. 
 
The current reciprocity agreement allows residents from other 
provinces to access treatment here in Saskatchewan. It also 
ensures that Saskatchewan residents can access treatment in 
other provinces. Up until now, not aware that there were 
concerns with the current reciprocity agreement, given that, 
why is there a need for amending the current legislation? 
 
Shouldn’t the government be more concerned with more 
pressing issues, some of which I have listed? Like the closure of 
rural hospitals. The increasing number of health facilities which 
translates into no acute care and fewer services. The nursing 
shortage. The lack of doctors in rural areas. The long waiting 
lists. The closure of operating rooms and intensive care units. 
The huge deficits faced by two-thirds of the province’s 32 
health districts. The list goes on. 
 
It would seem that if the government were to address these very 
critical issues, then would reciprocity take care of itself? In fact 
is the government, by amending legislation, preparing for the 
reality that more and more residents will have to be treated in 
other provinces and even in the United States simply because 
the health care system here cannot accommodate the increasing 
numbers? 
 
Reciprocity is something that’s in place so that residents 
everywhere can access medical treatment wherever they may be 
in Canada. The minister has referred to this as a housekeeping 
duty. Why aren’t the other issues being taken care of first, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Certainly the lack of front-line services would seem to be more 
urgent than amending the Act that by all accounts still works 
and won’t speed up or change how residents of this province 
access health care. Once again, it’s the government making sure 
that they’re getting paid for services rendered, and they’re 
forgetting about the people who need those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this matter for now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 1 — The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill, The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 is what I’d like 
to address today. 
 
I find it kind of interesting. It’s quite a title; it’s got really extra 
billing I guess you’d say. Farm financial stability — under this 
present government, it seems to be something that is very tough 
to find. 
 
And I really find it interesting that if anybody should be talking 
to farm financial stability it probably shouldn’t be the members 
opposite. The NDP government has had many, many problems 
in this area, I really feel in agriculture especially, and farm 
financial stability since they were given power back in 1991. 
 
I look at my own situation on my farm and how things have 
gone since then. And there’s been some real problems with the 
way this administration has operated to help farms gain 
financial stability. 
 
One of the first things that I have to look at a number of years 
ago as a young farmer at that time and trying to gain some 
stability and especially financial stability on my farm, was the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program that came 
into place. The guaranteed revenue income program which 
really was designed to create farm stability. That was the whole 
point of this very program. 
 
And I was involved with it. I was a member, had a contract 
through the GRIP program for a number of years, for the couple 
of two or three years that it was in place. And I found that it 
was a program that I could find some stability on. 
 
I could go to the bank and I could talk to the banker and say, 
this is what I’m going to be planting this year, this is what I’m 
going to be able to produce through revenue and product. And 
they were quite happy with that. It did give me, definitely, some 
stability. 
 
Unfortunately, shortly into the administration . . . and I will 
agree with the government of the time that perhaps the program 
was not the perfect program. Perhaps it was a little rich for what 
we could afford in the province. But to all of a sudden take that 
contract and rip it up without doing any adjustments at all to 
that program, really, I think removed any sort of stability that I 
was facing and that I was feeling in my farming operation. 
 
You know, again for this government to talk about stability, this 
farm crisis just didn’t start on September 16, even though they 
might have got a clear reminder that they weren’t addressing the 
farm situation when they failed to win a rural seat in 
Saskatchewan after the last provincial election; but this farm 
crisis really started many, many years ago. 
 
I would say two to three years ago on my farm I really started to 
notice quite a decrease in the revenues being generated by the 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

crops that I was growing. I myself took it upon myself to 
certainly change the farming operation that I was in and go to a 
lot more specialty crops and things like that. 
 
But I think the point that is very, very important here is that the 
present government at that time said there’s no farm crisis. 
What farm crisis? I don’t know of any farm crisis. And it was 
starting to really hit home for a lot of us that do manage the dirt. 
 
There were comments by the now defeated Ag minister, Eric 
Upshall, last spring that there was no farm crisis. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eric who? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Eric Upshall. Can you imagine the Minister 
of Agriculture saying that there’s absolutely no farm crisis and 
then to have it blow up in their faces like it did last fall? I mean 
that . . . talking about losing touch. It’s really a sign of just how 
out of touch the NDP government was in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think most of us MLAs that were elected, and newly 
elected MLAs in rural Saskatchewan, felt that and lived and 
breathed it because most of us were connected directly with 
agriculture. And so we knew that that problem didn’t start 
September 16; that problem had started many years prior. Again 
starting with the ripping up of the GRIP, and a government not 
really understanding what we are going through when we are 
farming the ground. 
 
Another area . . . And I guess we could thank the Ag minister, 
defeated and former Ag minister Eric Upshall for this. But then 
came AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance),and 
AIDA has really been a disaster. It’s suppose to relieve the 
disaster; it’s suppose to be a disaster assistance program, but to 
me it was a disaster. 
 
It caused so many problems. And I can think of the number of 
phone calls . . . I think if there is one thing that, as a newly 
elected MLA, that I really noticed the first two months into my 
term as the MLA from Indian Head-Milestone was the number 
of calls that I was receiving on AIDA. And it was example after 
example after example of how AIDA was not working. And it 
really wasn’t working. 
 
I had a fellow who is a seed cleaner in my constituency, who 
has been struggling. He’s expanded, he’s expanded his cleaning 
system so that he can hopefully gain some of this farm financial 
stability that this Bill speaks of. And he was told by AIDA that 
he was suppose to receive about $16,000 after having the forms 
filled out and costing him $600 to get the forms filled out. 
AIDA sent him a cheque for about 8,000 out of the 16 — he 
was suppose to get all 16 — and he was really complaining. 
 
And so that was really one of the first phone calls that I 
received as an MLA. He says, can you help me get my name 
moved back to the front of the line so that I can get the full 
amount from AIDA? And I thought, well, I’m going to be a 
hard-working MLA and I’m going to go to work for this guy, 
and I’m going to see if he can’t get all $16,000 as soon as 
possible because he needed as much money as he could get his 
hands on with bills and everything else coming up. 
 
Well I worked, and I made a bunch of phone calls and made a 

bunch of phone calls, and to make a long story short, the end 
result was AIDA phoned him back and said, whoops, we made 
a mistake. That $16,000 you were suppose to get, even though 
you only got 8, was really supposed to be zero and now you 
owe us $8,000. And that was the first situation. 
 
And I guess we can really thank the defeated minister of 
Agriculture Eric Upshall for having such an input in that 
program. 
 
So the AIDA program is flawed, is flawed from the beginning. I 
realized after that maybe you’ve got to watch which caseloads 
you want to follow, and which ones you can win and which 
ones you can’t. 
 
The people of rural Saskatchewan, and in fact of all the 
province, sent the government a clear message on September 
16, the election the Premier called in the middle of harvest. And 
I guess that really speaks to the compassion that this 
government has for agriculture and the importance this 
government puts agriculture in. As far as a 1:10 reading — and 
1 being most important and 10 being the least important — I 
think an election come September would put agriculture at a 
number 10 level. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or less. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes — or less. It really shows that they have 
absolutely no compassion and no understanding for the 
agriculture sector, the people that are trying to make a living on 
the dirt. 
 
Well I think that fall election certainly showed that this 
government wasn’t in touch with agriculture. And I think by the 
number of seats that were lost — which were held, a number of 
them, by cabinet ministers of the government — that were lost 
just goes to show that the NDP feeling and compassion for 
agriculture was gone. The people voted, and voted 
overwhelmingly in most constituencies, to knock the sitting 
NDP member out because they just really didn’t have an idea of 
what was going on, dealing with agriculture. 
 
When we actually thought that the members opposite were 
starting to listen, when an emergency debate on the farm crisis 
was finally called, it was an idea of ours. We said, let’s get the 
farm groups together and say this is an emergency and go to 
Ottawa with it. Well finally, once this session was recalled in 
late fall, early winter, we thought maybe that this present 
government would be listening, and as a coalition government, 
supposed to be being able to encompass more of the views of 
the people of the province — we sure didn’t see it. 
 
History was made when the farm groups . . . farm group after 
farm group came forward to the floor of the legislature to 
present its case on how the crisis was affecting the entire 
province. And I think that’s definitely an issue that sometimes 
gets lost when we start talking about the agriculture crisis, is 
that we look at it as people on the dirt, people that are actually 
doing the farming. But this agriculture crisis is going to hit 
home over the next two or three years as more and more people 
are unable to meet their expenses, meet their bills. 
 
I was talking to a fellow that runs a car dealership down in 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Weyburn, and he was saying the amount of half-ton trucks that 
they had sold in the last six months to a year has been zero. 
New car sales aren’t too bad. They’re still a number of 
government employees and people that may be on pensions that 
are getting some regular income. But the guys that farming 
around the Weyburn area, because we had such a disaster last 
spring as far as seeding, people that got 20 and 30 per cent of 
their ground seeded aren’t out there buying new half-tons and 
aren’t out there buying used half-tons now that there’s a six per 
cent tax on it. 
 
You know, the used half-ton that they thought about buying a 
little while ago they can’t afford now. It’s just jacked up 6 per 
cent, you know, so when I think of how understanding, and 
whether this government has a grip on agriculture, I really 
question. And that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and then the 
GRIP was ripped up, that’s right. 
 
Do you think the government’s listening? No, we get yet 
another flawed program with barely enough cash to help 
farmers get through spring seeding; a program that we haven’t 
heard any details on yet either. I get phone call after phone call 
saying, what’s happening with these latest programs; do we 
know any more about what’s going to happen? I’m scared to 
start checking into it like the AIDA program that I checked into 
and found out that it was a big fat zero. I sure as to heck hope 
that this new program isn’t that way. 
 
The other area that they talked about it is the reduction in the 
education tax on ag property. And as I mentioned when I 
responded to the budget, I said I had to give them a hand; I said 
that’s a very good idea. I’ve been to tax revolt meeting after tax 
revolt meeting, and most of the members on this side have 
attended tax revolt meetings, which is a heck of a lot more than 
I can say for members on the opposite side. 
 
After tax revolt meeting and tax revolt meeting, I realize it’s a 
huge, huge issue. I know I just look at the ag . . . the education 
portion that I pay on the land that I farm and it’s a huge issue. 
But the unfortunate part is, is that it’s coming around to bite us 
from behind, and that the education portion in that budget is far, 
far behind. 
 
And so now what’s going to happen is that any relief that I 
received through education portion . . . in my tax, my property 
tax, is going to be eaten up because the school divisions are 
going to have to increase their mill rate. And as the school 
divisions increase their mill rate, it’s just going to increase my 
property tax. 
 
The area that people were angry about the most in rural 
Saskatchewan — property tax. And they thumbed around and 
found a new way of hiding it; coming through the back door 
and increasing it through the school divisions which obviously 
say we can’t compete, we can’t cope with the money that we’re 
raising; we’re going to have to raise more — with the money 
we’re receiving from provincial government we’re going to 
have to raise more. And there it goes right back on the property 
tax, the very issue that this government was boasting about — 
historic budget on tax relief. It’s not there. 
 
Much of the money farmers might actually get will go into 
increased fuel cost. The NDP government had every 

opportunity to help farmers by voting in favour of a motion put 
forth by the Sask Party to cut gas tax by 10 cents a litre. Okay, 
and that’s an area that would help. I mean it’s an area that we 
thought it was missed out on the budget. They had an 
opportunity to make a big difference in the province — they 
missed the mark; they struck out on that budget. 
 
And it was a motion that we on our side of the House thought 
was a great idea and after talking to, again, constituent after 
constituent, after talking to a number of people from around the 
province, we’re receiving petitions every day on the temporary 
relief that people were looking for in this budget. 
 
Now unfortunately it missed the mark on not only the budget, 
but you missed your opportunity on that 10-cent-a-litre fuel tax 
rebate. It’s really, really too bad. 
 
The federal Liberals . . . It’s interesting because on that very 
issue is that the federal Liberals were willing to meet us 
halfway. They started the whole ball rolling; they said here’s 
something that you can latch onto, here’s something that can 
help. And unfortunately it was missed out. This government is 
sitting on a huge slush fund, but when it comes to helping out 
people by giving them immediate tax relief, nothing is here to 
help them. 
 
And you know it was interesting, I was talking about the 
agriculture financial stability fund is how . . . When back in the 
fall when the coalition groups were meeting on agriculture and 
saying you know, what can we do, we’ve got to pressure the 
federal government, we got to pressure the federal government, 
it’s the federal government’s responsibility, we came along with 
the $300 million out of the liquor and gaming fund. 
 
And you know I’m not kidding, we did have to sit there and 
think is 300 million too much — there’s only 350 in it — are 
we asking for too much to put 300 million in to lever some 
money from the federal government. 
 
(1545) 
 
Well little did we know 300 million was a drop in the bucket. 
There was $700 million in that fund and we only had asked for 
300 million. Maybe it’s a good thing we didn’t know there was 
700 million, they’d accuse us of trying to spend the whole darn 
thing. That wasn’t the issue at all. The issue was some farm 
financial stability for the farmers in Saskatchewan and we 
missed the mark on that one too. 
 
The government announced in its budget a program to rebate 
farmers of $50 million in property tax, which I’ve already 
touched on, over the next two years. Were they willing to make 
up this money with more hidden taxes? And the answer is, yes. 
I mean, we’re going to go through the school divisions and let 
them increase the taxes so we can look good; we can look like 
it’s a historic budget, but let’s make the school divisions 
increase taxes which then just totally eats up any portion of the 
education rebate that we are hoping to receive in the near future. 
 
The establishment of the Liberal-NDP coalition has done 
nothing to help farm stability. I remember standing . . . I 
remember talking on a number of . . . from farmyard to 
farmyard for the month of September, when people were out 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

getting ready to combine and you’d get out on the campaign 
trail real down and out good and early so that you could get 
them before they got the combine greased and got out and 
started knocking off another couple hundred acres of durum, 
and what I was doing is I was talking to many different farmers. 
 
And what I was finding is they were saying well what about this 
Liberal, they’re going to have money in my farm hands 
immediately. If we vote Liberal, we’re going to have money 
right away from the federal government because we can pull the 
strings and we can get it here so much quicker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, I guess, that it wasn’t a 
Liberal majority government, but I was certainly hoping that at 
least if it was a coalition government with some Liberal input, 
that maybe some of this campaign promise that we’re going to 
have money in your hands immediately would come about. But 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the case. 
 
I see very little that the coalition of Liberal-NDP has done for 
rural Saskatchewan and agriculture. The leader and now 
Education Minister could have called the Liberal Prime 
Minister for help. But all farmers ended up getting was a 
headache called AIDA, and the son of AIDA now. 
 
But there’s very few . . . there are a number of people, again just 
touching on AIDA, in my constituency that were down to 20 
and 30 per cent seeding intensity rate on their ground. And 
they’ve applied for AIDA and they’ve got no . . . first of all it 
takes a long time to get a response, but when they do get the 
response, it’s not the response that they needed. It’s not the 
response that they needed to keep farming into the year 2000 
and 2001. It’s a totally lacking program. 
 
And unfortunately guys that are that close, that are really 
needing some financial assistance, some financial stability — 
which this Act talks about — are not receiving it, not receiving 
it from the provincial government and they’re not receiving it 
from the federal government. 
 
For days and days and days, when we had people sleeping in 
the Legislative Buildings, it wasn’t because of its comforts. It 
was because they had . . . against the wall. They’re totally 
against the wall and they see nothing, absolutely nothing, from 
this provincial government. 
 
The member of Saskatoon Northwest also suggested that the 
school boards don’t like the way . . . what they got in the 
budget. They should raise taxes. That was his comment, just 
raise taxes. That will lead to further erosion of services in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The last issue too that I want to talk about when I look at this 
Bill, as far as farm financial stability, is what I would class as 
farm financial stability would be a long-term safety net. 
 
You know we need something long term that we can bank on, 
that we can go to the bank, — a little bit like GRIP; not saying 
it has to be GRIP — but that gave us some sort of stability, 
some financial stability. And right now we haven’t seen 
anything come forth. I just hope that the Minister of Agriculture 
is working on it, but unfortunately hope is not a real common 
word used these days in the agriculture sector. 

There doesn’t seem to be a lot of hope in the agriculture sector 
although we all hope that he’s working on some sort of a 
long-term safety net that can get us through the real valleys. 
The peaks are easy to manage because we can do certain things 
on the farm that allow us to manage. But when you go through 
a valley like we’ve hit, and it’s an extended valley that we’ve 
hit and we’ve seen absolutely nothing coming out of the federal 
government or provincial government, perhaps this provincial 
government figures that crop insurance that we’ve got —that, 
Mr. Speaker, you know an awful lot about — but the crop 
insurance program that we have got is sufficient. 
 
Well it isn’t sufficient. We need something long term; 
something that will help us. On my farm myself, I do take crop 
insurance but it’s only because it’s an absolute must. I think I 
should. It’s certainly isn’t because of the benefits that it’s going 
to help me out through the real valleys that we see in 
agriculture. So, Mr. Speaker, The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 is far from what it spouts, it says it is. 
It’s certainly far from farm financial stability. 
 
I think one other thing that I wanted to talk about — just touch 
on, is to show how things are going in rural Saskatchewan — is 
the expansion and the increase of farm groups; farm groups that 
are trying to speak on behalf of farmers to try and get the 
governments here to say this is a real disaster. You know we, as 
opposition, can say it and what the government says is: oh, 
you’re just playing politics; you’re fearmongering; it’s not as 
bad as it seems. 
 
And I think a lot of people in rural Saskatchewan are so 
frustrated that they start their own farm group and say: well, 
yes, it’s just exactly what you are saying, what the opposition is 
saying; it is as bad as it is. We have the Pro West which used to 
be the Bengough rally group. We have the Sask rally group. 
Now I see SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) is working very, very hard to put another farm 
group together to try and bend this government’s ear to say it’s 
a crisis out there. 
 
We, as the Sask Party, have been saying it for two, two and a 
half years, and we’re having a hard time getting through. 
Finally, maybe there’s a bit of a crack there, maybe they’re 
starting to think that maybe there is a problem in rural 
Saskatchewan. But unfortunately this Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 that we’re talking about today is far 
from any sort of a saviour. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill and 
we’ll discuss it more in the future. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 — The 
Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able to 
speak to Bill No. 2, entitled The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999. 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, any time this NDP government brings forth 
legislation dealing with agriculture, people in rural 
Saskatchewan are somewhat hesitant. They wonder if there’s 
any hidden agenda, or what plans members opposite may have 
to further erode rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to make 
a few comments dealing with the mindset of rural 
Saskatchewan. Many of the comments that I’m going to make, 
my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone has just stated. But I 
think that it’s important enough that I will repeat at least some 
of the areas that he’s talked about just to make sure that 
members opposite understand the concerns. And even if it is 
something so simple as dealing with livestock identification, 
there’s a real concern that the government opposite may have a 
hidden agenda. And why do they have this concern? 
 
Well I think if we look back and see how this government has 
dealt with agriculture, we can see that the concern is genuine. 
The proof behind this is how the government started when they 
first took power. The first sign we saw was what happened with 
the GRIP contracts that were broken and the money was used to 
balance the provincial budget. Farmers’ mistrust of this 
government started almost on day one. 
 
A further sign of this government’s lack of commitment to 
agriculture in this province is the state of our highways that 
farmers use — including the livestock producers — to have to 
travel and take their produce to market. These farmers get their 
animals to market but ever since the government came to 
power, the roads have degenerated to gravel. 
 
And the case in point, Mr. Speaker, is a highway in my 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, Highway No. 22, 
which goes from Dysart to Lipton. And you might be quite 
familiar with that highway, Mr. Speaker, since it’s very near to 
your constituency and you may in fact have had the misfortune 
to have to travel that portion, particularly in the spring. It is full 
of potholes. It’s unsafe for not only cars, but can you imagine 
producers taking livestock to market with a trailer behind a 
half-ton or three-quarter-ton truck? It’s quite a challenge to 
navigate that portion of the highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government has had nine years to do something about 
that section of highway, and to this point in time, they managed 
to get a few trucks out there to repair during the election period. 
And most of the residents saw through that veiled attempt to do 
something with it, and pointed it out very vividly to me during 
the campaign as to what a bogus statement on highway repair 
that type of action was. 
 
This NDP government has also been off-loading many costs to 
producers including education to rural ratepayers. This has been 
. . . which has been disastrous for farmers. Granted, in this 
budget, they have made some attempt to come forward with a 
program of rebate on a portion of your education tax. 
 
Many producers are skeptical of this. They are waiting to see 
how it is going to be enacted. When RM (rural municipality) 
offices contact Department of Finance or Department of 
Education, they are given various scenarios as to how it’s going 
to be implemented. There’s no clarity on this issue, and 
landowners remain very skeptical. 

They also wonder whether this is actually going to happen or is 
there going to be some sort of a hidden tax introduced to offset 
that. We’ve already seen the Minister of Education say that if 
boards of education can’t meet their commitments with the 
monies in this budget, that they should just go ahead and raise 
taxes. Taxes, which will most likely more than offset any rebate 
that producers and landowners will see. 
 
Many livestock producers have concerns with the direction this 
government is taking in regards to Bill No. 2. They have serious 
questions about animal identification and what we are seeing is 
the possibility of a compulsory ear-tagging system. 
 
And those of us, Mr. Speaker, who have been involved in the 
livestock industry for many years know that to date there isn’t a 
system of tagging and identifying animals short of the branding 
system which has been around for many years. But as far as 
tagging animals, there isn’t a system that is fail safe, where 
animals won’t lose the tags. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what is the purpose of this Bill if you 
haven’t got a system that will in fact carry forward the intent of 
the Bill? 
 
I’ve been in . . . myself and my family have been involved in 
beef production for many years. We’ve tried probably almost 
every system of tagging there is available, and we find that 
none of them are fail safe. The animals tend to lose them during 
the winter feeding period, out on summer pasture, and that sort 
of thing. So there’s a real concern amongst producers about the 
fact that there isn’t a good system of ear tagging. 
 
In his speech addressing the Bill, the Minister of Agriculture 
talked about people’s safety concerns and where the food they 
eat comes from. The packaging and feedlot industry share these 
concerns as well, and they are working towards putting 
programs in place. 
 
But as I mentioned earlier, to date we don’t really have a system 
that — other than the branding system — which is permanent. 
It stays on the animal. It’s may be not quite as readily readable 
in some instances as some of the people in the industry would 
like to see, but I think it probably does serve the purpose of 
identifying animals. If the brand is registered, you know who 
owned that animal. It can’t be tampered with and so on. So I 
think, as I said, there is a system already in place. 
 
There’s a lot of questions that producers have about this 
proposed system of animal identification. It sounds like it’s 
going to be mandatory. They’re wondering about whether 
people who don’t want to, for whatever reason, don’t want to 
get involved and enrol in the program, what the implications 
will be. 
 
Will they be able to sell their animals? Will they be able to buy 
animals? Will they able to transport their animals? There’s quite 
a number of questions that remain unanswered that deal with 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are also questions that many producers may not even be 
around to see this proposed amendment if it passes. This 
government deals with rural Saskatchewan in such a 
heavy-handed manner. 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

In the budget, it failed to bring forth any long-term safety net 
program which would add some financial stability, as the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone has already mentioned. 
 
I feel, Mr. Speaker, that the government should be spending its 
time more wisely in researching and developing a long-term 
safety net program. And some of these other issues that they are 
presenting here are . . . seem to be more window dressing. 
 
(1600) 
 
The government had the chance to do something in a real and 
meaningful manner, for not only producers and farm families 
but for all people of Saskatchewan. We gave them the idea and 
the opportunity to do something about fuel costs in conjunction 
with the federal government. But what they did do? They 
backed away. They said: no, we can’t do that; we like to see 
people pay these high taxes. 
 
And these high taxes have a real effect on livestock producers, 
the people who do the custom hauling and many . . . Most of the 
livestock nowadays is moved by custom truckers who are 
paying these high prices and they have no alternative but to pass 
that cost on to the livestock producers, as do the truckers who 
haul a lot of our grains and oil seeds and pulse crops off our 
farms. 
 
Many truckers have come to me, Mr. Speaker, and said: with 
this high cost of fuel, we are really finding it tough to hold the 
line on custom hauling charges. And they have no alternative 
but to pass it on to the people that are shipping the products, 
and thereby taking more dollars out of struggling farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Bill, I see things like requiring 
persons selling or distributing devices or substances for animal 
identifications to be licensed. Now I interpret this as my local 
co-op, a farm supply store, would have to be licensed to sell ear 
tags, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then it goes on to further say that there will be requirements for 
eligibility for a licence, and terms and conditions for a licence. 
So we’re talking here about developing here a whole set of 
regulations and perhaps creating more bureaucracy just to sell 
ear tags in this province. Is that what this Bill is all about, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And then to no one’s surprise — at least on this side of the 
House — we see here that fees will have to be paid for this 
licence. So what is this? Another hidden tax, Mr. Speaker? Fees 
to sell ear tags — now I haven’t heard of anything so ridiculous 
in a long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then the Bill goes on to talk about renewal, suspension, and 
cancellation of licence. You’d think that this licence is a licence 
to practice medicine, and you’re talking here about developing a 
licensing system for people to sell ear tags. 
 
Now is that all this government here has to deal with today 
when farm families are struggling out there? I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government is not focused; they don’t realize 
what the problem is; they have no ideas as to what the solutions 
are; and so therefore they bring forth the Bill like this to take 
the focus off so that they can go out to the country and say to 

the agricultural sector, well we are doing something. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, before we can move this Bill along, we would 
like to . . . we have some real concerns with it — particularly to 
the licensing issue and the fee structure — and we would like to 
talk to the various sectors of the livestock industry and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first item, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look 
forward to questions from the opposition. And before we start, 
I’d like to introduce my officials who are with me today. 
 
Seated to my right is Terence Scott, the deputy minister of 
Agriculture and Food. To my left is Hal Cushon, director of 
policy and program development branch. And directly behind 
me is Jack Zepp, the director of administrative service branch. 
And behind and to my right, Susie Miller, the assistant deputy 
minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials this afternoon. 
 
We have had some degree of discussion about farm stability in 
Saskatchewan here with respect to one of the past pieces . . . or 
one of the pieces of legislation that’s before the Assembly. And 
I’m sure many farmers in this province are concerned about 
their farm stability, their operations these days where, as you 
know, Mr. Minister, a very short time before our spring seeding 
will start in Saskatchewan. 
 
Even though we’ve been blanketed by a snow storm here in 
Regina, many areas of the Southwest traditionally by the middle 
to the last week of April will be into pre-working stages and 
then into seeding very shortly thereafter. And after that the rest 
of the province will join along in the effort very shortly. 
 
Part of the . . . part of what we are hearing from people and 
farmers all across Saskatchewan is the concerns they have both 
in terms of short-term problems that they are faced with, the 
short-term relief packages that have been put forward, and we’ll 
be having . . . we will want to discuss with you, Mr. Minister, 
how that program development and delivery is happening, and 
where we can hope to go in the future with respect to a 
long-term safety net. 
 
Farmers in Saskatchewan have been waiting with great 
anticipation for a long, long time in terms of a long-term farm 
safety net program. So we’re not caught in the situation that we 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

have been faced with over the last year where there is nothing 
largely in terms of a long-term safety net that meets the needs 
of Saskatchewan producers; that they can point to with any 
degree of security for the future for their operation. 
 
So we’ll want to engage in those broad range of discussions 
over the course of time. We have many questions about crop 
insurance and the changes in the crop insurance program. I’m 
under the understanding that the officials for that department 
aren’t along today. If we can’t get into specific questions about 
crop insurance, we will perhaps reserve those questions for 
another day. 
 
But we could start with the short-term relief package that has 
been negotiated, Mr. Minister. And I’d like to know, on behalf 
of farmers across Saskatchewan, at what stage we are in the 
process for that program right now. I’m told that, I think as of 
today, crop insurance offices will have packages available. 
 
I checked on the web site yesterday — your web site — to see 
whether or not there was anything in terms of applications and I 
couldn’t find it. Perhaps you can let us know whether that was 
available today. I think it said in the brochure that you sent out 
that the 10th — which is today — would be when some of that 
information would be available. I want to check to see whether 
that is the case. 
 
In many parts of the province, prior to the snowfall that we’ve 
just seen, there was large parts of Saskatchewan that were very, 
very dry and so spring seeding operations could be quicker than 
we would normally expect. We’re not looking for drought relief 
as the member is alluding to over there; that wasn’t what I was 
suggesting at all. What I was suggesting was is that spring 
seeding operations may be advanced, more advanced than we 
might ordinarily see. Given the difficulties with the crop last 
year, with an early frost in many parts of Saskatchewan, I’m 
hearing from many farmers that spring seeding operations this 
year will be fast and early. 
 
And with many farmers getting on the land as quick as possible, 
not waiting for later on in the spring to get their operations 
going, so a lot of them are looking to see if they can’t get this 
program wrapped up as quickly as possible so that they can start 
into their seeding operations, or their pre-working stages, or 
there’s lots of seed cleaning going on — all kinds of very 
intensive activity in the ag circles these days as you know. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would start by providing an 
explanation as to where we’re at with the short-term programs 
that have been put in place, the NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) top-up — exactly how that is all going to be working 
and provide some direction in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to take this 
opportunity to thank the member opposite for work that he and 
his caucus were able to do with us in the farm coalition. We 
travelled to Ottawa together and their leader, along with the 
Leader of the Liberal Party and our Premier, did a lot of work 
after the election leading up to the new year. And subsequent to 
that, working with farm organizations throughout the province 
to try to put together and cobble together a package that would 
ensure that the maximum number of farmers would be able . . . 
as he says when the spring comes, whether it’s early or late. 

And obviously as soon as you try to predict which that will be, 
you’re wrong, because it changes so quickly. 
 
But at any rate, I thank him and his caucus for some of the work 
that they did in bringing together what is, I believe, a 
meaningful package, although not perfect, far from it, but a 
meaningful package of getting some emergency money into the 
hands of farmers before seeding and throughout the coming 
year, this year 2000. 
 
There’s really four parts to that package and I’ll start out with 
the Canada-Sask Adjustment Program which I think is the main 
program that he’s talking about, the $260 million which will 
flow from taxpayers in this province and from taxpayers across 
the country to farm families in Saskatchewan. He will know 
that there are two different groups of farmers who will be 
eligible. Those in NISA who’s records will be used to base the 
payment on. The ability to access that program by those who 
are in NISA will be very, very simple and straightforward. They 
will be receiving in the mail, this week, a declaration which 
they will be able to simply sign, return by Canada Post or bring 
back to one of their offices, and those cheques then will start 
flowing out next week. 
 
So you could see people getting money into their accounts as 
early as 10 days from now if they were to, let’s say mid this 
week get their declaration, sign them off, and immediately 
return them. And this is what I would urge farmers to do is not 
leave it as I often do, sitting on the fridge or coffee table in my 
living room for a week or two. And I’m sure they you won’t 
because there’s a lot or urgency, but get those back in right 
away and the cheques will be cut by the department 
immediately. 
 
So the money for those who are in NISA will come back by 
return mail very, very quickly. And most farmers, if they return 
the declaration form immediately, will have cheques into their 
accounts before the end of April. So that money will be turned 
around very quickly. 
 
Those who are not in NISA will have to fill out an application 
form and those are available, I understand — don’t hold me 
absolutely to it — but at the rural service centres today. And 
some may get them tomorrow but my understanding is those 
application forms will be in the rural service centres today. 
 
(1615) 
 
This process will be a little bit longer because they have to 
actually make an application and fill out to give evidence of 
their cash receipts to make sure that they have eligible cash 
receipts. So that will take a little bit longer. 
 
But just so we know what percentage we’re talking about in 
each of those two parts. There’s about 90 per cent of the 
farmers actually have NISA accounts or have their grain 
flowing through NISA so they will get their cheques very 
quickly, by the end of April. The 10 per cent who aren’t in 
NISA, or approximately 10 per cent, it will be a little bit longer 
process but they too will get their cheques fairly quickly. 
 
So that’s the first part of the program. Cash on the dash as a 
former premier of this province used to like to say, of $260 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

million from our friends and neighbours who through the 
budget process have now allocated $260 million of their money 
to help farm families. 
 
Then there’s another part of the program, which is the 
interest-free cash advance, whereby farmers now can go to their 
elevator and fill out cash advance forms and receive about $400 
million before seeding, interest free. There will then be the 
AIDA program which will pay out this year, by estimations, 
$300 million to farm families in the province. 
 
In addition to that, the $40 million of tax relief announced in the 
budget for farm families for a total package of interest-free 
loans and direct cash payments of about a billion dollars to 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Again I say it’s imperfect, but on the other hand most farm 
groups and farmers themselves are saying it’s the lifeline they 
need to get the crops seeded. Again, it’s not foolproof. It’s not a 
hundred per cent of farmers who will . . . this will do the trick. 
But it will serve to help get the crop seeded for the vast, vast 
majority of farmers in the province. 
 
And again, I want to thank all farm organizations and all 
political parties that were involved in helping put this package 
together. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I understand 
that many farmers have — and you would know this — have 
moved their operations . . . or have moved to withdraw money 
from their NISA accounts and now will find that they would 
have very little . . . In fact, I’ve had many, many calls from 
farmers over the last while that in order to gain access to their 
NISA account have found that they . . . the only way they could 
get money quickly in a lot of cases was to withdraw or opt out 
of the plan entirely. And many did that in 1999, some of them 
just recently with the changes in the NISA program allowing 
them to access that money. 
 
I’m wondering if that actions, those actions that many farmers 
had gone through, will that impact in any way upon the 
program delivery or any expected benefits from the program for 
those producers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — For the member opposite, it is not 
linked to your involvement in NISA. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Many farmers as well, Mr. Minister — and you 
will, and I’m sure your officials, be aware of it — when income 
tax season, which we are approaching real close now, rolls 
around for people, for non-corporate entities, April 30 will be 
the deadline. There’s a lot of farmers are going to get a big 
surprise when they file their personal income tax if they 
withdrew from their NISA accounts or wound up their NISA 
accounts. Because they will be faced with significant income 
tax implications as a result of that. 
 
Have you made or are you looking at making any representation 
to the federal government with respect to that? Or looking at 
any deferral of income tax or any of that type of thing at a time 
when cash flow is going to be extremely important to farmers as 
we approach spring seeding? 
 

I’m told that many farmers are finding that they will . . . 
anything that they may have gained out of this NISA top-up 
program is likely going to be not even enough to meet the 
income tax problem that they are faced with. Are you aware of 
those circumstances? And are you taking any steps to address 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again, I say to the member 
opposite, that each individual will be in a very different 
position. 
 
But it’s quite obvious that those farmers who are most strapped 
for cash and having a great difficult time with their farming 
operations, paying income tax is the last of their worries 
because their income is offset totally by farm expenses which 
are, in most cases, totally deductible. So that group of farmers 
who are in the most difficulty aren’t worried about income tax. 
 
But there is a group, as you go up the income scale, who will 
have to pay income tax — not on the portion that they put into 
NISA because that has already had tax paid, as the member 
opposite is obviously aware — it will be the about 50 per cent 
that is matched by the federal government or by other taxpayers 
that they will have to pay income tax on. 
 
The member opposite, I think we should be very careful too to 
not paint a picture that it’s a total disaster in rural Saskatchewan 
— that every farmer in rural Saskatchewan is having a great 
deal of difficulty. 
 
In reading The Leader-Post, Mr. Chairman, on the weekend, I 
was interested in a front page story that said, “Different takes 
on farming” which goes into a story and compares the plight 
and I say the attitude of two different farmers. 
 
The first I would like to talk about is a fellow by the name of 
Doug Schmuland who farms at Langbank. And the other is a 
woman by the name of Dianne Cropp who farms at Gerald. And 
we know Dianne because she was one of the people who was 
very much involved in the protest here at the legislature. 
 
But it’s an interesting story because the story, as told by Doug, 
talks about how you can make a living farming. And this is an 
individual who some years ago . . . he grew up in Regina and 
decided two decades ago to make his living on a farm in that 
area of the province. 
 
And I quote from him. And I want to quote it because there are 
other members who will not have, and many of the public who 
will not have heard this story, because it’s an important one. He 
says, and I quote: 
 

This is a wonderful lifestyle, but I look at it as a profession. 
With the capital we have invested in our farms, we have to 
be professionals. We can’t do it the way Grandpa did it. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

Farming is 80 per cent management and 20 per cent work, 
so I spend my winters gathering information and coming 
up with the best way to run my farm. 
 

And he continues on: 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

Even with today’s low prices, there are ways to pencil a 
profit. Rather than farmers whining and crying to Regina 
and Ottawa for a handout all the time, we have to be 
masters of our destiny. 
 

Now these are not my words; these are the words of Doug 
Schmuland, who just happens to be the local president of the 
Sask Party in that area of the province. And I congratulate him 
for being open enough to speak on behalf of many, many other 
farmers in this province. 
 
And I would argue the majority of farmers who are doing very 
well even this year. And I think the member opposite in the 
Kindersley area, as in the Shaunavon area, we have many 
farmers who are doing extremely well. 
 
Now there are others, and Dianne Cropp, I think, indicates her 
belief that government should be doing much more. 
 
And so I think, in terms of what we should be doing here and 
the programs that we have instituted, I think is a good balance 
between Doug who says, really I don’t want money from the 
other taxpayers because that’s whose money it is. It isn’t our 
Premier’s money or Prime Minister Chrétien’s money; it’s our 
friends and neighbours who pay the income tax and pay the 
sales tax. That’s whose money it is. And so to give out more 
money than is needed to get the crop in, I really wonder 
whether we want to do that or not. 
 
And I think the fact of the matter is, to the member from 
Kindersley, that I don’t know how much your phone is ringing 
off the hook now, but I know in our office it has become very, 
very quiet — which would tell me that the plan that has been 
laid out, and part due to the work that you have done and other 
members of the Assembly, I think we’ve hit a pretty good 
balance on making sure that the needs of our farmers are met; 
but not going so far as to waste taxpayers’ money by giving out 
money, quite honestly, where it isn’t needed. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that many 
producers in Saskatchewan would certainly understand your 
thoughts in that area, and certainly feel that it is important that 
taxpayers’ money is being spent in the most prudent fashion 
that there is. 
 
And I think . . . even if you talk to this gentleman I think you 
would find — and I have talked to him on many occasions; not 
recently, since this article came out — but I think you would 
find that there is very little disagreement with what he is saying 
on this side of the House, that there is certainly . . . that is the 
direction and the long-term vision that many people would want 
for agriculture. 
 
His thoughts in a number of other areas might not be . . . You 
might not be so fast in wanting to bring them to the attention of 
the people. I suspect his thoughts in terms of marketing, you 
may fall fairly short of agreeing with. 
 
Well I’m pleased to see that the minister is saying maybe not in 
that area, that he maybe not . . . is so short. His thoughts in 
terms of the Canadian Wheat Board’s operations and how 
perhaps that should be opened up, I think, are far different than 
what yours are or what at least your government’s are with 

respect to that. 
 
I think what he is saying, that farmers want the opportunity to 
chart their own destiny — absolutely — and farmers need the 
opportunity to chart their own destiny. And I think if you had 
occasion to talk with him more than one paragraph in length, 
you would find that his thoughts in that area are that we need 
more marketing options, that we need less government 
involvement in transportation — that we need many, many 
changes that allow farmers to do those kinds of things. 
 
Because on one hand if you are going to, Mr. Minister, as 
you’re suggesting, decouple farming operations in agriculture 
from government, at the same time as doing that we need to 
decouple farming operations from the restrictions that 
government places in front of them. 
 
And to quote a couple of paragraphs from a newspaper story in 
The Leader-Post, that doesn’t give you any of that background 
information as to what this one gentleman’s thoughts are, I 
think is painting a rather glowing report for what is happening 
in Saskatchewan today. And I think he would be the first to 
want to clarify some of those comments that he is making with 
respect to that. 
 
Yes, he is indeed saying that farmers in some cases are doing 
pretty well and there’s no denying that. There are many farmers 
that had a pretty good year. However, if we continue down this 
path — the very, very low grain prices and commodity prices 
— I think we have just scratched the surface of what kind of 
problems we may encounter in the future. 
 
Many farmers are doing pretty well because they’ve saved for 
occasions like this, Mr. Chair, and you will know this as 
someone that comes from an agriculture background. Farmers 
have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, even he came from an 
agriculture background a long time ago. 
 
And the many farmers have saved and put money away into 
registered retirement programs. They have saved in 
considerable fashion into NISA accounts over the last number 
of years. And they have put money into savings accounts and 
they have prepared for the eventuality that there always is in 
terms of agriculture and that’s the downturn in commodity 
prices. And they have done that and yes, they are sitting in a 
pretty good position right now because they are able to draw on 
those reserves in this particular period. 
 
But I would also venture to say that many, many operations 
right now have drawn down significantly their NISA accounts, 
have drawn down RRSP contributions, have drawn down 
savings accounts in large measure, and now are in a position 
where they’re looking at this year as a real . . . a year that 
there’s going to be faced with some real challenges in terms of 
their operations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while we can agree with you that there are 
farming operations out there that are doing well, we certainly 
can’t agree with you that this is simply an opposition that 
maybe is crying wolf too loud. We see the problems in 
agriculture. Many of our members are associated very closely 
with agriculture. 
 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

I know on your side of the House that may not be the case, but 
many of them on this side of the House derive the majority of 
their income still from farming operations so they’re a little 
closer to the action, shall we say, than perhaps members on the 
opposite side of the House are with respect to this. 
 
In terms of that, we also largely represent rural Saskatchewan 
and as a result of that clearly have more occasion to speak with 
farmers that are directly associated with agriculture than 
perhaps . . . and that’s not to say, that is in no way to suggest 
that members on your side of the House don’t care about the 
issue or aren’t understanding the issue. There is just I think a 
closer association with agriculture on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Minister, many farmers have told me yes, they cruised 
through last year and will find it to be a difficult year and one 
that they won’t look upon very favourably when they’re 
remembering that about 1999. But also they’ve cruised through 
it because they’ve had significant savings that they’ve built up. 
As I said, many of them have drawn down those savings now 
and they’re looking at this year with some concern to say the 
least as what their operations will bring for them this year. 
 
(1630) 
 
Areas that are dry in the province, areas that have problems 
with all kinds of things that they haven’t anticipated in the past. 
Larger and larger areas of this province are faced with wheat 
midge. Larger and larger areas of this province are faced with 
transportation difficulties in terms of getting their products to 
market. Larger and larger areas of this province are faced with 
fewer and fewer elevators to deliver their products to. Larger 
parts of this province all of the time are more and more 
concerned about marketing issues. 
 
And while many of your people are of the view that marketing 
is being handled adequately by the Canadian Wheat Board, 
there is growing, and more and more and more concern about 
that — the operations of the Canadian Wheat Board and what is 
going to take place in terms of any changes in marketing in the 
future. I think the Wheat Board largely is trying to do the best 
they can, but I think there is many farmers that would like some 
other options made available to them to market their products, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
So to pick up on your theme here a little bit that farmers aren’t 
doing that bad in Saskatchewan, I want you to know that we 
certainly agree that there are farms that aren’t in too bad a 
condition right now, but there is also farms that are headed in a 
wrong direction. And all you have to do is speak to members of 
the accounting community in Saskatchewan right now that will 
know very well that there are a lot of farming operations that 
did not operate in the black last year, operated in the red last 
year, but because of the significant . . . their significant ability 
to manage through those times have put them into that position. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, to pick up where we left off in terms of the 
short-term relief package, I’m told that the farm corporations — 
and it may interest many of your backbench MLAs to know 
this, that there are thousands and thousands and thousands of 
corporate farms in Saskatchewan today, family-owned farm 
corporations, mind you, or individually-owned farm 
corporations. 

But I’ve heard many of your members get up and rail against 
the idea of corporate farming in Saskatchewan, but there are 
indeed dozens and dozens, hundreds and thousands of them. I 
operate one myself, and I dare to say that perhaps the minister 
might as well. So before your backbench MLAs get ranting and 
raving too much about farm corporations in Saskatchewan, you 
should look at the trend in terms of agriculture as to where it’s 
going. 
 
Many, many, many operations for tax reasons are moving 
towards corporate entities in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And they are family corporations, yes. But to 
suggest that corporate farming in Saskatchewan isn’t alive and 
well and moving very quickly ahead, it would be wrong 
because that is indeed the direction that farming is going. And 
corporate operations generally speaking tend to be larger and in 
a lot of cases more progressive operators today than we have 
seen perhaps in the past. 
 
And as farms consolidate, as they are and you will know this, 
Mr. Minister, they are generally speaking consolidating to 
larger operations which almost undoubtedly are corporate 
holdings. And they are probably owned by two or three people 
on the board — in a lot of cases, husband-wife, husband-son 
and daughter, husband-nephew, husband and uncle, those kind 
. . . man and uncle . . . those kind of operations that are very 
prevalent in Saskatchewan today. 
 
So it distresses me a great deal when I hear members on your 
side of the House stand in forums around Saskatchewan and 
pound their fists opposed to corporate farming. Frankly I don’t 
think they know what they’re talking about in a lot of cases. 
Frankly I don’t think you know what they’re talking about 
when it comes to corporate farming. I don’t know, I don’t know 
of the multinational corporations that you speak of all of the 
time coming into Saskatchewan. 
 
The farm land ownership laws in Saskatchewan are such that it 
makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for those 
operations to be set up. And for members on the opposite side 
of the House to get up and rail against those kinds of operations 
— you haven’t a clue what you’re talking about with respect to 
them. 
 
There are not the multinational chemical companies that are 
buying into rural Saskatchewan in any large measure. The 
Cargill operations are not buying large tracts of land up in 
Saskatchewan that you would be opposed to and very alarmed 
at. This simply isn’t the case in modern agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that old National Farmers’ bugaboo about those kinds of 
things happening in this province just is so far off the mark 
from what is really happening in agriculture, it isn’t funny. And 
many farmers in Saskatchewan, I’m sure, would agree with me 
with respect to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, getting back to the short-term relief package that 
has been negotiated with the federal government — a $1 billion 
program — you will know that many farmers I think take, I 
think, great exception at the characterising it as that $1 billion 
package. When you see that many of them now are looking at 
that 400 million of that package as a cash advance program, it 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

simply is the speeding up of the cash advance program of a few 
months — when it would be available after harvest, now it’s 
available right now. 
 
So while it will provide some degree of help — yes; while it 
will provide a measure of hope in some operations — yes, but 
let’s not get too far down the road as to saying that this is a 
huge windfall for farmers. Because you will know, Mr. 
Minister, that many people that aren’t associated with 
agriculture don’t understand the program, don’t understand the 
detail of the program, don’t understand the security provisions 
of that type of program; don’t understand the red tape and 
everything else that’s associated with getting those kinds of 
programs, cash-advanced programs. And I know I’ve had many 
people that aren’t associated with agriculture think that this is 
like receiving a cheque in the mail and there is no strings 
attached to it. This simply isn’t the case. 
 
Many farm operations that are taking cash advances know full 
well that, and they all will know full well, that there are many, 
many strings attached to that program, everything from grain 
inventory that . . . everything to statutory declarations, 
everything including problems associated with banks at getting 
the clearance to provide those kinds of . . . 
 
I’ve heard of many operations right now that aren’t taking this 
cash advance because they know full well that they will have to 
get priority agreements with their banks in place in order to do 
that, and that’s very difficult considering the problems that they 
are faced with in their operations right today. 
 
I had a farmer call me a couple of days ago last week saying to 
me that this wasn’t an option for him at all in his farming 
operation, this cash advance. He’s been told by his bank — I 
think the credit union in this circumstance — that if he looks 
towards getting a cash advance he will require a priority 
agreement from the credit union. In this case the credit union 
has told him that they want their name to be on the cheque, and 
as soon as that cheque arrives, then that will be used to pay 
down debts that he has incurred in the years previous. So while 
it will help in some circumstances, there are problems with it in 
many circumstances out there. 
 
So let’s not try . . . While we don’t want to discourage 
producers from taking these options that are available to them, 
we want to also be sure that farmers in this province are well 
aware of the strings that are attached. And there are many. You 
are signing forms that are several pages long. You’re signing 
priority agreements. You’re signing crop insurance 
declarations. The strings are many, and they are very, very long 
attached to this program. 
 
So to just . . . For people that aren’t associated with agriculture, 
they think it’s as simple as going in and having a cheque written 
out to you. I assure you it’s anything but that. It’s an onerous 
process and it’s something that only farmers will want to go 
through with a great deal of forethought as to what it involves 
or what kind of security they are providing the Canadian Wheat 
Board, the federal government, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan with. 
 
So let’s not characterize this too much as a great . . . herald it as 
a great thing here for agriculture because while it will provide 

some stability and help, it comes not without a lot of strings 
attached to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the program that we are talking about is the 
Saskatchewan adjustment program and many farmers are 
looking at that. They are also looking at concerns — as I raised 
— with respect to the NISA withdrawals that they have made. 
In many cases, prior to the changes that have been recently 
made in the NISA program, farmers withdrew entirely from that 
program, so I dare say that there are lots of farmers that are 
going to be faced with income tax problems, even though 
income was low for them. 
 
In lots of circumstances they’ll have 25, $50,000-plus of 
income that will be taxable that they may not have been 
thinking was taxable. So I think that there is reason to believe 
that there is going to be concern out there, Mr. Minister, about 
it. And I suspect, as we get closer to the end of the month, we’re 
going to be hearing from many producers about that situation. 
 
And I’m just wondering whether you’ve made any 
representations to the federal government with respect to any 
adjustments or any deferral, as has been done in the past with 
cattle operations, about deferral programs for taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, just in a general way 
I want to indicate to the member opposite that today we issued 
. . . or the Department of Agriculture and Food issued their first 
report for the year as it would relate to, in this case, seeding 
intentions of farmers. And one of the things we’ve been trying 
to monitor in order to see whether or not we had a plan in place, 
again jointly developed by the federal and provincial 
government, that would see an average amount of acres be 
seeded. Because we have heard in the southeast part of the 
province some of the horror stories about many farms not being 
seeded. 
 
And what I’m pleased to say today is that by the estimations 
which have come from farmers themselves, the projected 
seeded acres for this year is 33 million acres, which is about 
two per cent above the 10-year average. So all indications are 
that after a lot of hard work by a lot of people, the program that 
has put in place of cash advances interest free as well as cash 
from other taxpayers, that in fact an average amount of crop 
will be seeded this year. 
 
Again if we’re to put out a lot more money than it takes to get 
the crop in, then I think we have to talk about the responsibility 
as legislators. Because this is not your money and not my 
money that we’re talking about giving out here, it’s other 
taxpayers’ money. And if we’ve got enough money out to get 
the crop in, which it now looks like we have when we have 
anticipated 33 million acres, then we’ve probably got it about 
right. 
 
But I say again, it’s not a perfect science and you’re probably 
absolutely right that there will be a small group of farmers who 
will not be able to seed their crop for one reason or the other. 
But that is no different . . . Even in the best of years there were 
farmers who went bankrupt even when grain was selling for 5 
or $6 a bushel. And we all have known those stories. 
 
But again I don’t want to, I don’t want to say that everybody is 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

flush with money. That’s not the case. But nor is it the 
responsibility of every other taxpayer to see that farmers have 
more than enough to stay in business. And I don’t think you’re 
arguing that point. 
 
On the issue of NISA, I find it interesting that while many 
farmers will have depleted their NISA accounts, the fact of the 
matter is that as of March 31, 1999 — that’s a year ago — there 
were $1.142 billion in NISA accounts. 
 
Now you might have expected that the NISA accounts would be 
depleted in the past year. The numbers I have today would 
indicate that as of February 1, 2000, there was an increase of 
$70 million in NISA accounts to $1.213 billion in NISA 
accounts in farmers — and I believe, I asked this to my deputy 
— but these are in the accounts in Saskatchewan alone. So the 
NISA accounts far from being depleted, in total have actually 
gone up by $70 million in the past year. 
 
Now the discrepancy of course comes in the bottom 30 per cent 
again where many of those . . . and the difficulty is many of 
them are the younger farmers and the innovative farmers, who 
haven’t had as many years to build up a surplus in their NISA 
accounts, have depleted them. And this is the challenge for us, 
both at the provincial and federal level, is how do we ensure 
that that group of farmers who are the new, innovative people 
who are buying the air seeders and using the new technology 
are defended during this downturn in the grain economy. 
 
Again, I want to say to the member opposite that we should not 
lead the public to believe that grain prices in every area are so 
depressed. It’s true that in the area of wheat . . . And I say wheat 
not durum; durum prices are still holding all right and the 
member opposite, more than anyone, knows that those of us 
growing durum are doing okay because both he and I are in 
areas where we’re able to grown durum and we’ve had pretty 
good crops, and so he and I are able to do all right. 
 
Then in the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, no, I’d say the 
member opposite is doing fairly well, and when he says that 
members opposite, some of them derive the majority of their 
income from farming, that tells you something about his 
circumstance if the majority of his income as a legislator is 
derived from farming. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I agree with him. That’s a pretty good income. And there’s 
nothing to be ashamed about. I think people who work hard and 
make proper business decisions should be proud. 
 
But in today’s or last week’s Leader-Post . . . Western 
Producer, some of the grain prices are staying very solid and as 
of April 3 of this year, laird lentils, for example, 19 to 20 cents 
a pound still today. You can contract at 16 cents a pound and 16 
cents a pound on lentils is $9 a bushel, $9 a bushel. 
 
And so in the areas where we can grow lentils you can 
guarantee yourself today, if you want to sign on the dotted line 
with your elevator, $9 a bushel. In our area, 20 bushel an acre; 
last year much better than that. And so . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I’m not talking about contracting; you’re 
talking about production. There’s lots of areas in the province 

that grow 20 bushel an acre of lentils. 
 
I’m not arguing that there aren’t difficulties, but I’m saying that 
you are still able to forward contract mustard. Mustard, for 
example, you’re still able to contract at 12 cents a pound. So at 
12 cents a pound, 12 cents a pound, you’re still looking in the 
area of 6, $7 a bushel for mustard, and so those areas of the 
province you’re able to guarantee yourself on an average crop, 
and if you look at crop insurance to back it up. And I would 
agree with the member opposite that we as farmers have to look 
at different marketing . . . ways of marketing than just the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
I’m not arguing with the member opposite that the wheat board 
is the only way to market your grains. I think it is wonderful 
option of stabilizing income with 50 per cent of your grain in 
the wheat board. But most of us now do forward contracting 
and some even go so far as to not use a broker but deal directly 
with the Chicago grain exchange. 
 
The fact of the matter is, if you look at durum prices and you 
wanted to buy futures in durum on the Minneapolis market, you 
could guarantee yourself $4.40 a bushel for October delivery, 
US (United States), of durum. 
 
And you can do that and I can do that today. We could go buy 
futures in durum and guarantee . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No you can’t deliver. But your broker would be very interested 
in buying some up, and if the grain prices go up, you’ll get the 
benefit. Or you can sell puts, and if the grain prices go down, 
you can make a lot of money. So there’s ways of protecting 
yourself. 
 
And I agree with some of the things that your president of your 
riding out in Moosomin says where we can’t do the things on 
the farm the way we used to and you have to do forward 
marketing and hedging. And you have to understand puts and 
calls. And you have to be involved and you have to be creative 
about the way you farm. And even if you do it all right, some of 
us still won’t survive. 
 
But having said that, I think the plan that we’ve put together 
will maximize the number of farmers who can get their seed in 
the ground and maintain a farm. And that really is, I think, what 
a Department of Agriculture and Food, or legislators — 
whether they are in opposition or in government — have to feel 
responsible for. 
 
And to that end again, it’s not a perfect plan — the billion 
dollars of interest free loans — and let me break it out. There’s 
400 million of interest free loans and 600 million of direct cash 
payments through AIDA and the other programs. But we 
shouldn’t argue that $600 million in direct payment from 
governments, whatever level, that we as farmers shouldn’t also 
say thank you to the other taxpayers who are putting that 600 
. . . that is a lot of money. That’s a lot of taxpayers’ money. 
 
And the interest-free 400 million — interest-free for let’s say 
six months on $400 million — let’s compare that as if you were 
running it on your John Deere account, Wayne . . . the member 
from Shaunavon will know. I believe at my John Deere dealer, 
not the one that you work at, but it’s 2 per cent a month. I think 
that’s what’s charged for parts. 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2000 

And so to say that this is nothing, when the parts I need for my 
air seeder, I don’t have to pay 2 per cent a month on my account 
at the John Deere shop or any other dealership not to be hard on 
that one. I think the Wheat Pool’s the same. I’d have to look. 
It’s either 18 per cent a year or 24 per cent a year on those 
accounts. The saving of 18 per cent or 24 per cent for six 
months paid for by the good old taxpayers of Canada, I think is 
an important part of getting my crop in. 
 
And I mean if we deny that as legislators that the other 
taxpayers aren’t giving a helping hand, and we just say this is 
nothing and give them the back of our hand, and don’t say 
thank you when we get 600 million in direct cash and 400 
million in interest-free loans, what then is the incentive for the 
other taxpayers the next time we need help to be there for us. 
 
Now you can argue, is it supposed to be more than that? Should 
it be a billion dollars in cash and 500 million in interest-free 
loans? You can make that argument, but when our projections 
are that we’re going to get 33 million acres seeded this year 
which is 2 per cent more than the 10-year average, then I really 
would argue whether or not putting more money on the dash 
would be taking it inappropriately from other taxpayers when it 
wasn’t needed to get the crop seeded. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t think anyone on 
this side of the House is saying that they aren’t thankful that 
there is some degree of support for the agriculture sector. 
 
We may argue whether it was adequately addressed or whether 
there’s enough or not, but for you to suggest or leave the 
impression with people that we are simply crying and we’re 
ungrateful as to the support that there has been put into 
agriculture would be very, very wrong. And I hope that wasn’t 
your intentions with respect to that, Mr. Minister, because you 
would know very well that that’s never been our intention. 
 
Our intention in agriculture has always been to move the system 
as quickly as possible to a market-driven system. To move the 
system so that it is sustainable, environmentally friendly. To 
move it so that we have a system where there is some vision in 
agriculture so that farmers today can look towards the future far 
brighter than they perhaps see it right now. Where they can look 
towards having many other farmers move into the occupation, 
into the profession, in a fashion that many of us would like to 
see happen. 
 
Many of us, I think, would like to see sons or daughters or 
family members take over operations. Many of us, I think, 
would like to see an expansion in the ag economies of 
Saskatchewan. Many of us would like to see expanding 
livestock sector, expanding specialty crop sector, and expanding 
marketing system in Saskatchewan and indeed, all of Canada. 
 
Many of us would like to see all kinds of changes in agriculture, 
but to leave the people of Saskatchewan with the impression 
that they are an ungrateful bunch of rubes out there I think 
would be very, very wrong. And I hope that you wouldn’t be 
attempting to do that, Mr. Minister, because they are certainly 
not that. 
 
Many farmers in Saskatchewan look upon the assistance 
package as a lifeline. There is no question about that 

whatsoever. And we believe that the lifeline, while it may be a 
little bit tattered, is at least a lifeline and we’re not ungrateful in 
any fashion as to that lifeline, and we do indeed say thank you 
to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and Canada for what 
assistance has been put in place. 
 
But when we consider the assistance and we look at the 
assistance that is available to farmers that we are competing 
with on an international playing field, you will know, Mr. 
Minister, that it is gross . . . it is very inadequate. What we are 
putting in place for farmers in Saskatchewan and western 
Canada compared to what is in place for an American farmer, or 
what is in place for a European farmer, and those kinds of 
comparisons, I think are very valid. When we have to compete 
in an international arena at $3 a bushel for our wheat or our 
other products right now, and they are receiving subsidy that 
takes their production and takes their values to considerably 
higher than that, I think there is reason to be concerned about 
that. 
 
And I can’t help but think that when you were making your 
presentations in Ottawa that is exactly the train of thought that 
you had at that particular time, but the playing field is very 
unequal. And even with this latest package it is still very, very 
unequal compared to . . . and for you now to suggest that 
somehow or another, the package that you put in place has 
equalled the playing field and that farmers if they can contract 
their lentils at 16 cents a pound is somehow or another has . . . 
we have made up and have equalled the playing field, this 
simply is wrong. 
 
You will also know that there is a limit to the production of 
specialty crops in Saskatchewan and in many areas a lot of 
people feel that we are reaching that limit to the productive 
levels and the opportunity to increase rotations. 
 
The reason why we are seeing, Mr. Minister, and I hope you 
know this, the reason why we are seeing more and more acres 
seeded in Saskatchewan, not as only for conservation reasons, 
but farmers are moving and putting as much possible land in 
production as they can. They’re pushing their farming 
operations absolutely to the maximum to try and capture 
whatever small levels of profit that there are out there. They’re 
doing everything they possibly can. 
 
And many of the farm operations that I know of that once were 
a 50/50 -- 50 per cent summer fallow, 50 per cent crop -- have 
now gone to cropping entirely to push their operations to the 
maximum. And we’ve been very, very blessed the last number 
of years in Saskatchewan; probably the last 10 years have been 
as productive in terms of productive capacity as we possibly 
could have in Saskatchewan. 
 
But eventually we all know that we are going to be hit in terms 
of a downturn in the amount of rainfall that we get in 
Saskatchewan. You will quickly see that productive capacity 
move in the opposite direction that we would like to. Specialty 
crops. Yes, absolutely. And farmers have moved as quickly 
away from traditional crops as possible, but there’s a limit to 
that. 
 
When you move into those specialty crops as well, there’s an 
increase in the cost of production; there’s an increase in risk 



April 10, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

that’s associated with those kinds of things. And while farmers 
have been accepting of that risk, let’s not just hold out the 
example of one or two specialty crops as the panacea here that 
is going to turn around agriculture. Because the entire province 
can’t grow lentils. Or the entire province can’t grow chickpeas 
or canary seed or field peas. That just simply isn’t the case. 
 
Yes, farms are diversifying, and yes, farmers are doing 
everything they can to increase the productive capacity of their 
farms. But on the other hand, Mr. Minister, let’s not just simply 
say that there are no problems in agriculture and bury our head 
in the sand and suggest that the official opposition is crying foul 
when they want to try and expand or try and create opportunity 
in agriculture. Because that isn’t the case. All of our members 
on this side of the House are doing everything we level best can 
to try and promote agriculture in this province, to try and 
expand opportunity for agriculture in this province, to try and 
create wealth in this province, to create opportunity for young 
people in agriculture. 
 
Every occasion I’ve had to speak to farmers, every occasion 
that I’ve had to speak to young people in Saskatchewan — my 
remarks are always around the area of optimism and hope and 
opportunity. And those are the kinds of things that we want to 
see in agriculture for our farmers in this province, Mr. Minister. 
 
So let’s not point fingers over here, saying that we aren’t in 
favour of expansion of opportunity and expansion of optimism 
for agriculture. We speak from that platform regularly about 
those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other areas — and I know our time is running 
very short here — the other areas that we will want to discuss 
with you the next opportunity that we have with respect to Ag 
estimates will surround the area of the safety net that is, as you 
know, is still not adequate, still not there. 
 
Your government promised a long-term safety net a long time 
ago, and we’ve still seen nothing with respect to that. And we 
will want your vision in terms of what that program will 
involve. Is it an income-stability type program that you are 
looking at, along the lines of a revenue insurance program? Is it 
comprehensive and any changes to crop insurance? Is it 
enhancements to NISA? Is it a long-term safety-net program in 
its true form, or are we talking about tinkering with the 
programs that we have today? 
 
Those are the kinds of questions, those are the kinds of 
questions that we are faced with. Those are the kinds of 
questions that farmers in agriculture will want from you, Mr. 
Minister. And that’s the kind of discussion that we will want to 
entertain. And seeing now that we’ve reached the hour of 
adjournment, Mr. Chair, I’ll take my place; but that’s the kind 
of questions that we’ll have for the minister in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say to 
the member opposite before we close, and when I complete a 
very, very short comment, I will report progress. I just remind 
members we should probably not call the clock too quickly for 
some obvious reasons. 
 
But having said that, it’s important that . . . I really want to 
acknowledge the hurt in rural Saskatchewan, there’s no doubt 

about it. I agree totally with the member opposite. My point in 
talking about the package that has been cobbled together and 
important . . . send signals to other Canadians that we 
appreciate it as meagre; I agree with you, as meagre as it is as 
compared to what’s being delivered in Europe or the United 
States, is the fact that I think when people give a helping hand, 
you have to acknowledge it. 
 
As well I want to make it clear to my friend from the Cypress 
Hills area who, I think does a great job down in that area, and at 
the opening of the dealership in Shaunavon recently with many, 
many farmers out with optimism about seeding. I’m not critical 
of the dealerships, or even John Deere, for the rates on their 
accounts they charge. It’s standard procedure. As so everyone, 
or the Sask Wheat Pool, because many of them also have 
interest free options. If you buy your implement and use it over 
a period there are many programs they are trying to cobble 
together to make life easier for farmers as well. 
 
And I want to make this clear. That this really is a big effort by 
a lot of people to get the crop seeded. And I think we’ve 
achieved that with a lot of hard work. Again, there are many 
people who are hurting. 
 
I just wanted to close on this note in saying that in the 
projections for this year’s seeding, we are expecting a decrease 
in spring wheat, flax, canola, mustard, and sunflower acreages. 
And the projections also are at this point, after survey, that 
seeding in durum, barley, lentils, field peas, and chickpeas area 
is expected to increase, again acknowledging that it’s very 
limited some of the areas that you can grow these specific 
crops. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your effort and the questions from 
the member opposite. I just want to say that I would move we 
rise to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 
 
 


