





























































Hansard: June 16, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1865 
 June 16, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition for the Assembly today from citizens throughout our 
province who would like to see the retention of the hospitals in 
Lanigan and Watrous. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions regarding health care and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the petition I present is signed by the good folks from 
Lanigan and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition about the citizens concerned about hospital closures. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the communities of Viscount and 
Colonsay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today on behalf of the citizens of Cupar who are 
concerned about medical services in their community. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Care Centre remains open and physician 
services are retained in the community of Cupar. 

I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible closures 
of Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Lanigan, Guernsey, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; and 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
67 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much revenue is 
generated through cash lease agreements and crop share lease 
agreements? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you, sir, and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly — it’s my honour I might add and privilege 
to do so — His Excellency Mr. César Mayoral, the ambassador 
from Argentina to Canada seated in your gallery. 
 
Hon. members will recall earlier this week that we had the 
pleasure of a visit from a diplomat making his last visit to our 
beautiful province. Well today we have the honour of welcoming 
a diplomat making his first official to Saskatchewan. 
 
He is here with the secretary of agriculture from Argentina to 
attend the International Grains Conference being held in Regina. 
Mr. Ambassador, this is a lengthy introduction so you may want to 
take a chair for a moment, and I’ll call on you to stand at the end. 
 
His Excellency has served the people of Argentina in a number of 
diplomatic posts since beginning his professional career with the 
Argentine Foreign Service Institute in 1976, including service at 
the Argentine Embassy in Paraguay, at the United Nations, in 
Paris as Consul General, as an international relations advisor to the 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

transition team of President Fernando de la Rúa, and since April of 
this year as his government’s ambassador to Canada. 
 
His Excellency has also taught international relations and 
constitutional history at the university level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Argentina have much in 
common, most notably, a strong agricultural sector. As such, we 
look forward to working with Argentina on addressing 
important issues in international agricultural trade policy. 
 
In addition, Argentina and Saskatchewan enjoy strong and 
growing relations in the academic and cultural fields. Both the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina have 
research agreements with universities in Argentina. So we are 
good friends and we look forward to being even better friends 
in the coming years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while His Excellency is here he has a very busy 
agenda. He has already met with our Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs who’s seated in the 
gallery with him. Right after question period, it’ll be my 
pleasure to meet with him in my office — a meeting, I might 
add, to which I’m looking forward to very much. 
 
Later His Excellency will be the guest at a luncheon hosted by 
the Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development; a 
meeting with STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership Inc.) officials; a meeting with our Associate 
Minister of Health, who recently was in Argentina; and then he 
will call upon Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor at 
Government House. 
 
Finally, His Excellency will meet with Dr. André Lalonde, the 
director of the Language Institute at the University of Regina. 
And, Mr. Speaker, His Excellency will be in good company at 
the institute for language because in addition to his many 
impressive credentials that I’ve cited, His Excellency speaks 
five languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the people of Saskatchewan and this Assembly, I want to 
welcome His Excellency César Mayoral, the Ambassador to 
Canada from Argentina, and I invite him now to rise and to 
accept the greetings and best wishes of this House. Mr. 
Ambassador. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
on behalf of the official opposition to welcome Ambassador 
Mayoral to Saskatchewan. We hope that his visit here is very 
warm and welcome, as I’m sure it will be. 
 
As the Premier said, the grain and livestock sectors are very 
important to both of our countries and to our province. The fact is, 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are people from my own 
constituency that have shipped animals down to Argentina. 
 
I hope that we have long and beneficial trade between both of our 
countries and province and that we make the ambassador and his 
group very welcome here. Welcome, sir. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure indeed to 
introduce to you a very important person from India. The Minister 
of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution for the Government 
of India, Minister Shanta Kumar. 
 
Mr. Kumar of course is in Canada for the Grain Council meeting, 
and at the same time looking at the distribution system of grains in 
Canada with some intent to look at a similar distribution system 
for grains in India. 
 
Just to put in perspective, the production in India of grains is 200 
million tonnes of grain, which has to be distributed across a very 
large country with a system that improvements would allow for 5 
per cent of that crop to be saved. And one doesn’t have to do very 
many calculations to realize a saving of close to a billion dollars a 
year for them, by looking at a system similar to what is used in 
Canada by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
 
With the minister is also Ram Subhag Singh, the secretary to the 
minister. With the minister as well is Mr. Jaishankar, consul 
general of India and Mr. V.K. Gilani consul as well. 
 
I wonder if all these individuals would rise and we will show 
you our appreciation for your attendance here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, I too would like to join with the 
Deputy Premier in welcoming the representatives from India to 
the International Grains Conference. 
 
It’s indeed an important conference about the future of the grain 
industry, not just in North America but indeed worldwide. And 
the representatives from countries all over the world that are 
attending it, I believe have had an enjoyable time but also a 
good work experience opportunity here in Canada — the first 
time that the International Grains Conference has been held 
outside of . . . or in North America. And fortunately having it 
here in Regina was a very important thing. 
 
So I would want to welcome the Minister of Consumer Affairs 
from India, Shanta Kumar, and his delegation, on behalf of the 
opposition to the Assembly, here as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this is 
quite a day for honoured guests in the gallery. I’d like to 
introduce Fred Pomeroy, president of the Chemical, Energy and 
Paperworkers, and his immediate family, Catherine Pomeroy, 
Jessica Pomeroy. As well, accompanied by Richard Long, CEP 
(Communications, Energy and Paperworkers) vice-president 
from Ontario, and Krys Long. And Rejean Bercier, CEP 
vice-president from Quebec, and many friends who have joined 
them as well. 
 
Now Fred started working at SaskTel on July 15 of 1957 and 
started with the CEP in 1970. And from 1972 to 1992 he was 
president of the 40,000-member Communications and Electrical 
Workers of Canada, which is one of CEP’s founding unions. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

He was on the executive board of the Canadian Labour 
Congress, Algoma Steel, the Canadian Labour Market and 
Productivity Centre, the International Federation of Chemical, 
Energy, Mine, and General Workers Unions.  
 
His interests have been local, national, and international. And 
I’m told he’s recognized for his common sense approach to 
problem solving which of course, Mr. Speaker, is needed now 
more than ever. 
 
So please help me welcome . . . And he’s wearing a 
Saskatchewan tie, so we’ll give him extra points there. But 
please help me welcome Moose Jaw-born Fred Pomeroy, 
family and associates to the gallery today. Please stand, Fred. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to draw to the attention of the House, two visitors in 
the east gallery, one a former member of the Legislative 
Assembly — Jack Sandberg, who was a representative for 
Saskatoon Centre and a former minister of the Crown. 
 
Mr. Sandberg and I had the privilege of running against one 
another in a federal election and fortunately I happened to win 
that contest. I hope Mr. Sandberg feels I did an acceptable job 
serving him as a Member of Parliament for 
Kindersley-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Sandberg and also Mr. Bill Schultz who is with him, are 
part of the support team who are making the International 
Grains Conference a success here in Regina. So we extend our 
best wishes to you in that task and welcome you to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 47 students from Wagner Elementary School in 
Nipawin. 
 
I had an opportunity to meet with these students a little earlier. 
They had some excellent questions for their MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly). 
 
Today they are accompanied by Mr. Posehn, Ms. Gunnlaugson, 
and a number of chaperones. 
 
And they still have a big day ahead of them, and optimistically 
they’re hoping to be back in Nipawin by 6:30 this afternoon. 
I’m not sure that they’re going to be able to accomplish all that 
they want to and still keep that time frame, but I would ask 
everyone to join with me in welcoming the students here today 
from Nipawin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
recognize a person up in your Speaker’s gallery. Of course, he’s 
been introduced by the Minister of Labour and his name is 
Rejean Bercier. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I want to recognize him is that I was 
with him to the international delegation in Berlin in 1992. We 
met at the Reichstag with the Socialist International. 
 
At that meeting there was a lot of discussion by the late Yitzhak 
Rabin and peace in the Mideast. And there was a lot of talk by 
Brundtland, Prime Minister Bruntland from Norway, on the 
economy and the environment. As well, Mr. Speaker, the very 
importance of democracy in the world. 
 
So I would like again to recognize Rejean Bercier. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Baby for the Romanuks 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Speaker, more good news for 
Saskatchewan — more good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Or, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite would 
just calm down for a minute, we have the best news yet for the 
month of June 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us in this Assembly have been eagerly 
anticipating the birth of a new family member for Rhonda and 
Jeff Romanuk. Kevin Jeffrey Romanuk finally made his entry 
into the world at 4:45 p.m. on June 15, 2000, weighing in at 8 
pounds, 4 ounces. 
 
Being approximately two weeks overdue, Kevin finally decided 
that June 15 was to be his chosen date to begin his exciting life. 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, these are signs of a self-directing young 
man. 
 
His mother, Rhonda Romanuk, has worked in the Speaker’s 
office for approximately four years, but will be taking off a 
little time to enjoy this new addition to her family. 
 
Rhonda and Jeff, we congratulate you and we celebrate this 
happy occasion with you and your two other children — Alissa 
and Karley — on your new family member. 
 
Congratulations Rhonda, and you can be sure that many of us 
look forward to the opportunity, when it presents itself, to 
sharing a little bit of time with you and your new arrival and to 
oohing and ahing over your precious new son. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Danka Industries Relocates to Regina 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d also like to 
congratulate Rhonda and Jeff on the birth of their child, and it is 
good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
But now that the opposition has finally caught on, we should all 
sing it together. Because, Mr. Speaker, we have more good 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

news for Saskatchewan. 
 
I haven’t quite figured this one out, Mr. Speaker, but somehow 
I think we owe today’s good news to the Leader of the 
Opposition. I say this because every time he opens his mouth to 
claim Saskatchewan is going to you know where in a handbag, 
Mr. Speaker, something good happens. He’s our secret weapon. 
 
Two days ago today, or as we were told yesterday at a business 
lunch in Saskatoon, the leader gave a shill for Alberta — their 
party’s holy land. The road to success, he said, runs through 
Calgary. 
 
And one day ago, yesterday, Danka industries announced that 
it’s moving its headquarters and major call centre from Toronto 
and Montreal to Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Bringing with it at least 100 new jobs because of, 
quote, the availability and quality of the workforce, our central 
location, and the low cost of operation, said the CEO (chief 
executive officer), Garry Huntington. No government 
enticement, just great economic conditions, he said. 

 
I guess Danka ran out of gas before it got to Calgary. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, the leader also said he would reduce 
income taxes. This just two weeks before the first stage of the 
largest income tax reduction in the history of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You got to love this guy. We’re trying to decide where to send 
him next, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Scientist Wins Award 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
honour to inform the members of the Assembly today about 
Jeffrey Schoenau, a constituent of mine who farms near Central 
Butte. Mr. Schoenau is also a highly respected soil scientist and 
was recently named winner of the prestigious 2000 Robert E. 
Wagner Young Scientist Award by the Potash and Phosphate 
Institute in North Cross, Georgia. 
 
This annual award recognizes outstanding achievements in 
agronomic research, education, or extension. In particular it 
honours research that expands crop yields, lower production 
costs, and maintains environmental quality. 
 
This is only the second time a Canadian has won this award. 
Mr. Schoenau is a faculty member at the University of 
Saskatchewan. As a senior research scientist and a professor in 
the department of soil science, he’s a leading expert in 
agronomy, the study of field crop production and soil 
management. 
 
His recommendations on fertilizer requirements for new 
traditional crops, on enhancing crop production using reduced 
tillage methods, have been of great benefit to the farming 
sector. 

Mr. Speaker, once again a prominent Saskatchewan resident of 
a rural community has been highly honoured for great 
achievement. Perhaps now this government will start to pay 
some attention to rural Saskatchewan which continues to 
produce men and women of high achievements and honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Symposium on Heavy Vehicle Weights and Dimensions 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today with the news that the Sixth International 
Symposium on Heavy Vehicle Weights and Dimensions, the 
theme being past, present, and future, will begin this Sunday, 
June 18, in Saskatoon. 
 
It’s an honour for Saskatoon and Saskatchewan to be chosen as 
the site for this prestigious symposium. This event will gather 
together researchers, policy-makers, and industry leaders from 
around the world. These individuals are active in road, rail, and 
vehicle technology. The participating transportation experts will 
exchange views and discuss developments in highway and rail 
freight transportation systems. 
 
Much discussion will focus on technology and regulatory 
issues. There will about 50 papers to be presented and discussed 
over the course of five days. This symposium is an opportunity 
to share ideas and innovations that will benefit us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation is 
proud to act as the host in this international exchange of ideas. 
May the sixth International Symposium on Heavy Vehicle 
Weights and Dimensions be a great success for our province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Public Service Week 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to highlight that 
this week, June 11 to 17, has been designated National Public 
Service Week. This week allows us to recognize the many ways 
that public servants, at all levels, contribute to the quality of life 
for all Canadians. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we’re fortunate to have a very highly skilled, 
professional public service. In the time that I’ve had the 
privilege to be an elected member of this legislature, I have met 
and worked with many public servants and I have been struck 
by the depth of their commitment and dedication to their work. 
 
Every day in every department and agency, there are 
hard-working, talented people who work to provide the services 
that are essential to the people of Saskatchewan and valued by 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, during 
National Public Service Week, I would like to recognize the 
work of our provincial public servants and thank them for their 
continued contributions to the betterment of this province and 
its people. 
 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

Bazaart at the MacKenzie Art Gallery 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many of 
us know, particularly those who call Regina home, the capital 
city has more artists, more talent, and more culture per square 
kilometre than any other place in Saskatchewan, although of 
course I’m just a little biased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But a sure sign that summer is coming are the many wonderful 
and interesting outdoor activities around Regina. If the weather 
co-operates, the 27th annual Bazaart will prove to be no 
exception. This Saturday on the grounds of the MacKenzie Art 
Gallery there will be great art, crafts, fabulous food, 
entertainment — something for everyone. 
 
Bazaart is Saskatchewan’s finest outdoor arts and crafts fair 
with over 100 artists, craftspeople, and new displays. And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to have to see this to believe the 
quality of work and the excitement of the diversity of work 
that’s there. Certainly a good way to spend Father’s Day 
weekend. 
 
So I’d like to congratulate all the organizers of the event, and to 
encourage everyone to take part in this craft and arts festival 
and the wonderful Saskatchewan outdoors. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Liberal Position in Coalition Government 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s big 
trouble on the island — Gilligan’s making plans without asking 
the Skipper about it first. 
 
The Liberal leader says he wants to negotiate the coalition 
agreement. What’s he asking for, Mr. Speaker? Is it better 
highways? No. Is it better health care? No. Is it to lower taxes? 
No. 
 
What does he want? He wants another political payoff for the 
Liberals. That’s his number one priority, not what’s best for the 
people of Saskatchewan — what’s best for the Liberal Party. 
 
To the minister who is also a leader and a signator to the 
coalition agreement, when are you going to learn . . . When are 
you going to put the interests of Saskatchewan ahead of the 
interests of the Liberal Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, despite this question not 
really having any relevance to education, I will answer this and 
let him know that this coalition government stands for 
highways, improved highways, and that’s why we put $250 
million into the budget. 
 
We stand for quality education, and that’s why we put 7.2 per 
cent back into the budget. And this is the only coalition parties 
that stand for health care — single-tier, publicly funded, 
publicly administered — because we know where the two-tier 

Sask-a-Tory’s stand, and they are opposed to health care in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know 
actually the Liberal leader is getting better at this. After the 
election it took him two whole weeks — two whole weeks, Mr. 
Speaker, to sell out to the NDP (New Democratic Party). This 
time he’s doing it before the election is even over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just review the record. Since the Liberals 
joined the NDP, taxes have gone up, health care has gotten 
worse, highways have gotten worse, and now the teachers are 
ready to go on strike. That’s the Liberals’ record in this 
government. 
 
And now the doctor wants to prescribe more of the same bad 
medicine. 
 
Mr. Minister and co-leader of the coalition government, two 
Liberals in this government have been an absolute disaster. 
Why on earth would we want a third one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, talks about higher taxes, and they propose higher taxes 
because how else could we account for the increase of 1.1 
billion that they’ve asked for this session. 
 
This coalition government stands for sustainable, planned, 
managed, no-deficit financing, and that’s why we can have 
more for health care. And that’s why we can have tax 
deductions. And that’s why we can improve our highways. 
Because the members opposite cannot do that. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition has referred on numerous 
occasions about sellouts. And I point to the member from 
Canora-Pelly who yells from his seat; and the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale who yells from their seat; and the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena who . . . Who sold out? The sellouts are 
over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just remind again the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, the questions must be within the 
competence of the government . . . of the administration of 
government, not party responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 
to address my questions to the co-leader of the government, one 
of the signators to the coalition agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says that another Liberal in cabinet 
would help address issues likes highways and health care. 
Which begs the question, what have you been doing for the last 
nine months? 
 
Why did you let the NDP raise taxes? Why did you let the 
waiting lists in our health care system get longer? Why do you 
let the Minister of Highways gravel them? Why, if this coalition 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

is such a brilliant idea, why aren’t you fighting for safer 
highways and better health care? Why aren’t you doing that for 
the last nine months? 
 
Mr. Minister, if the Liberal leader and the leader of the coalition 
can’t accomplish anything — even the teachers are going on 
strike — what good is another Liberal going to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Opposition stands in his place and talks about the 
accomplishments of this coalition government and he says we 
raised taxes. No, the biggest tax cuts . . . the biggest tax cuts in 
the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Every single, every single member of 
society will benefit from the tax cuts. 
 
And when we talk about their plan — their plan that would 
have given crumbs to seniors, to people on fixed incomes — 
and our plan that provides for tax credits — it’s fair. It doesn’t 
add up, Mr. Speaker. They have not been able to add at any 
time in the past nine months of this coalition government. And 
they point to our record. Well I’m proud of our record within 
the coalition government because we have improved the lot of 
the lives of Saskatchewan citizens every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, that minister is part of a 
government that just raised fees for patients of long-term care 
homes. Now what’s he talking about? There’s one part of the 
Liberals proposal though that I like. That’s the part about 
getting rid of one of the other ministers. 
 
Now I want to know which one does the Premier want to the 
fire here? Is he going to cut . . . is he going to fire the Minister 
of Finance for raising taxes instead of cutting them? Or he 
could fire the Minister of Health for wrecking the health care 
system instead of saving it. Or he could fire the Minister of 
Highways for gravelling highways instead of fixing them. Or he 
could fire the Minister of Education for bumbling the teachers 
negotiations. He’s also embarrassing the government every time 
he opens his mouth. 
 
I think I know which one the Premier wants to fire. But, Mr. 
Premier, would you tell us today which one is it? Are you 
prepared to fire one of your existing cabinet ministers so this 
new Liberal, if he was elected, could sit in your cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on July 1, in just a short 
few days from now, we’re going to have the biggest personal 
income tax cut in years in Saskatchewan, thanks to this 
coalition government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have launched a medicare review for 
Saskatchewan which I think will be a medicare review in some 
ways for all of Canada in order to save medicare, thanks to this 

coalition government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have initiated more funds for education this 
year, more funds for highways at $250 million, and I could go 
on with all of the great accomplishments of this coalition 
government. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition seems to have firing on his 
mind. I tell you, I’m not going to fire anybody on this side; but I 
make a prediction that people of Saskatchewan will fire the 
Leader of the Opposition and all of those Sask Party people, 
come the next general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think the 
Premier’s being a little presumptuous, saying what the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to do. We’ll see on the 26th whether 
he’s got the right idea or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader wants to 
talk about what will happen if he wins the by-election. I think 
he should be talking about what will happen if he loses the 
by-election — if he loses in one of the strongest Liberal seats in 
the province. That would be a clear rejection of the coalition 
government. This will be a clear thumbs down on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
members over there are excited but he should be thinking about 
renegotiating the coalition agreement if he loses. He shouldn’t 
be doing that only . . . he should be ripping up the coalition 
agreement if he loses the by-election. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you listen to the message of the people in 
Wood River that they will deliver on the June 26 by-election? If 
the Liberals lose, will you tear up the coalition agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I will allow the 
minister to answer if he wishes, but I must remind members that 
questions should be related to . . . not related to any party 
responsibilities. But I will allow the minister to answer, if he so 
wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, for the 
course of this session the members opposite have spited the 
rules of this House. They know full well that it is the role of 
question period to ask questions to ministers related to their 
portfolios and within the administrative jurisdiction of 
government. 
 
And we have allowed some leeway with the member opposite 
to respond on political matters because of the by-election in 
Wood River. And I’m prepared to answer the question of the 
member opposite. 
 
No, regardless of the result in Wood River, we will not be 
tearing up the coalition agreement. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The fact of the matter is, in all 
seriousness, Mr. Speaker, the coalition government is working 
very well; we have achieved a lot of high water marks with this 
coalition government. We’re proud of our record. And I believe 
that a Liberal elected in Wood River would add to the strength 
of this coalition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
appropriate that the leader of a coalition government answers on 
behalf of that coalition. 
 
But the bottom line is, the NDP and the Liberals can argue all 
they want about which of their candidates is best able to speak 
for the coalition government. The Saskatchewan Party will 
speak for the people of Wood River. 
 
The last thing the people of Wood River need is another yes 
man for this coalition government. The last thing they need is 
another Liberal MLA yes man who will vote to raise taxes, vote 
to gravel highways, and vote to close hospitals. 
 
The people of Wood River trusted the Liberal Party and the 
Liberal leader betrayed them. It’s not going to happen again, 
Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party will give the people of 
Wood River an MLA that listens to their concerns and who 
stands up for them instead of rolling over to the NDP. 
 
My question to the minister: will you admit the failure of your 
coalition agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’ll 
answer this question on behalf of the government because the 
Leader of the Liberal Party has already clearly set out his 
position on the coalition agreement. And that agreement is in 
good stead. 
 
I will let you, Mr. Speaker, rule as to whether or not these 
questions are in order and abide by your ruling. 
 
But I simply say to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party the 
following, when he says what good is another Liberal and what 
good is a New Democrat and what . . . I’ll tell you one thing. 
Either a Liberal or a New Democrat sitting on the side of 
government, acting in the best interests of Wood River is 10 
times, 100 times better than one additional Saskatchewan Party 
member in opposition pointing the way to Calgary, 
misrepresenting the facts, not acknowledging the real problems 
facing Saskatchewan people. 
 
That person elected in Wood River will work for positive 
benefits for the people of Saskatchewan rather than another 
voice in the darkness of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teachers’ Strike Mandate 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, another coalition member would 
make it possible for you to pay more taxes and then go fix your 
own highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister of Education. 
Ninety-one per cent of teachers in Saskatchewan voted in 
favour of strike action — that is an overwhelming majority and 
a clear signal that our teachers want more than political rhetoric 
from their minister. 
 
On Wednesday, the minister said that negotiations with the 
teachers were going very well and that there’s only three or four 
more contentious issues. Then the minister was quoted saying 
he was prepared to negotiate further, and inferring there was 
going to be more money on the table. No wonder 91 per cent of 
the teachers voted in favour of a strike mandate, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do within contract 
negotiations now to ensure that teachers do not take strike 
action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness — and 
this is a serious matter, there’s no question in my mind — but 
just to clear the record with some of the preamble from the 
member opposite. Negotiations began in October of 1999. 
Bargaining has occurred at the table in good faith by all parties. 
 
A conciliation panel was brought in with representation from 
the teachers. They made a unanimous recommendation which 
was used as the base to have an interim agreement, which was 
signed by all parties. This was then presented to the teachers as 
a whole and was rejected by about 56 per cent of the teachers. 
 
We recognize now that the teachers have moved on to the next 
step which is a sanctions vote which they have endorsed by a 
large majority. And that does give them the mandate to continue 
with negotiations. And certainly it is the policy of this coalition 
government for the government-trustee negotiating team to go 
back to the table. 
 
And what I said this morning is no options have been closed, 
and we want to negotiate a collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The key word, Mr. 
Minister, is rejected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few weeks ago we heard that the tentative 
contract agreement was rejected by teachers by only 54 per 
cent, and that time the minister said he was optimistic that a 
new agreement could be reached, and soon. But now 91 per 
cent of teachers are saying they want to go on strike. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are leading this province to the very first 
teachers’ strike in 30 years. And now you want the Premier to 
give your candidate a cabinet post. Just what this province 
needs is another Liberal cabinet minister. 
 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

Mr. Minister, the teachers are talking about strike action as 
early as Monday. What leadership are you showing as Minister 
of Education to avert this action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, again with 
regard to the sanctions vote, we recognize that a sanctions vote 
was an endorsement of the teachers’ negotiating team to allow 
them to have a renewed mandate to go back to the negotiating 
table. And certainly we are hopeful that we can have a 
collective agreement bargained at the table. 
 
And what we have said, and I will repeat to the member 
opposite, is that we have closed no options; that we believe in 
fair, collective bargaining, unlike the members opposite who 
are opposed to unions, who are opposed to collective 
bargaining. 
 
And of course the member opposite who said that the tentative 
agreement that was reached was fair. And now she sits in her 
chair and says, well what will you do? Well what I’ve said is 
we want to bear . . . want to bargain fairly and we are asking 
teachers to return to the table for a . . . to have a bargain 
collective agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, nine months ago the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest was made Minister of Education in 
the coalition government. Since then we’ve had tax revolt 
meetings all across this province from citizens that are sick and 
tired of paying the lion’s share of education tax. 
 
We’ve seen the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) begging the government to take on the 
responsibility for funding our public education system. And 
now we see the teachers ready to walk out on you. Mr. Minister, 
I remember that feeling. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to make education a 
priority for this coalition government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
asked this question repeatedly during this session and of course 
I’ve given them the answer. And we are in the process of voting 
the budget estimates for Education, and we’ve had several 
discussions with regard to that. 
 
And let me just tell the members opposite what they will be 
voting for, and what this government will be proposing in terms 
of education estimates: $28.5 million more foundation 
operating grant; 30 million plus for school capital; $5 million 
for the Centenary Capital Fund each year for the next four 
years; an additional $18 million for special education; doubling 
of the community programs in Northern Saskatchewan; and 
increased funding for disabled children. 
 
And I say those members opposite would have given not one 
dime to education because they said education spending would 
be frozen. And this government has provided a large sum of 
money for education this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highways 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Speaker, for 
weeks the minister has been saying he has no plan to download 
highways onto municipalities. Now he’s saying that’s exactly 
what he’s going to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, the municipalities I’ve talked to want no part of 
this. They know your government’s record of downloading 
more and more responsibilities, while providing less and less 
funding. At the end of the day, local ratepayers end up footing 
the bill. 
 
Highways are a provincial responsibility — Mr. Minister, 
they’re your responsibility. When are you going to accept that 
responsibility and start to fix the highways in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very clear — if 
the communities want no part of it, they don’t have to have any 
part of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that might be a short answer, and that’s just about how 
much effort you’re putting into repairing the highways in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a deal that this 
minister is offering. He says that if a municipality takes over a 
highway, he’ll give them the same amount of money that the 
province is spending on them now. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem is you’re spending very little on the 
highways now so that’s exactly what you’re going to give them 
to repair it. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have another problem out there. You’re 
talking about turning highways back to gravel. The problem 
being municipalities are running out of gravel out there. The 
cost and availability of gravel are on many municipalities’ 
minds. How are you going to replace that gravel that’s running 
out? How are RMs (rural municipality) going to pay for that 
gravel? Where are they going to find it if you use it on your 
highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if the member is 
concerned about gravel roads, I am surprised then that he would 
have suggested the following. In Hansard he said that: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back to gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me on this point, but I 
honestly feel there must be some point there where we 
have to give up. 
 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our government, our coalition government 
is not going to give up. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
committed $250 million this year, Mr. Speaker, the highest 
Highways budget ever, and a 6.6 per cent increase, well above 
the rate of inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister isn’t looking for a solution, he’s looking for a 
scapegoat. That’s all they ever do over there. Blame the 
previous government, blame the federal government, blame the 
farmers for hauling grain, blame the winter weather, and now 
they want to off-load the highways and they can blame the RMs 
then for not fixing them. 
 
It’s just like you do with the health boards. You give all the 
responsibility but none of the decision-making powers and not 
enough money to do the job. And that means they get all the 
blame and you get all the glory if anything goes well, which 
very seldom happens. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time. Quit giving up over there, quit throwing 
your hands in the air, take your responsibility, and start fixing 
the roads in this province. Start turning them around. Make an 
improvement. Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
from Saltcoats doesn’t remember what he said, he talked about 
us giving up. Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what he said. He said: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back in gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me . . . on this point, 
but I honestly . . . 
 

Now listen carefully: 
 

. . . but I honestly feel there must be some point there 
where we (talking about himself) have to give up. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker; that’s what 
he says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not give up on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why we’ve committed $250 million to our 
budget this year for Highways and Transportation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well maybe the 
Minister of Highways should take a second look, join the 
Liberal Party. According to the Liberal leader, all his 
accomplishments are going great. If we had that attitude in 
Highways, maybe we could get some highways fixed over 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re getting calls from reeves and mayors all 
over this province. We had a call . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The question will be 
heard. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re getting calls from reeves and mayors all over this 
province concerned about our highways in this province. We 
had a call from the reeve of the RM of Laurier and the 
municipalities in his area are talking about blockading the 
highways if they turn them to gravel. 
 
We got a letter this morning about the mayors and the reeves 
having a meeting on Monday. If the minister may even be 
going, he may even have got a copy. And all — in the Arm 
River area — all these municipalities are concerned with your 
lack of work on the highways and roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going out to meetings like this to talk to 
these people, to explain to them what you’re going to do to their 
highway system, and will you tell them that you’re not turning 
them back to gravel and you’re not going to give them back to 
those municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, the member from Saltcoats. He gave up on 
the Liberals, Mr. Speaker; then he gave up on the 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. We sure hope he doesn’t give up 
on the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want him 
over here, Mr. Speaker — absolutely not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is 
asking us to direct all of our resources from that region and 
from other parts of the province to fix the roads in an area that 
just happens to have a by-election occurring in it, Mr. Speaker 
— just happens to have a by-election occurring in it — we will 
not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have put $250 million into Highways and Transportation, 
Mr. Speaker, to fix our infrastructure across the province of 
Saskatchewan. We think that is a commitment that we certainly 
will honour, Mr. Speaker, and we think that’s a commitment to 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open 
accountable government, we are very happy and pleased to 
table the response to question no. 178, and hope the opposition 
can understand it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 178 is tabled. 
 
Hon. members, I would ask you all to please come to order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert question no. 179. 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax 
Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, order please. 
Hon. members on both sides, you seem to have lost the respect 
for the decorum of this institution. Now please come to order! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add a 
couple of comments if I could, to the earlier debates on this 
particular Bill, Bill No. 45. This is The Fuel Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the member from Lloydminster for the leave. 
 
I want to introduce, Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery this 
morning are 48 students from the Yorkdale Central School in 
my constituency of Yorkton. Accompanying them today is their 
teacher Valerie Jeske; chaperons Darlene Arnold, Shannon 
Moore, Norman Roberts; and others are Barb Morin, Colleen 
Patzer, Janet Wegner, and Shelley Nussbaumer. 
 
I’m going to be meeting with the students in a few minutes. I 
want to say to the students though that, like you, on Friday we 
get pretty excited down here too. So we’re really happy that 
we’re all going to get a chance to go home soon so this is what 
you see in the legislature today — it’s Friday. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the Assembly to 
join me in welcoming the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Continuing with 
the comments I’d like to have regarding Bill No. 45, The Fuel 
Tax Act, 2000. 
 
I think there’s several items that have already been covered by 
my colleagues in the discussion on this particular Act, and some 

of them I think need to be repeated again and highlighted. 
 
We are going to have an opportunity of course to address some 
of these particular concerns and some of these issues when we 
get into the Committee of the Whole. But I think for the record, 
it really behooves me to focus on one or two items that I think 
is really quite important before we do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I’ve noticed in the 
amendments to this particular Act, focuses on the fact that it’s 
to simplify the collection of the tax — to simplify and 
standardize the system for — here in Saskatchewan as it applies 
to other jurisdictions across Canada. 
 
And maybe that’s of value overall. I do suspect in there that it’s 
a way to try and make sure that it’s very clear that this is a legal 
and a straightforward way of collecting this tax so that there is 
no confusion as to who is collecting it and at what level. 
Because at the end of the day the consumer in fact is the one 
that is identified by these amendments as the one that will be 
paying this tax. And the consumer, in my view, is exactly the 
one that should be taken into consideration. 
 
The amendments focus on the administration, the simplification 
for that department. The consumer is outside of that 
consideration, in my view, and I think the consumer has to look 
at this, at the gas tax here, fuel tax in Saskatchewan, and really 
question why it’s so high in comparison to other jurisdictions 
— 15 cents of each litre is in fact a provincial tax adding to the 
10 cents of tax for federal. That’s 25 cents out of the total 
amount that just goes to taxation. 
 
And that’s a problem that I have because I think a lot of the 
money collected from this fuel tax, if it is directed back to the 
road maintenance and construction, I think people in the 
province would accept that amount certainly with much more 
confidence than they do now; because all they see is this 
particular tax which generates a significant amount of money — 
for instance about 347 million according to the budget numbers 
that were presented to us earlier. 
 
Besides the 250 million that is budgeted, from the statement of 
the Minister of Highways, that shows that there’s a lot of 
money being spent in budget numbers to highways but in fact 
by the same numbers of the budget only $109 million is going 
to maintenance, 61 million to construction, and that’s actually a 
lower figure than last year. So I have some real problems with 
that. 
 
And before we pass this on, Mr. Speaker, the other point I 
would like to say is that there is an item or a mention of the fuel 
tax on propane itself. And although the tax on propane was 
considered exempt for small propane tanks of 100 pounds or 
less, that certainly might help the people in urban communities 
that use propane for barbecuing and so on, but the large amount 
of propane certainly is for home heating and in the rural areas 
for drying grain. That is a very major item. And that tax on that 
propane is a very serious item when it comes to the 
cost-conscious communities and the people that are heating 
their homes with it and using it as a tool in their agricultural 
endeavours. 
 
Also the oil industry . . . petroleum industry certainly in my 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

constituency use a considerable amount of propane in making 
sure that the oil in tanks remains liquefied and being able to be 
transported via truck. And that is a serious, serious expense 
amount. And the taxation on that I think is a very crucial item 
because that is not absorbed by farmers, by homeowners, and 
certainly not by the oil companies — that is a direct taxation 
through them to the consumers and to the taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these items we will get to in more detail 
when we get to Committee of the Whole. So at this time I 
would have no further comments. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No 44 — The 
Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to add a couple of 
my comments to this particular Bill and the amendments put 
forward in this Bill. 
 
Again, we’ll be looking forward to addressing some of the more 
specifics in this Bill when we get to Committee of the Whole, 
but there are some issues here that again I want to go on record, 
making sure that they are highlighted so that we can address 
these in more detail once we get into Committee of the Whole. 
 
What this shows basically is that this is a taxation increase, Mr. 
Speaker, on insurance rates that are being put in place. The 
amendments, as I read them and have been reported to us, 
commented on by the minister, is in fact it’s an increase in 
taxation. A tax on life insurance, accident insurance, sickness 
insurance, will in fact raise to 3 per cent. It will increase by 1 
per cent from 2 to 3. That’s a very significant increase. 
 
The tax on all other types of insurance, except for hail, as the 
minister outlined, raises from 4 to 3. That is a tax increase, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is a concern, certainly to me and to the people 
on this side. Because even though hail insurance remains at 3 
per cent, other forms of insurance increase is a major concern. 
 
When the provincial government in their budget tried to put 
forward the fact that there was going to be a tax saving, we are 
finding that there are other areas that the tax has been expanded 
or increased. 
 
Certainly, as you well know, that the tax expanded in what is 
being charged on the PST (provincial sales tax). 
 
And here’s another example where tax is being taken out of the 
system, and not in fact being absorbed by insurance companies 
of course, that is being passed through to customers. One of the 
things that the Vicq commission, when it did its reporting, 
suggested that — putting a tax on these insurance premiums. 
And I think again the consequence of that passes right straight 
through to the taxpayer, and that is a tax increase. 
 
Whereas the Vicq report suggested that the PST be reduced to 5 

per cent, that was not taken into consideration. That makes it 
much more difficult to justify the fact that this is not a tax 
increase budget which we’ve been maintaining all along. 
 
One of the concerns and we’ll get to in Committee of the 
Whole, is that the minister talked about the tax increase that’s 
he’s proposing is only going to raise $14 million. In the same 
statement he says they could have increased it by 40 million. 
That to me is rather offensive, saying that we could have been a 
lot worse, but because we only raised it a little bit you should 
view us as really the good guys in this case. And I have a lot of 
trouble with that hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Bill in fact isn’t a very complicated Bill. The amendments 
are pretty straightforward, trying to show that there is in fact a 
real increase. It’s not a very long Bill but it certainly was 
predictable in terms of the outcome and the intent. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, we’re very anxious to get into 
discussing some of these items in Committee of the Whole. So, 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would not have any further 
comments and suggest we move it forward. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 25 — The 
Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 
the House today to comment on the proposed amendments of 
The Irrigation Act, 1996. This Act was passed in 1996 to 
replace three Acts which had previously served the irrigation 
industry in this province. 
 
I know very well how important irrigation is to this province, 
indeed, the Arm River constituency. There exists a very large 
irrigation sector for example, in the Lake Diefenbaker, Outlook 
area. 
 
I am therefore, in my duties as critic, very interested in 
protecting the interest of my irrigation-based farmers. As I look 
at the amendments contained in Bill 25, I must say that I look 
on, with any and all changes which regard Sask Water, with 
more than usual scrutiny. 
 
As evidenced by the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) failure, Sask Water’s proven that 
mismanagement does exist within its administrative structure. 
 
You know, I believe this Bill gets to the centre of what this 
NDP administration’s all about — arrogance. This Bill could, 
and I’m not sure, will give immunity to Sask Water from 
lawsuits launched under The Irrigation Act, one of the tools 
responsible for developing the failed SPUDCO. 
 
This government is at the point where it can get itself into 
ill-conceived and ill-thought-out developments, lose a ton of 
taxpayers’ money, and then say sorry, we lost your money; 
don’t bother suing us to get it back because now you can’t. If 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

that isn’t arrogance, nothing is. 
 
You know, this SPUDCO deal the NDP had got themselves 
into, took more than just millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money. How much else was taken? How many people’s 
finances are now in ruins because of this bad deal? How many 
private investors lost money in it? The NDP doesn’t take one 
minute ever to think about what it’s doing and its effect on 
people of this province. 
 
I’m not sure, but I believe four companies right now are 
presently thinking about launching lawsuits against this NDP 
government. How will this new Bill affect them? We’re not 
sure. Even the Canadian Taxpayers Federation feels this is a 
bad Bill. 
 
You know, watching the members opposite get into business 
deals is a lot like watching The Three Stooges run a pie store. 
 
But of course, you know, we must assume that Sask Water is 
acting on behalf of the irrigators as well. When we look at the 
cancellation amendment however, some doubts come to mind. 
As an example, if Sask Water issues an irrigation certificate to 
an individual and then down the road decide to cancel the 
certificate for any number of reasons, we must ensure that the 
reasons are well documented and valid in each case. For in the 
end, cancellation of the certificate means a cancellation of that 
particular irrigator’s business. 
 
Of course we must keep our environment in mind, as well as 
concerns of also the neighbouring property, which I hope Sask 
Water is addressing at all times. 
 
But what is important though at the end of the day is whether or 
not the affected irrigator is treated fairly by Sask Water. And I 
hope some of this fair treatment, I hope to be included in the 
amendments. 
 
I think there is another amendment is included where provincial 
irrigation districts will now be responsible for irrigation 
equipment that is owned by the province of Saskatchewan. I 
think this came from the request to the Irrigation Crop 
Diversification Corporation. This producer organization is 
responsible for irrigation research and education in the 
province. 
 
During the past two years, there was levies that were assessed 
on district irrigators and seemed to be a sufficient amount of 
funds to operate effectively. Now, as it seems to be the habit of 
this government, permission has been granted to ICDC 
(Irrigation Crop Diversification Corporation) to collect levies 
from all irrigators. It will be interesting to see if this particular 
new tax will be popular across the whole irrigation industry. 
 
I agree that the public needs to be consulted. And that is the key 
to valuable input into this industry. Though the minister says 
that most irrigators — and he only said most — who 
participated in this consultation agree with these changes. So 
I’m not sure if they all agree. Because I think I’ve had a few 
calls that — some are awful — are concerned about some 
things. 
 
In conclusion though I must state that I will remain vigilant to 

ensure that the proposed amendments serve the intended 
purpose that the irrigation industry will have success in the near 
future. 
 
And opposition has a duty to guarantee that this Bill addresses 
all concerns of the irrigation industry, resulting in renewed 
growth, more employment, and more businesses for the area. 
 
And I hope, under Committee of the Whole, we will be 
addressing some of these issues. So with that, I will move that it 
move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 34 — The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 34 — The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, 
there has been quite a lot of scrutiny of this Bill and there 
certainly has been discussion in the House on this Bill by the 
official opposition. 
 
We have taken a really good look at the Bill, and remaining, we 
have many, many questions that we’d like to put forward about 
this Bill. But we feel at this time, that would be the most 
valuable way to address the Bill, is to move it to Committee of 
the Whole, and to issue our questions at that time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 37 — The Public 
Libraries Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
talk on this Bill. And I believe at the end we’ll move it to 
committee, but there are a few things I wanted to mention at 
this time. 
 
And I guess there are four main areas that this Bill addresses. 
Most of the issues regarding public libraries and the issues that 
rose in that area were addressed in 1996, but there were four 
main areas that needed to be addressed and are being addressed 
with this Bill. 
 
The first deals with boundary changes. And we’ve heard a lot in 
the House over the last probably two to three months, about 
boundary changes. And this, I think, is no different. We would 
see that if there are going to be boundary changes, that the 
boundary changes are made at the local level. It’s extremely 
important that they are not mandatory or mandated from the 
provincial government, but worked on from the local level to 
serve their purposes as well as they possibly can. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

So the first one is on the boundary changes. The second issue 
that is addressed in this Bill is the process of resolving conflict 
— local conflict. Previously the process often involved the 
Provincial Library and the minister. Conflictual resolution can 
also be lengthy, costly, and not acceptable in the outcome for a 
lot of the parties that are involved. 
 
The amendment will allow for more decision to be made at the 
local level, which is certainly a much more efficient process and 
one that the municipalities are much more familiar and 
comfortable with. 
 
The third issue that Bill. 37 looks at is the issue surrounding 
regional library agreements, agreements which essentially 
created libraries. And since all municipalities now participate in 
the library system, proposed legislation will not require them to 
enter into agreements unless they opt to do so. 
 
The amendment will still allow for those agreements if there is 
a specific relationship that is to exist between a municipality 
and its libraries. The government does not require these 
agreements to be in place. So it’s kind of a bit of a 
housekeeping item that will be addressed in this Bill. 
 
The fourth and final issue that this Bill addresses is the fair 
representation on the library board and especially the executive 
committee. Regional libraries have representation and then 
there’s a provincial board of about 100 representatives. From 
that board, which only meets one or two times a year, they 
select an executive committee. This committee is primarily 
responsible for the day-to-day operations and the majority of 
administration decisions. 
 
There are virtually no regulations regarding representation of 
members on the executive committee. Proposed legislation, this 
proposed legislation will allow urban representation on the 
executive committee that will be representative of the 
population, which isn’t there right now. So a regulation that 
exists for the regional library boards. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will have more questions in Committee of 
the Whole on this Bill. But those are the four main areas that it 
addresses, and for the most part we think the areas that it 
addresses need to be addressed, and it’s going in the right 
direction. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1115) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Health to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Beside me is Drew Johnston who is a health professional 
consultant in the Department of Health. Now behind me is 
Lawrence Krahn who is in charge of the medical services 

branch. And beside me to the left is Rick Hischebett, who is a 
legal adviser to the Department of Health from the civil law 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and welcome, Minister, and your officials, this morning, I 
guess. 
 
Madam Minister, a few brief comments before we get into some 
of the details. First of all, of course, we are very supportive of 
the thrust of this legislation in terms of allowing for the 
incorporation of medical doctors in this province. We think that 
that is an important step in the right direction. 
 
Madam Minister, in terms of the details of this, I don’t have a 
lot of questions because in going through it, it seemed that 
everything is in order. And in our material received back from 
the chartered accountants association, etc., there are really no 
issues raised in terms of how this would work from an 
incorporation standpoint and those sorts of things. 
 
A couple of details though. Is this limited to general 
practitioners or is it general practitioner, specialists? Who does 
this apply to specifically, Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This applies to all physicians in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, there has 
been some concern raised by other medical professionals in 
other categories — dentists, for example, chiropractors, other 
medical professionals. Have you considered expanding this 
legislation to incorporate professionals of that nature? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — A decision to look at physician 
incorporation came out of a letter of understanding that went 
along with the last collective agreement that was negotiated 
between the province and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. 
 
This letter of understanding needed to take into consideration 
physician shortage in the province of Saskatchewan, and the 
need to recruit and retain physicians in our province. The 
member may know that physician incorporation is allowed in 
other provinces, particularly our neighbouring provinces. So it 
did have an impact on us in terms of our ability to retain and 
recruit physicians. 
 
This kind of shortage that has been identified in the area of 
physician recruitment and retention has not been identified in 
other areas of the various professions. We have indicated to the 
college of dental surgeons that we’re prepared to have a 
discussion with them, because they have made a similar request 
to determine whether or not a shortage of dentists could develop 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And as I understand it, those 
discussions are proceeding. 
 
I would say that the loss in tax revenue, if we were to allow 
professional incorporation for all professions in the province, 
could amount to between 18 and $23 million, which would be 
significant in terms of our provincial treasury and our ability to 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

raise revenues. 
 
And we’re hoping that our recent announcement of tax 
reductions and going to basically a tax on income system in the 
province of Saskatchewan to be phased in over a three-year 
period, will certainly help us with the recruitment and retention 
of other professionals who are better paid than most of us in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister I do 
appreciate that this Bill does speak to the issue of retention and 
recruitment of medical professionals. 
 
Madam Minister, and I hope I’m not too far off topic, but are 
there any other initiatives that you’re using in terms of the 
recruitment and retention? I noticed just recently that there were 
extra educational seats set up in Alberta. Are we doing 
something similar here in order to retain physicians if the major 
thrust of this is indeed to retain and recruit doctors? 
 
Has there been a real assessment of what the demographics are, 
what the needs are, looking forward a number of years? And are 
there other initiatives that are going to be required in order to 
meet that challenge? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We put in a number of initiatives into 
the province of Saskatchewan. In particular, we’re trying to 
retain the young people that were graduating from the College 
of Medicine. And we did have a discussion at a national 
meeting with ministers of Health, and certainly the college . . . 
or the Canadian Medical Association was arguing that various 
provinces put back into the system the seats that they took out 
of their medical school in the early 1990s. 
 
For us, the issue that is very important is not only the number of 
seats in the College of Medicine, but then being able to keep 
those young people that graduate from the College of Medicine. 
And there are a number of initiatives that we have put in place. 
 
One of the initiatives that has been very helpful is the medical 
resident bursary program, which allows young people to receive 
up to $18,000 and in return they have to sign a commitment to 
rural Saskatchewan. And that has been quite successful. 
 
The other thing that we’ve been able to do is introduce a 
medical resident bursary program that provides bursaries of 
$18,000 to three family medicine residents to assist them in 
their educational expenses. 
 
And we’ve also introduced the rural practice establishment 
grant which provides a grant of $18,000 to a Canadian-trained 
or landed immigrant physician that establishes a new practice in 
rural Saskatchewan for a minimum of 18 months. 
 
And it’s an ongoing program. And it has assisted us, we 
believe, in attracting 23 physicians to rural Saskatchewan. Six 
Canadian-trained physicians took advantage of the program in 
1998 and they located in such communities as Meadow Lake 
and Kindersley. And currently there are three additional 
applications that are being reviewed, and one has already been 
offered. 
 
We have the recruitment . . . or the physician recruitment 

coordinator. And this is Dr. Dewar who resides on a farm 
outside of Wynyard, and she’s the coordinator who helps rural 
districts and physicians in recruitment. And as part of that, she 
is linking between students at the College of Medicine and the 
health districts. And that’s important. 
 
In our last collective agreement with the physicians, we 
provided additional funds for emergency room coverage and 
weekend relief. And this was really helpful in ensuring that 
physicians in rural Saskatchewan would have weekend relief. 
And $6.8 million in funding is directed to compensating 
physicians providing emergency room relief in rural areas and 
assisting those communities that have fewer than three 
physicians in their community. And we think physician 
incorporation will help as well. 
 
The other thing that we’ve done — and we just announced this, 
this year — we have announced two spots, or two seats, in a 
specialist residency program for family medicine physicians in 
the province of Saskatchewan, which means that they will be 
able to receive funding while they pursue a residency in a 
specialty. And this is for those specializations that we have a 
difficult time recruiting to the province. In exchange they’re 
expected to come back to the province, if they take their 
training outside of the province, to provide those services to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We also have a re-entry training program, and this provides 
grants annually to rural family physicians who wish to enter 
specialty training. And what it does is it means that they could 
become a GP (general practitioner), anesthetist, or a GP 
surgeon; and in exchange, we expect a return commitment to 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m told by people outside of the province that we have the 
most enhanced program in Canada in terms of trying to recruit 
and retrain . . . or retain physicians in the province. We’ve 
worked very closely with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and the College of Medicine, and we think that this 
kind of support is certainly paying off in terms of our ability to 
retain and recruit doctors. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
overview. And certainly we are supportive of this as one 
component of that initiative and therefore we’re supportive of 
it. So thank you to yourself, Minister, to your officials. That 
would conclude my questioning this morning. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur les services de l’état civil 
 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Intergovernmental 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

Affairs on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, by leave I would like to introduce guests now 
entering the west gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, a 
large school group we have with us this morning from North 
Battleford, from Connaught School. And I would ask them to 
please stand for you. 
 
We have grade 5 to 7 students of Connaught School in North 
Battleford, who I’ll be meeting with in a few moments. And 
they’re also accompanied by teachers: principal, Mr. Fransoo, 
Mr. Humphreys, Mr. Wouters, Mrs. Etcheverry, Mrs. Baldwin, 
and Mrs. Bullerwell. 
 
So I’d ask all members to kindly join me in welcoming these 
visitors from the great community of North Battleford and 
Connaught School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Labour to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today with me 
is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of the Department of 
Labour; John Boyd, director of policy and planning; and Jan 
Whitridge, manager of legal analysis policy and planning. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I’d like to: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
1999” and substituting “The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 2000”. 

 
The Chair: — Committee members just heard the minister 
state the amendment. Will committee members take it as read 
— the amendment as read? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I guess the first 
question that I would have to the minister is: why wasn’t the 
appropriate dates put on the first presentation of the Bill? And I 
wonder if she could explain why the need for this amendment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m pleased to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
We first introduced this Bill in 1999 but because we didn’t 
complete our work in 1999, it is now . . . 2000 is the more 
appropriate title. 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, this 
amendment basically extends the Dorsey commission 
provisions for another three years. 
 
I wonder, could the minister explain . . . Initially when these 
recommendations and the original Bill was brought into place, I 
presume that the minister felt that all the work that needed to be 
done under the Bill could be done in three years. 
 
I wonder now, could the minister explain why she chose three 
years to extend these provisions? Does she not feel that the 
work could be done in a shorter period of time, so that things 
could move forward as . . . on a normal basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Certainly, I think you characterized that 
very accurately. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that when you 
have a process that takes 500 different collective bargaining 
units — over 500 — and brings them down in the range of 40, 
there’s a substantial amount that has to be considered, 
negotiated, and reconfigured. 
 
So this has taken longer than people expected and we believe 
that people are supportive of this process of extending the time 
period. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I guess a further question to that is, if 
in fact that we — in the future — we see a reduction in the 
number of health districts and so on, will that . . . what 
implications will that have with respect to these . . . to this 
report and contract negotiations and so on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, perhaps the member knows 
something I don’t. I don’t know that there is any change going 
to happen in that. But if it did, this speaks to the collective 
bargaining arrangements, not necessarily to the way that the 
employer is organized. So I think that we would cross that 
bridge when it comes . . . when we come to it. 
 
This is basically just governing the rules around the raiding 
between unions during an open period, and giving three more 
years for their work to be completed before we move into that 
type of environment again. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Under this original Act, 
I wonder if the minister could tell us how many health care 
workers that weren’t in unions prior to the implementation of 
the Dorsey commission ended up in unions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because it was such a long time ago, 
Mr. Chair, I don’t have that detail with me, but we can certainly 
get it and provide it to the member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, further to dealing with the shifts in 
people who weren’t unionized and forced into unions, and also 
the shift of union members from one union to another, I wonder 
if the minister could briefly review the reorganization that . . . 
effects that it had on unions within the health care system and in 
terms of who were the winners in terms of numbers and losers 
as far as unions were concerned? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, you can imagine when you go 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

from over 500 bargaining units down to 40, there’s some fairly 
major shifts. 
 
From the perspective of the unions, I think they would see 
themselves in a much stronger position for bargaining today 
because rather than having over 500 fractured units, they now 
have a much smaller number of unified units for the purposes of 
bargaining. 
 
The other positive effect that it had for the unions was taking a 
number of inequities that existed across the system and really 
had the effect of levelling up wages, working conditions, and 
benefits for a large number of workers. So in fact a lot of people 
got, I guess, benefits that may have been much slower in 
coming by any other process. 
 
The union that would have lost the most members in this 
process was SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union). 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, further to the minister’s answer. Is the 
minister then suggesting that some of the unions who in the past 
had represented workers in the health care system were failing to 
adequately represent their members, and that this shift and 
reduction in number of unions that were bargaining with health 
care districts are now doing a better job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t think anybody places any value 
judgments on this process. It was a matter of fairness for the 
unions. And I will remind the member that the unions asked us for 
this process. We did not impose it. We were asked to put this 
process in place and they agreed that Mr. Dorsey should be the 
person who did it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister could review 
the current contract environment with the various unions that 
are presently representing workers in the health care system as 
to what state the contract negotiations are, when the contracts 
expire? There are some expiring very shortly. Will some of the 
contracts run for another year or two, and that sort of thing? 
Can you just give us a general overview of the state of 
negotiations as far as contracts in the health care system? 
 
The Chair: — Before the hon. minister even attempts to 
answer that question, I’m going to rule the question out of order 
in that it does not deal with the Bill. The Bill before us is An 
Act to Amend the Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act 
and you’re asking a detailed question about the state of, I 
believe, current negotiations. 
 
Now if I misunderstood the hon. member and the intent, I will 
certainly provide an opportunity for you to clarify that. But as 
you put the question and as I heard it, it’s just not relevant to the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, if I could clarify the question. The 
question deals with the point that the Dorsey commission 
amalgamated a number of unions into smaller bargaining units 
and that sort of thing. And I guess what we are wondering as to 
whether this had an . . . poisoned the atmosphere in working 
relationships and how that is affecting contract negotiations? 
And so it does pertain to the Dorsey recommendation in that 
now workers find themselves being represented by a smaller 

number of unions and bargaining units. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I’ll just reaffirm that this was a 
process that was requested because people saw, as all of these 
large number of bargaining units came together within the 
districts, that there would be a need to reorganize collective 
bargaining. 
 
And in order to do it in a process maybe that you’re suggesting, 
where a long extended period of raiding back and forth could go 
on until they arrived somehow more organically at the 40, they 
agreed themselves that that would be a very acrimonious, long, 
and unnecessary process. And they, together with SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), requested 
that we put this process in place. 
 
Now maybe to give you a little bit of comfort. I’ll mention that 
the three unions, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, which is 
SUN of course, the Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees Union, SGEU, and the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees, all had open periods that began in February 1 of 
2000 and concluded in March 2 of 2000, and that was partly 
because we didn’t pass the Bill in the last sitting. 
 
The open period in February did allow for raiding. The Labour 
Relations Board did not receive any applications from the 
unions representing heath care workers. So I guess that to me 
would suggest that they agree that in the interest of stability it 
would be best to get the rest of the work that was agreed to 
under the last round of collective bargaining completed before 
any new factors enter into the equation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, when the Dorsey report was implemented and the 
various units were put together in the three separate unions, 
they had different collective bargaining agreements within the 
original structures. Some were coming from SGEU going to 
CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), some were 
going from SEIU (Service Employees’ International Union) to 
SGEU, and those various things. 
 
How many of those different units now, in their amalgamations, 
are completed in their different negotiations to equalize all of 
the benefits and salaries within the different groups? 
 
I know that SGEU was very unhappy after the legislation was 
passed and being implemented as to how this was being settled. 
In viewing other areas such as amalgamations with school 
divisions where you have two separate bargaining units even 
though they’re under the same union, they have separate, 
different, small clauses within their structures that they have 
negotiated. It’s difficult sometimes to put them together. 
 
Have all of those issues been settled at all the work sites? Or are 
there still some issues outstanding at the work sites? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the basic work that’s 
outstanding is the job evaluations related to pay equity. There 
was substantial increases within that sector, particularly because 
it’s a female-dominated sector, for pay equity adjustments due 
to the long-standing underpay of women in that sector. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

So that process is ongoing because it’s necessary to have a base 
job evaluation done across the piece in order to determine the 
relative pay of each job. But this is something that they 
requested and it’s something that everybody agrees needs to be 
done, but it also is a time-consuming process. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, as we saw with 
the nurses’ strike that some of the units had much different pay 
scales and when they were amalgamated all under SUN, it 
caused some conflicts. 
 
Now when you have amalgamated the various groups within the 
support staff, how many of those units that have come from the 
different unions had different bargaining within their units? 
How many of those are still outstanding — not related to pay 
equity but related to the different contracts that were originally 
in place that were put together — how many of those remain 
outstanding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will maybe clarify for the member 
that my role is not to be at the bargaining table. My role is to 
govern the framework legislation that governs collective 
bargaining in the province. 
 
But I will say is there would have been conflict no matter how 
you cut it, because you would have had people working side by 
side in the same organization doing the same job at very 
different rates of pay. 
 
And that’s what Dorsey was all about. It was about bringing 
that together, recognizing that there was 500-and-some 
separate, different agreements that needed to be brought into 
line so that people weren’t working side by side who had $2 an 
hour difference in their pay; one might have had a health plan, 
one no health plan; one might have had some job security, some 
no job security. 
 
So there was a whole range of issues that had to be dealt with 
by some method. And it was the agreement of SAHO and the 
unions that this was the best method and that Mr. Dorsey was 
the best person. And recently, I also have a letter from Brian 
Rourke at SAHO requesting the extension so that work could be 
completed. 
 
I’m not sure what you’re getting at. But it wouldn’t have solved 
it not to do it, because you would have had people working side 
by side doing identical work who were paid very different 
wages and benefits. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
you had that prior to the Dorsey report, where people may not 
necessarily have been working side by side, but they may very 
well have been working in different physical structures within 
the same health districts, and getting different pay, different 
securities, different pensions, different benefits. 
 
So what you have gone from previously was disputes between 
union and management. Now you’re in a position where 
amongst the union members themselves, there are still some 
differences in place. And how many of those have not yet been 
resolved? Or is it now strictly a difference between union and 
management. Between the unions representing the health care 
workers, either the professional workers or the support staff and 

SAHO. Or is it still being negotiated in the union structure itself 
as to exactly what benefits they’re going after, what securities 
are they going after, what pay scales are they going after? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The best way to describe this, is the 
amount of additional money that was added into the process 
after Dorsey, was enough to do some interim adjustments that 
dealt with the biggest inconsistencies between people’s job 
wages and benefits. And the job evaluation process should take 
care of the rest of the inequities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well if the job evaluations take care of 
the rest of the inequities, why do you need three years to extend 
the Dorsey report? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The point of this, and again it’s by 
agreement, and as I indicated there was an open period for 
raiding and people didn’t do it. People want the stability of 
knowing that the environment that they’re doing these changes 
in will be stable until it’s completed. And you know as well as I 
do that the health sector is very big; there’s 36,000 employees. 
You don’t do job evaluations on 36,000 employees in an 
afternoon. Someone has to meet with each of those employees 
and go through this process. 
 
So as much as you would like to paint a spectre of difficulty, 
the fact is that people have, in a very responsible way, gone 
through a very big change. And I would urge the member 
opposite to be supportive of the work they’re doing, rather than 
trying to find conflict where none exists. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I think what’s 
being protected here is the government, to prevent any further 
disruptions in the health care field by forcing the unions to work 
under the Dorsey commission report, that they are not allowed 
to cause any labour conflict when it comes to putting these 
unions together. 
 
If there wasn’t a potential for conflict here, and protecting the 
government, there would be no need for this three-year 
extension. It would simply be settled at the bargaining table, the 
same as all wages and benefits are settled in the normal course 
of events. 
 
This is not a benefit to the unions and the union workers. This is 
protection of the government. That’s all it’s about. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll repeat this again very slowly for the 
member’s benefit and it’ll be in Hansard if you want to read it 
again after. But SAHO, CUPE, SEIU, and SUN asked for this. 
We didn’t go to them and impose it. They came to us and asked 
for it. 
 
And I presume that you guys are consistent when you say to 
listen to people; that in this case people came to us, the people 
who are charged with these responsibilities, they asked for it 
and we did what they asked for. 
 
Now if you have an objection to the government responding to 
people’s wishes, then please tell me. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, just at this time I’d like to thank the 
minister and her officials for providing us with the information. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I’d like to add my thank you and to 
the members opposite for their questions. Thank you. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d introduce 
Andrea Seale, who’s on my left, the Crown counsel in 
legislative services, and Ron Kruzeniski, who is a Q.C. 
(Queen’s Counsel), the Public Trustee for Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And good 
afternoon and welcome to the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take the opportunity to commend the . . . 
I guess initially the persons who came to you concerned about 
the vulnerability and sometimes abuse of adults who are in 
circumstances that would, I guess, render them quite vulnerable. 
And I would like to again give commendation to the committee 
that was struck to come up with some recommendations to 
ministers of various departments. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was just wondering . . . There are many, many 
questions that are needed to be asked about this particular Bill, 
The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. But I 
wonder if you could provide me with the amount of money, or 
the cost I guess, that was paid by the government or . . . by the 
government for the first steering committee that was set up. 
And if that steering committee’s work is complete, I would be 
pleased if you could indicate that to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. In response to the 
member’s question, the committee was comprised of people 
within . . . essentially within the Department of Justice, and the 
budget which was relatively small was absorbed within normal 
budgetary expenditures within the department. So it was not a 
large expenditure incurred outside of the Department of Justice 
expenditures. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
subsequently from the recommendations put forward by the 
steering committee, there was . . . according to your speech on 
this particular Act, there was a further working committee set 
up. Now that working committee had to do with producing draft 
legislation in the area of vulnerable adults and guardianship. 
And it says in your notes that the legislation working committee 
has completed stage one of its work. 
 
So I would ask you: to date, what is the cost of that committee? 
And how are those costs taken care of? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you for the question, Mr. Chair. 
Once again the answer is that very little money has been 
expended on this procedure. Ms. Seale and Mr. Kruzeniski 
co-chair the committee, and essentially people from . . . 
representatives from the various groups which, as you point out, 
have been very helpful and very co-operative in assisting in the 
development of this legislation, come to Regina and it 
essentially involves providing them with lunch. So the costs 
incurred by the department are extremely modest. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From your comments 
then I take it that the representatives of community agencies 
that have concern here were not reimbursed for their expenses 
or been given any other per diems or any kind of payment. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — That essentially is correct, Mr. Chair. 
Most of the representatives are from Regina. There are not all 
that many that come from outside. And so, as I say, the costs 
are really very small. 
 
(1200) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, 
who appoints the guardians that are referred to in this 
legislation, guardians that are appointed in emergency 
situations? Who would be the body or the person that would 
have the authority to appoint those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the Court of Queen’s Bench 
would appoint the guardians. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, Mr. Minister, after reading the legislation, I 
understand from the legislation that anyone that wants to make 
application to be a guardian in as far as personal or property 
instances take place, that anyone who wants to make an 
application can make that application to the courts I believe, 
and then the courts would be selective of the person that they 
feel is most suited. 
 
I’m just wondering how we can be assured that the individual 
that is selected is working in the very best interests of persons 
they are trying to represent. Now I say that because if it’s . . . if 
anyone is able to make representation and the courts have a 
number of people that might be equally qualified to do that, 
how can the courts make sure that the best person is selected? 
Will the courts, to your satisfaction, be doing a proper scrutiny 
and background research on these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair. Thank you very much for 
the question, Madam Member. Yes, I do have faith, as I think 
we all do, that the Court of Queen’s Bench treats these 
applications seriously and appropriately, considers what is in 
the best interest of the person in question. And that is what the 
law provides, and that is the guidance provided to the court, and 
the court responds to that. 
 
There are though provisions in the Bill, which to assist in 
ensuring . . . And the member, I think, raises a valid question: 
can we assure that the person who comes forward asking to be a 
guardian is the appropriate person? 
 
Amongst the changes in this Bill are provisions which I think 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

provide confidence in this regard, so that all interested parties, 
including those who’ve spoken on behalf of the person in the 
past, who have assisted or counselled the person in the past, 
would be provided with a notice that this application was taking 
place and they had the opportunity to state any objections they 
might have. 
 
I think we can be confident that the surrounding circumstances 
and facts are presented, which enable the court to have before 
them what they need in order to appoint the appropriate person. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minster. Mr. Minister, what I’m 
wanting to ask is very relevant to a situation very close to 
myself. Does this legislation pertain only to those vulnerable 
adults that would have no other guardianship in the case that 
they had to make a decision or a decision had to be made for 
them? 
 
In other words, is there . . . I’m concerned about who 
determines whether or not a person has adequate guardianship 
already. If a determination like that is made and jeopardizes, for 
instance, any kind of provision that is made through the will of 
a parent of a vulnerable adult, or any other provision is made 
already for guardianship, I would be quite concerned if this Bill 
gives the right to the courts to appoint yet another guardian. 
And I would like to know if there’s any danger, I guess, that 
that might be done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I think there are two or 
three situations in which this question applies. You might, for 
example, have a guardian who is older and in a will prescribes 
for someone to replace them in the event that they die. And that 
would apply unless someone . . . unless it was something in 
which a review was prompted by someone else who thought 
that was not appropriate. There’s no change there. 
 
Someone else might also be a guardian and some other person 
might not be satisfied with that person as a guardian — which is 
perhaps the question the member raises — and apply to replace 
the first guardian; and the court would hear that application and 
would consider it in the context of what it was in the best 
interests of the person who was the subject of the guardianship. 
 
And if the guardianship was a relatively informal process, or 
informal arrangement, it probably wouldn’t even come to the 
court’s attention in the first place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Is there a timeline, Mr. Minister, whereby a permanent 
guardianship must be established after an emergency situation 
takes place? I noted in your explanatory notes that you had 
mentioned that there can be a temporal — temporary, rather — 
personal or property guardian in emergency situations. 
 
So that seems very good, but then there would have to be 
permanent guardianship set up, I guess, and ongoing 
guardianship — I was wondering whether or not there’s a 
timeline on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. All these 
guardians would be temporal, I guess. They would all be 
temporal but whether they’re temporary or not . . . But in the 
event that a guardianship is temporary, that could last for a 

maximum of six months at which time an application of this 
sort would be appropriate. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, to the minister regarding 
the signing of documents portion of the legislation — Mr. 
Minister, does a lawyer have to be present if any documentation 
is signed by the adult and personal co-decision maker to ensure 
that there is no discrepancy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, it is not necessary for a lawyer to be at a site where a 
document is being signed by a co-decision maker and indeed 
the . . . I mean the responsibility would lie with the co-decision 
maker to ensure that they are effectively carrying out the 
wishes, I suppose, but most importantly the best interests of the 
person for whom they are acting. 
 
In the event that that turns out not to be the case, the signed 
document would not be void and therefore unenforceable 
altogether, but would be voidable and thereby would be, at the 
instance of the person who was being assisted, somebody acting 
on his or her behalf, to ascertain whether or not it should stand. 
 
So there doesn’t have to a lawyer present at the signing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, regarding 
section 26, the order of fees — could you give me some sort of 
indication as to what sums of money the guardian would be 
paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, the majority of persons acting for others in this 
context do it for nothing. So there generally are no fees there. I 
mean there aren’t a lot of examples of this to draw on from 
experience, but most would be doing this voluntarily. And the 
court, which would be making the order, would generally make 
an order for zero fees in those cases. 
 
There may be others, other co-decision makers who find 
themselves travelling quite a bit on behalf of the person for 
whom they’re . . . person they’re assisting, in which case the 
court would provide recompense for that. 
 
But our experience is, as I say, limited and so we . . . and we 
haven’t had cases in which large sums of money were either 
requested or deemed appropriate for fees in this case. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just have 
one last question and I would like some clarification here so 
that I can have sort of a settlement within myself, I guess, about 
this whole thing. 
 
Now if for instance there is a vulnerable adult that has had a 
guardian appointed to their care in the event that their parents 
die, if they’re living with their parents at the time, say for 
instance that that guardian passed away within a week of the 
parents dying, and there are other family members that would 
be able to look after the . . . or be guardians for that vulnerable 
adult, would consideration be given to other family members 
over and above someone that the courts may appoint if in fact 
there were other applications made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

question, in the vast majority of these cases indeed it is family 
members who act as the guardian. And in the event that 
someone, that a vulnerable person passed away shortly after 
their guardian passed away, in general the court would assess 
who could best respond. But most frequently these would be in 
fact be family members, unless there had been some past 
history of abuse or something of that sort, which I think we can 
all understand. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. I thank you very much, Mr. Minister, 
and I thank your officials for coming out today and providing us 
some assistance on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 86 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like before I 
do that to thank Andrea Seale and Ron Kruzeniski for being 
here today and helping us, and I appreciate the comments of the 
members opposite. And indeed thank them for organizing the 
consultation that was very significant in the development of this 
piece of legislation, and of course all those who participated in 
that consultation. 
 
And with that, I would move that we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: —Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have two officials here today to assist the committee dealing 
with the electronic commerce Bill. Behind me is Robert 
Hersche, who is executive director, policy and planning in the 
information and technology office of the Economic and 
Co-operative Development Department. And to my left, Brent 
Prenevost who actually, Mr. Chair, has, in spite of being a 
former student of mine, has gone on to do very well and 
undertake significant responsibilities in the Department of 
Justice. He is Crown counsel in the legislative services branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon once again, 
Mr. Minister and welcome to these officials. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, our office has received some calls 
regarding this piece of legislation and people are concerned 
regarding security and privacy. And that’s understandable, 
because any time you’re on the Internet, there are really a lot of 
worries about this and whether privacy is going to be guarded. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps have you taken to ensure people’s 
privacy and security regarding this Bill? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the 
member’s quite right that this is a matter of some concern to 
citizens and indeed to the business community as well. In order 
for the Internet and the various aspects of electronic commerce 
to be more widely accepted, these questions of privacy and 
security need to be addressed. 
 
Now the purpose of this piece of legislation is actually not to 
address those issues. And I would just say that the Bill before us 
is about ensuring that the rules of . . . the law relating to 
contractual arrangements which presently is in place dealing 
mostly with . . . dealing with such things as buying produce at 
the supermarket or a CD (compact disc) at a CD store, those 
rules and regulations, those laws will be applicable in electronic 
commerce transactions. And, as the member knows, this is the 
first piece of legislation of this sort in the country and is the 
result of widespread consultation both internationally and here 
in Canada. 
 
But in response to the member’s question, the federal 
government recently passed the Personal Information Protection 
and Electronic Documents Act and that’s expected to be 
proclaimed shortly. 
 
And we’ve been watching, and I think many have been 
watching, the proceedings to and as they deal with the 
collection, the use, and the disclosure of private information in 
the private sector. So we’ve been watching the development of 
that . . . of those . . . of that piece of legislation through the 
House of Commons and the Senate. It’s received extensive 
debate and extensive discussion. And once we have . . . once 
it’s proclaimed and we have an opportunity to fully consult both 
with the business community and with the federal Department 
of Industry, we’ll be able to respond to the member’s question. 
 
I might say though that it is a matter of great seriousness to all 
of us, and we are moving forward in conjunction with the 
activities of the federal government, the Department of 
Industry. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, that 
is good to hear that the federal government is taking some 
leadership as far as having a Bill tabled to protect the privacy of 
consumers and so on. 
 
I guess it’s the internal mechanics of everything that is really 
going to be very interesting to see how in fact this can be 
worked out in a way that all provinces can ensure that kind of 
privacy. I can’t imagine . . . I mean its experts like you have 
sitting next to you I guess that would be more able to 
understand those workings. But I know that there have been 
endless, endless stories — and sometimes very tragic stories — 
brought to our attention about people losing their life savings 
because their credit card number has been lifted off the Internet. 
 
And so my question to you is: how can . . . or are you assured 
that with what the federal people are doing, as well as the steps 
taken provincially to work in unison with them, that those steps 
will really help safeguard the information of the people of this 
province? And what assurances can you give the people of 
Saskatchewan today — in respect to this Bill — that this Bill is 
going to be something that is going to aid in, I guess, a federal 
initiative to ensure privacy? 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member’s question is, 
I’m sure, on the minds of many as they consider using the 
Internet for some of their purchasing decisions. And indeed as 
time goes on, it would appear that more and more, this will be 
commonplace. 
 
I should say to the member that the problem of someone using a 
credit card illegally is also present in the non-economic 
commerce. And we all, I’m sure, sometimes wonder the extent 
to which our cards can be used. 
 
But fraud is fraud whether it be on the Internet, whether it be 
over the mail, whether it be a telephone fraud, or whether it be 
at our local store. And we treat them all with the same amount 
of seriousness. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, that when you’re using the 
Internet and perhaps dealing with somebody in another 
province, another country, or another continent, that the chances 
of . . . or the risk is significant. Co-operation is incredibly 
important here, both between governments, but also between 
business and governments. And there are, as the member 
probably knows, activities or provisions on the Internet to 
ensure that there is security. 
 
One of the things the business community will have to do, is in 
fact alleviate any fears the consumers have with regards to 
security on the Internet. That is already in place. And we just 
have to make sure that we do that more and more, and ensure 
the security of consumer transactions and member’s personal 
information and credit card information. 
 
And I would say to the member that the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, of which Canada’s a 
member and indeed a Canadian is the president, has looked at 
this specific question — the question of fraud on the Internet — 
and has developed in consultation with all member countries, 
that’s all developed countries in the world, guidelines for 
consumer protection in the context of electronic commerce. 
 
So while these issues have not all been finalized and completed 
and arranged to the total satisfaction of consumers, a great deal 
of work is being done to ensure that the information that 
consumers have, both personal and financial, is protected. And 
it’s, I think, all of our expectations that everything will be done 
to ensure that this is the case. 
 
But we know too that those intent on fraud find ways to defraud 
consumers. And over long-distance transactions . . . I mean we 
particularly have a problem in Saskatchewan with older and 
more vulnerable consumers who, especially over the telephone, 
get tricked into making significant errors of judgment in 
sending money to someone who’s just going to take it from 
them. 
 
That contact is not quite the same on the Internet of course, but 
because it’s not personal, it’s not on the telephone, and perhaps 
many of those older residents won’t use the Internet as much. 
But it’s a matter of grave concern to which we’re all committed, 
not only government but business and consumer organizations 
as well. 
 
And if it’s not resolved to the satisfaction of consumers, of 

course the opportunity is for business on the Internet will not be 
as great as they otherwise would, and we know that business 
has a great interest in expanding commerce on the Internet, 
primarily because it’s such an efficient way to deliver goods 
and services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Just a 
comment or two. When I was fortunate enough to be a part of 
the CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) 
delegation that went to Cincinnati, there was a workshop on this 
very issue. And I was really astounded to learn that if the 
know-how is there, that people can access information about 
anybody in the world within seconds, all the information about 
that person that is available. 
 
And so that certainly pronounced very loudly the need to make 
sure that we do work at providing some sort of mechanism for 
privacy here and that we continue working on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, just one last question. If in fact there is some 
fraudulent activity that does occur, even in spite of the efforts 
being put forward, is there any, like I mean theft of identity . . . 
identity theft through credit cards, etc., can you explain whether 
there is any way that the province could be held responsible for 
that as far as a suit or . . . Can you just comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I think the short answer to the 
member’s question, Mr. Chair, is that there would be no 
liability on the part of the province if somebody defrauded a 
consumer on the Internet, which I understand to be the 
member’s question. 
 
But she does perhaps point to an important issue of consumer 
education. And I mean we all have to play our part in ensuring 
that consumers are informed as much as possible about the 
things that can happen and about how to protect themselves. 
And that’s part, I think, of the general co-operation and work 
together between government officials, both provincial and 
federal, and consumers and business groups. 
 
It’s also of course a matter for, which is why this has come 
through the international route through the United Nations and 
so on, it’s a matter for the international community as a whole 
as borders continue to break down and we have to focus on 
these things in a much more expansive way. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Committee members, this Bill has 32 clauses; 
it’s also broken down into parts and divisions. There’s four 
parts. The Chair is asking permission to vote part II and part III 
in their entirety as we come to them. Do I have agreement to 
proceed that way. 
 
Clauses 2 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me, before 
doing that, thank Robert Hersche and Brian Prenevost for being 
here today, and thank the member opposite for her questions 
which enabled us to, I think, explore some of the challenges that 
we have here. 
 
And I think we should all be proud that Saskatchewan is the 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

first province in Canada to introduce this legislation, and we’ve 
received very good response across the country as a result. 
 
And with that I’d like to move that we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Personal Property Security 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1 of this Bill, I invite the 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials to the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I am 
pleased to introduce on my left, Ron Hewitt, who is the senior 
vice-president for the Saskatchewan Land Information Services 
Corporation; and Darcy McGovern, on my right, who is a 
lawyer with Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
your officials today. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I just have a few questions regarding this 
Bill that I would like some clarification on. And I assume that 
the minister and his department have gone through a bit of 
research to assess how much it’s going to cost for some of this 
transfer. 
 
So I’d like you to indicate how much it’s going to cost to 
transfer all of the assets, employees, and functions to the Land 
Information Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, the actual transfer of employees and assets and 
liabilities won’t generate any cost. 
 
But what the transfer will do is enable the corporation to more 
efficiently and more effectively respond to the public’s 
concerns and needs to ensure that the transactions are more 
speedy, and will enable the costs to be brought into the 
corporation and used in its normal process of deciding how to 
use its assets and how to respond to the interests of users. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give me some 
indication of how long you think this whole process will take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, which I think is when will this transfer take place and 
when will the new structure be in place, the target is for October 
1, later this year, so not very far away. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to the closure 
of the Bank of Montreal in different locations in Saskatchewan 
and the subsequent offer by the credit union to take over those 
clients and services provided to those clients, I know that there 
were a number of people concerned about job loss. 
 
And so I’m asking you today if you can give me some 
indication if there was job loss in respect to those people that 
had jobs with the Bank of Montreal. And whether or not there is 

going to be any danger, I guess, to the people in the credit 
unions that may have their jobs replaced, or whether or not they 
may be moved to another location as a result of this whole 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the 
member for her question, which I think presents us with an 
opportunity to . . . all of us, to congratulate the credit union 
system in Saskatchewan for responding positively to rural 
communities, and enabling those communities to keep banking 
services in their communities, which perhaps would not 
otherwise have been the case had the Bank of Montreal just 
closed and left. 
 
The issue is really a matter for the Saskatchewan Credit Union 
Central. They assure us, and I think the member would know 
this, that while this transfer affects about 60 — I think 63 
branch staff, they anticipate being able to preserve those jobs in 
the communities in question. They don’t anticipate anyone 
losing their jobs. But, Mr. Chair, this really is a matter which 
should be brought up more effectively with the Credit Union 
Central. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that these branches . . . that these 
transfers ensure that banking services are available in 
communities which perhaps otherwise would not have them. 
And every effort is being made by Credit Union Central to 
ensure that those 63 staff members keep their jobs in those 
communities. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And in doing 
so I’d like to thank Ron Hewitt and Darcy McGovern for being 
here. Mr. Hewitt, as you probably all know, has had a long 
association with the land project and has been instrumental in 
moving it forward. With that I’d like to move that we report the 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I will invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
at this moment, Madeleine Robertson on my left from 
legislative services in the Department of Justice; and behind me 
Tom Irvine from the constitutional law department. 
 
The Chair: — I thank you, Minister, and thank you for the 
efficiency of the shift from Bill to Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair I just have a 
couple of questions for the minister on this Bill. Mr. Minister, 
will there be any new costs involved with utilizing the red light 
cameras? 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As the member 
will know, the operation of the red light cameras will be carried 
out by police services. There will be some increase in costs 
because presumably more tickets will be issued as a result of 
the use of red light cameras, and that would add some cost in 
the prosecution department and in the court system in general, 
and then in the enforcement of fines. 
 
The member may not know, but the test on the use of red light 
cameras generated huge numbers of people running red lights, 
and some doing so at considerable speeds. But I’m happy to 
advise the member that her number plate was not one which 
was passed on to anybody in the Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. I’m really glad to hear that because I 
certainly did see the little guy sitting in the ditch there. 
 
Mr. Minister, through the Chair, I’m really quite interested in 
knowing where the revenue, all the extra revenue that is going 
to be accumulated because of these red light cameras, where 
will that revenue be going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The split — in 
terms of the earning, if you want, on the fines — is 25 per cent 
to the province in order to cover their various costs we’ve just 
communicated, and the 75 per cent would go to the 
municipality which was operating the red light camera system. 
 
So in the present situation, Regina would . . . the city of Regina 
would benefit to the extent of 75 per cent of the fine. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, no doubt the municipalities are 
going to need that money after the withdrawal of all the funding 
your NDP government has imposed on them. They will be in 
need of any kind of revenues that they can get their hands on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what 
is the course of action that a person could take if they feel that 
the camera may have made a mistake and they should not have 
received the ticket in the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m not sure what the 
motivation is behind the member’s question here — I’m sure 
it’s just to find out the information — but the issuing of a ticket 
and the receipt of a ticket by a motorist or by an owner in fact 
of the car, in response to someone driving that car through a red 
light and being picked up by the red light camera, could be 
challenge . . . the choice is for that person to pay the fine 
voluntarily, as would be the case in any other traffic violation, 
or go to court and challenge the case presented by the 
prosecution. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I bring that 
up is I think mentioned to you in the last second reading debate 
that there is a provision there for the police, whoever’s 
operating the camera, to give an estimated speed of a vehicle. 
And I think that there’s going to be some dispute on the part of 
motorists when that sort of indication is given on their ticket, 
that they were charged because of an estimated speed. 
 
I’m wondering if there’s any kind of a parameter that that 
estimated speed is put within, so that people would know . . . 
For instance, if you’re within 5 miles an hour over the speed 

limit, 10 miles an hour over the speed limit, how do they 
calculate an estimated speed? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
the purpose behind the use of red lights is not to assess speed 
but to assess whether or not the driver drove through a red light 
and infringed that provision of the highway regulations. So the 
evidence will be about running the red light, not about the 
speed. 
 
But I think it’s interesting to note that in fact on one occasion, 
someone ran a red light in the child . . . (inaudible) . . . at 92 
kilometres an hour. So there are some serious issues revolving 
around driving in the city, in these circumstances. And as I said, 
there were significant numbers, hundreds of people in a very 
short period of time, who were running red lights. 
 
But I think the answer to the member’s question is, this is a 
process of dealing with an offence which involves running a red 
light, not excessive speed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, you 
are exactly correct but there is a dual implication here. There is 
the implication of going through the red light, as you’ve 
mentioned, sometimes that’s done at a high speed. And so the 
motorist would want to have recourse to some action to 
challenge that estimated speed, if it should be the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have one question and then I would like to 
refer the questions to my colleague from Moosomin. Mr. 
Minister, could you please clarify some of the amendments that 
are being made to the search and seizure provisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I can say 
actually the amendments, the other amendments other than the 
red light cameraman, serve two . . . (inaudible) . . . One, 
authorizes, the member will note, a driver’s licence to be 
withheld for outstanding fines for Criminal Code driving 
offences, as a mechanism for ensuring extra weight to someone 
who’s committing those kinds of offences and, as the member 
indicates, includes a search and seizure provision applicable to 
provincial statutes which don’t have search and seizure 
provisions attached to them at the moment. And I can give a 
couple of examples for the member. 
 
The Passenger and Freight Elevator Act for example has no 
search provisions. And if it was felt that standards were 
insufficient and a charge was being considered, the Act doesn’t 
at the present time provide for any authority to do a search 
which obviously would be useful if we were to proceed to 
address safety concerns in that way. So that’s one example. 
 
The Agri-Food Act and The Animal Products Act for example 
allow warrantless searches at the present time which don’t 
comply with the Charter. This would ensure that they do, that 
they are valid searches. 
 
And I’ll just give one other example. The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act allows searches and seizures but doesn’t have a 
provision authorizing the object seized to be retained, to be used 
for evidence at the trial. This has caused some problem in the 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

past. So this would . . . these amendments would resolve that 
difficulty too. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Minister. 
Mr. Minister, one thing I’ve noted about the . . . taken a note of 
and I’m not exactly sure if this is a major concern. But for 
example you get some intersections are fairly wide. And I just 
happened to notice there were lights on Prince of Wales . . . or 
the camera was on Prince of Wales and Highway 1 East and 
that’s quite a wide intersection. 
 
And just out of curiosity, I was approaching the intersection and 
the light just turned yellow. Where is the person held, because if 
you can’t get across the intersection without the red already 
coming into effect . . . And if you’re seen as having gone just 
through the intersection, the red hits . . . I guess the concern I 
have is when you hit it and when you’re right . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You weren’t going fast enough. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well that may be true, but at the same time I think 
we’re cognizant of the speed when a light changes as well. 
 
And I think we need to be really mindful of the fact that we 
need to step down on people trying to speed through red lights. 
But I still think we need to have an understanding of how the 
light works so that if you’re entering the intersection when the 
red turns, is that when the light is catching you? 
 
Or you’ve gone through, you’ve started, you’ve been there, 
you’ve gone through as the reason for the yellow light, and yet 
it turns red before you get through on a wide intersection. So I 
kind of want to know exactly what the parameters are regarding 
the lights so that people aren’t really being sent tickets when 
they’ve been caught in a situation when really they had no — it 
wasn’t really their fault. They were just proceeding and 
following normal traffic patterns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, like the 
hon. member, I would never drive so fast that I couldn’t stop 
when the light turned red. But, the . . . my understanding is that 
the cameras, which are operated by the police services in the 
municipalities which choose to use them at the present time, I 
think only in Regina, they calibrate the machines so that it takes 
a photograph of a car . . . if it passes through the red light some 
eight seconds after the light changes. 
 
So it provides some tolerance for those who are going through 
red lights, in the example the member proposes. So the 
calibration of the machine permits some tolerance in regard to 
that situation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, one supplement. So you’re basically 
saying the camera is actually photoing after you’ve proceeded 
rather then entering the intersection. If you’re entering the 
intersection on the red, then automatically there’s no questions. 
If it’s amber and you’ve got . . . and you’re going through, then 
80 seconds may not . . . although I guess, it possibly should be, 
but I’m just bringing that to your points . . . just a clarification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the photographs I’ve seen 
show the red light and show the car through the — through the 
red light, and I think addresses the member’s concern. The issue 

was to catch those who, in a sense, blithely ignore the red light 
and, you know, we have many examples of pedestrians, and 
other cars, and people in other cars, being injured, even killed 
as a result. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just had a couple of 
questions regarding the red light issue and the fact that you’re 
using photo radar. Obviously with the red-light if you’re getting 
a speed with that red-light . . . or how do you come up with a 
speed, or an estimated speed. And I’m just, I guess, interested in 
any progression then down that road of photo radar at 
intersections and . . . because this is . . . I mean, we’re moving 
into the electronic age and that’s what the red-light cameras are 
all about. 
 
The member from Humboldt had asked the question on the 
revenues and I’m very interested in seeing this because of 
trying to get a grasp on where that revenue is going to go. I 
mean the red-light cameras and red-light cameras at 
intersections are really for traffic safety. I mean, they’re trying 
to stop people from running amber and red lights, to reduce 
collisions. 
 
And so if you’re finding people breaking the law, how much of 
that money would be directed back into any safety programs 
educating people on the cons of running red lights. 
 
So really, I guess it’s two questions, one a little bit on the photo 
radar and a little bit on the red-light camera. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I want to 
thank the member for those two useful questions. 
 
In response to the first question. While the cameras do pick up 
speed, it is not . . . the purpose of the red-light camera is not to 
address speeding, it’s to address running a red light. And so 
while the speed is there it will not be used to generate an 
offence or evidence to support the commission of an offence. 
So the added detail of the speed will not be something which is 
taken into account here. 
 
Now the question of . . . actually the member had three 
questions. The issue of photo radar itself on highways, for 
example, is not contemplated and is not dealt with in this piece 
of legislation. This deals specifically with red-light cameras at 
intersections. So the member can be assured that this is not an 
issue of photo radar on the highways or indeed on any other 
street in a municipality other than at an intersection with traffic 
lights. 
 
On the third point, as I mentioned in response to the member 
from Humboldt, the proceeds of the fines are divided 25 per 
cent to the province, 75 per cent to the municipality. And both 
administer various safety programs. And so I think we can 
assume that some of the resources will be used for that purpose. 
 
But I think the member is right, that it’s a question of safety and 
the member from Moosomin mentioned the same thing. It’s a 
question of safety and anything we can do to ensure more safety 
on our highways is positive. And the trial period for the use of 
red light cameras was indeed for that purpose. People who 
infringe were sent notifications that they had in fact broken . . . 
or run the red light and that was part of an education process 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

too. 
 
But I think the member will understand that there needs to be 
more. And I think he’s saying this, there needs to be more 
education of drivers about the dangerousness of running red 
lights. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Okay, I just had one other question. I just 
briefly heard you mention about the withholding of licence for 
outstanding fines at that area there. 
 
I guess I had some reservations with this because I know when I 
was dealing in the traffic safety area as much as I did, we heard 
statistics of upwards of 10,000 people driving in our province 
without a licence. 
 
So withholding more licences and taking more licences away 
from people, not necessarily as a deterrent or not necessarily a 
deterrent but a reason for people to automatically pay their 
fines, you know they may just drive without a licence. 
 
As I said there’s well over 10,000, I believe, every day driving 
in Saskatchewan. And I thought the number used to be quite a 
bit higher. I think I’m low on that figure, but I don’t have the 
numbers in front of me any more. So I’m quite, quite sure with 
that — driving without a licence. 
 
So these people that owe a number of dollars as far as fines, 
they withhold the licence; they continue driving. What happens 
to any insurance situations that arise a week down the road 
because you’ve withheld their licence; they have no legal right 
of being on the road, and they get into an accident, and there’s 
no insurance valid? Is that correct? Or how does that all work 
out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
Mr. Chair, the member is aware I think that non-renewal of 
driver’s licence has already been in place in the province for 
provincial offences. And in 1996 the Criminal Code was 
changed to provide for the refusal to issue a renewal licence 
until a fine is paid for a Criminal Code driving offence too. 
 
So the member is right that this is an effort to ensure that people 
pay the fines that they’ve incurred as a result of committing an 
offence. 
 
The alternative in the past, as the member will know, has been 
for a person to spend time in jail for not paying a fine. This I 
think is a more useful way of responding to non-payment. Of 
course, we have other measures too — community service and 
so on. 
 
In response to the member’s question about what happens if an 
uninsured driver is involved in an accident, my understanding 
— and we can check this — but my understanding is that there 
is a base level of coverage under SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) which provides coverage when 
someone is driving without a licence. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, I was a bit remiss in not thanking the 
officials earlier but I would like to take the opportunity to thank 
them for coming in today to provide answers and assistance to 
the minister. Thank you. 
 
(1300) 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 41 — The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No 30 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000/ 

Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 
sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 3 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 

Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I move the amendments be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that Bill No. 3 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

Bill No. 66 — The Personal Property Security 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under it’s title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by leave of the House I should like to withdraw 
the motion that we do now adjourn. There’s obvious agreement 
to extend the business at this time. And so therefore I would ask 
for that leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister. We are definitely into the afternoon. And I wanted to 
just bring to your attention one more time, my deep belief that 
we do need to have a registry for sexual offenders in the 
province. And I wonder if you still take the view, Mr. Minister, 
that this is a bad idea; that it is not necessary in our province. 
 
And I think by now you realize that at least two of the agencies, 
the police agencies in the province, have indicated support for 
this. And I take it that you too do recognize the difference 
between CPIC (Canadian Police Information Centre) and a 
provincial registry and how they could complement each other. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also have . . . you know, we received word from 
Chief Dave Scott, from Saskatoon, that in Saskatoon, 
particularly, they would most likely have enough monies in 
their budget to accommodate this sort of a registry. 
 
And I, first of all, would like your comments for the people of 
Saskatchewan who are very, very concerned about this sort of 
an initiative being taken. They want to see this happen because, 
frankly, in my community of Humboldt there has been 
expression of concern by citizens about this very thing. 
 
And I think the people in that community as well as 

communities throughout this province would feel a measure of 
safety and confidence that the police are monitoring sex 
offenders that have been convicted and released, and that that 
would certainly provide for their safety and also for the 
protection of their children. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would be pleased if you could, like I said, 
for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, comment on why 
in fact you felt that this is not a good idea and why you feel that 
CPIC is sufficient and effective and complete as far as a registry 
goes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well let me 
reiterate our commitment to ensure that we do everything to 
protect our children, and in particular to protect them from the 
most heinous of crimes, that is the sexual abuse of children, and 
indeed, the sexual abuse of anyone. And I share the member’s 
commitment to ensuring that we do everything we can in this 
regard. 
 
With regards to her proposal for a sex offender registry, I’ll 
restate some of my position and add some other points. At the 
behest of Ontario and British Columbia, the ministers of Justice 
across the country, in their annual meetings with the federal 
Minister of Justice, considered the advisability of taking this 
route, and indeed considered the advisability of a national sex 
offender registry, and concluded that the most appropriate, the 
most effective way to proceed would be through a beefed-up 
CPIC. 
 
(1315) 
 
And consequently we have a hundred and fifteen million dollars 
being . . . having been committed to improving CPIC and to 
making it a faster and more efficient service. And the 
committee which is charged with implementing that hundred 
and fifteen million dollar investment is chaired by Deputy Chief 
Weighill here from Regina. 
 
We are all concerned to ensure that the appropriate authorities 
have as much information as possible so as to protect our 
children and indeed our families in general. And it is of the 
view . . . it is the view of the ministers of Justice, and indeed it’s 
the view of most experts across the country, that the most 
effective way is through a beefed-up CPIC. 
 
I might also say to the member that one of the reasons . . . that 
there are two other factors which I think are important. One, 
and this is presently being experienced by Ontario, which 
passed legislation of this sort, is that it is very difficult to craft 
the registry and to ensure that it will work. And Ontario has 
already taken a great deal of time to move towards the 
implementation of their registry. 
 
And the aspect of her Bill, which is very similar to the Ontario 
Bill, which argues that sex offenders . . . or which requires sex 
offenders to, in the face of $25,000 penalty, ensure that their 
name is on the list and that their — any new information about 
them — their address and so on is on the list simply has been 
shown not to work in those states . . . in the United States where 
the sex offender registry has been in place. 
 
And you have a kind of one-in-four compliance rate. So you 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

have three out of four sex offenders who are not on the registry, 
or at least not on the registry in a way which enables it to be 
used effectively — it’s not up-to-date information and so on. 
There is further serious concerns about the constitutionality of a 
sex offender registry. 
 
So for all those reasons, Mr. Chair, and, Madam Member, I 
remain of the view that the most effective way to proceed in 
this area is with regards to a beefed-up CPIC process. 
 
Now I might add also, as the member will know, we have 
provisions in place for notifying appropriate persons, including 
communities in certain circumstances, where a dangerous 
offender is in their community. We also have provisions for 
long-term supervision of people who have served their 
sentence. We also have designations of dangerous offender, 
which the province has . . . the prosecutions division has pushed 
for in many, many more cases in recent years than previously. 
So the information on a registry is not the only vehicle through 
which we protect our most vulnerable. 
 
Further I would say, lastly there is a question always with 
regards to this kind of information and it is: what do you do 
with it — who do you notify and under what circumstances? 
 
And that, as the member will know, with regards to public 
disclosure of persons . . . of dangerous . . . of persons who are 
dangerous in a community is now conducted by a committee in 
the province which assesses whether or not it is a good thing to 
do or not prompted by a request from a police service. 
 
So with those comments I remain committed, as I know the 
member is, to ensuring the greatest degree of safety possible. 
And on continued reflection, it seems to me that a beefed-up 
CPIC is the most appropriate response in conjunction with all of 
those other vehicles we have for ensuring public safety. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
from all the information that I have been given regarding this, I 
would have to dispute your claim that in the US of America that 
this is not working very well because it was upon their . . . some 
of the research and, I guess, inspection done as to how well this 
is working in the US that the Ontario government proceeded 
with it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your choice of words is a beefed-up CPIC. 
Surely to goodness you would understand as well as everyone 
that to have an improved CPIC that is more extensive in its 
information in regards to addresses being provided for police, 
that would require the assistance and the co-operation of every 
province. This is primarily why Ontario went ahead — or 
they’re going ahead rather — to set up their own sex registry. 
 
There is some responsibility on the part of a province — the 
Minister of Justice in this province is yourself — and so there is 
some responsibility for you to take to establish a sex registry — 
offender registry rather — in this province. 
 
Now I really question how CPIC can be beefed up, how CPIC 
can be improved. Because right now . . . I mean I fail to see 
how it can be improved if provinces do not co-operate and work 
along with the federal registry. 
 

And I also understand that the federal registry, if it does come 
to pass that it is beefed up to provide more information 
including current addresses of sex offenders, that it’s going to 
take two to three years to do that. Now I don’t know how many 
times I’ve stood in the House and I don’t know how many times 
people out there in the province have been telling us, we need to 
have action immediately. We need our government to care 
enough to do something now. 
 
And in view of the fact that this is not going to cost a great deal 
of money — it is just a matter of will — then I can’t understand 
why you would not take this measure. 
 
I would like you to prove to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, that you do care and that you won’t rebut a Bill just 
because a member of the opposition has put it forward. I think 
that is very unfair to the children and the people of this province 
who need some assistance and need assuredness that they will 
be protected. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to some of the other comments that you 
have made, I point out quite clearly what was pointed out to me: 
CPIC at this time has only information upon the conviction of a 
sex offender. They have the information in regards to the name 
of the sex offender and that they were charged with whatever 
offence. 
 
Now that is the last known bit of information, Mr. Minister, that 
any police can access in this country. There is no way of 
monitoring the movement to another location in this country by 
a sex offender because there is no registry of that anywhere. 
 
Even though communities are given information, given 
knowledge that an offender may be in their community, without 
the obligation being put on the offender of reporting to the 
police upon the intention of that offender to move, and 
information given to police in the jurisdiction where they are 
going to move, there is no way that police can properly track 
this. This registry that I am proposing would allow for that kind 
of tracking. 
 
Now in view of the fact that it would not cost a great deal of 
money; that there are, certainly, the Saskatoon police and the 
Prince Albert police that are supporting this kind of thing, I 
can’t quite understand why it is that as minister you would not 
be behind this and do your part provincially, getting ready for 
maybe a federal registry in time, a beefed-up CPIC that would 
provide information for everyone across Canada. 
 
But this certainly would help to monitor offenders also, not only 
to track them but to monitor them when they do enter a 
community, because the fear that people feel in a community 
when a sex offender has moved into their community is an 
extremely high fear. They are really afraid of this. They’re 
afraid for their children. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is not a great deal to ask. It is a very common 
sense, a very effective measure and that has been indicated by 
the police. 
 
It seems to me that people throughout this entire province can 
see clearly also that this would not . . . this would not take a lot 
of working and would not take a lot of money. And they’re 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

asking for every measure to be taken that can possibly be taken 
to help the children in our province to ensure their safety and 
protection. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I want to 
add a couple of points from listening to the member’s question. 
 
First of all, I want her to not to draw conclusions from my 
opposition to her private members’ Bill and to argue that on the 
basis of it coming from the opposition I wouldn’t support it. Mr. 
Speaker, that is not the way in which I or indeed people on this 
side of the House will respond. Provided the member, provided 
the member proposes legislative initiatives, which are effective 
and will work and are constitutional, I will support them. 
 
With regards to her point that a sex offender registry wouldn’t 
be very expensive and would be easy to administer and would 
provide extra protection for the public at large, I think we’re not 
sure how much it would cost. But we know that in order to beef 
up CPIC, we’re talking about a hundred and fifteen million 
dollars. I would say that CPIC is first of all more appropriate 
because it is a national registry, and it is indeed a national 
registry of sex offenders and sex offences, and more. 
 
If she talks rightly about mobility and the difficulty of tracking 
people as they move around, that precisely, Mr. Speaker, is one 
of the reasons why a registry dedicated to Saskatchewan is less 
desirable than a national registry. Because with that mobility we 
need to ensure that police services across the country are able to 
receive information of those who move into their communities. 
 
I’d add that the police in a community to which an offender is 
being released are notified ahead of time. They are somewhat 
dissatisfied with the ability they have to speak with Parole 
Board officials about the release. But, Mr. Chair, the police 
services are notified, when offenders move into their 
community, by the Parole Board, and that includes all 
offenders. 
 
And that doesn’t deal with the point of what happens if 
somebody moves from one community to another. But there are 
of course . . . there is of course capacity within CPIC to update 
the information and that of course would be done. The 
challenge for keeping an update CPIC registry is no different 
than keeping an updated sex offender registry, Mr. Chair. 
 
There are two other points which are important in this regard. 
One is with regards to the links between police services in 
Ontario. And the linkages between police services in 
Saskatchewan is much more sophisticated and much more 
effective and much more encompassing than is the case in 
Ontario. 
 
Consequently we can understand why Ontario might say, well 
we need something which is more provincial in nature. In 
Saskatchewan we don’t need that because our police services 
are effectively linked up and therefore have all the information 
available under CPIC, which, as I say and which I think is 
worth emphasizing, is a sex offender registry plus. So it 
contains much more information than a sex offender registry 
would do. 
 
And with regards to the experience in the United States . . . In 

the United States, there is not a national police information 
process. So they are driven to respond on a state-by-state 
approach. This is plainly not as useful or as advanced as our 
process. And I would conclude, again, that a beefed-up CPIC is 
the choice of ministers, the choice of experts, and the preference 
of those who have the greatest understanding of how these 
things work. 
 
With that being said, it is appropriate to reiterate that all of us 
are committed to ensuring that we do everything we possibly 
can to ensure that those most vulnerable in our communities are 
protected, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — My apologies to the hon. member for 
Humboldt, but I’d like to ask the minister to introduce his 
officials and then we’ll go to the . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my right is 
. . . I’m pleased to introduce Doug Moen, who is the executive 
director of community justice. Behind me, John Baker, who is 
executive director of law enforcement services, and Colleen 
Matthews, who is the executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
And there’s some others at the back. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to your 
officials, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think that it has been 
said many, many times over that action speaks a little bit louder 
than words. 
 
I hear time and time again and over and over that your 
government is committed to children — to the protection of 
children. And I hear time and time again where your 
compassion is equal to anyone else’s compassion. 
 
(1330) 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I don’t see appropriate action that could be 
taken, that is necessary to be taken, that would take not too 
much effort but would show a willingness, would put some 
proof behind your words that you care and that you’re 
compassionate, and that you’re really intent on . . . providing 
the best kind of protection for our children that your 
government can possibly give. 
 
I don’t see a great deal of action where action could be taken, 
and I challenge you, Mr. Minister, to take up your influence 
with your government, with your entire cabinet, and your 
Premier to ensure that this kind of legislation comes to pass. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in regards to your concern about 
constitutional challenges and so on, it’s very interesting that 
you would make that statement because what you’re concerned 
about here, and I guess you have to be concerned about it, but 
it’s pointing out to me that your concern is the challenge that 
might come forward from the offender as far as his freedoms 
and rights go. What I’m concerned about is those same rights 
and freedoms that children should enjoy that they are not 
enjoying. 
 
Now we have the rights and freedoms in children encoded. We 
have that down on paper just like any other rights and freedoms 
are encoded on paper. I am interested, Mr. Minister, in 
protecting the children, innocent children, and communities 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

from people who have offended in the past and are at a risk of 
offending again. And that has been well established that that 
does happen. 
 
So I guess if you’re concerned about a constitutional challenge, 
maybe that will happen in Ontario, maybe that will happen in 
other places. If CPIC is beefed up that same constitutional 
challenge may come about. The onus must be put on the 
offender to report to police agencies when they are released. 
When they’re on parole I understand that the parole officers are 
to communicate with the police in different jurisdictions about 
the whereabouts of this offender. If the onus was put on the 
offender, it would be simply a requirement of release due to the 
risk at hand to the general public. 
 
I can’t quite understand why that could not happen. Possibly it 
would have to be a requirement of release. It might have to be a 
little change in legislation. But due to the fact that it is well 
documented that these people can endanger our children, I 
would hope that possibly that’s a kind of a change you might be 
promoting also. I think it’s very, very important. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister: I would like to know from you where 
information that CPIC gathers originates from? Where does that 
information come from in the first place? It’s my understanding 
that CPIC has got some information coming when there is a 
conviction of a sex offender or other. And I’d like to know if 
that’s accurate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question 
then, a more general suggestion — I know that’s not the point 
of this but which may be helpful in the long term — CPIC is 
administered by police agencies, as I suspect the member 
knows, and is updated by police agencies as well, as 
information becomes available to them. And then, of course, 
because all have access to . . . CPIC is available to each police 
service across the province and indeed across the country. 
 
With regards to the member’s comments about 
constitutionality. I think it’s appropriate to remark that there’s a 
good chance that the Ontario legislation and the legislation the 
member’s proposing would be regarded as unconstitutional. 
Consequently not much is achieved, other than a false sense of 
security, to anyone in the community, of having legislation of 
that sort in place. Because you can’t . . . You know the first 
time that somebody challenges it, it will be struck down and 
then it is of no use. 
 
I would reiterate the member’s point — I absolutely agree with 
her — that faced with an option of responding to the civil rights 
of sex offenders and the civil rights of children, we have to 
focus all of our energies on protecting children. I absolutely 
share that view, but within the confines of our constitutional 
guidelines and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
My suggestion, Mr. Chair, if I may, to the member, is that we 
meet to explore the possibilities here. We share the same goal; I 
think that’s true. We want to make whatever legislative 
initiatives and policy initiatives we can to ensure that children 
and others are protected to the greatest extent possible. 
 
And I extend to the member an invitation to meet with officials 
and with myself to explore whatever possibilities we have for 

us to share with her, maybe in a more formal way, the concerns 
that I have expressed here about the registry and to see the 
extent to which we can move forward to address the concerns 
that she’s raised. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
your reference to me in regards to how CPIC gathers its 
information indicated that police agencies, you know, are a part 
of this — a part of gathering information, putting information 
forward for CPIC registry. 
 
Mr. Minister, you well know that police can only give 
information of the last known address — the last known address 
of an offender. And when they are released, upon release, the 
last known address is the address they had when they were 
convicted. There is no requirement on the part of released 
offenders to give their next address to anyone, to register 
themselves anywhere. So police do not have any sort of access 
or availability of information about the whereabouts of that 
offender once they leave prison. 
 
I think that we really need to take this step, Mr. Minister, and 
the requirement where the onus is on the offender, to give 
notification of where they intend to live, to the police in that 
jurisdiction, is extremely important. 
 
I don’t think that it is too much to ask. In fact, Mr. Minister, I 
trust, I really do trust that if Ontario has taken this step, that 
they could see the very likelihood and . . . likelihood, yes, of 
this going through, and that they would have done a great deal 
of research into whether or not it’s workable. 
 
I also want to bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, that when I 
was at the Edmonton conference for the sexual exploitation and 
healing of people that have been victims and survivors of this 
activity, that there was a workshop where the Vancouver city 
police presented on their efforts to try to get information 
recorded and put in. And it was certainly going to be I think an 
adjunct also, or a contribution eventually to CPIC. 
 
So there are efforts all over the country now, specifically in 
Vancouver and also in Ontario, to take responsibility 
provincially to make sure that we are doing our part and putting 
in place whatever we can in order to make this national registry 
a success in the end. 
 
So I wouldn’t want to have it said that Saskatchewan is just 
simply lazy on this. I think you have every opportunity to 
consult with Ontario, to consult with Vancouver, to find out 
what they have done, why it’s working, and why they can see 
that it’s going to work; and to ensure that we have in place in 
Saskatchewan the same sort of provisions to protect our 
communities, to assist the police, and to alleviate violence and 
crime against women and children in our province. Mr. 
Minister, I ask will you do that and will you do it as soon as 
possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, I’m committed to ensuring that effective 
legislation which will sustain a constitutional challenge is 
introduced to protect the most vulnerable in the province. I’m 
not committed to introducing legislation that will not support a 
constitutional . . . that will not sustain a constitutional challenge 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

or which will not be effective. 
 
The member focuses on the requirement in legislation of this 
sort, for a convicted sex offender to update the registry in the 
face of a $25,000 fine. Well the simple evidence is that 
three-quarters of offenders do not pursue . . . do not respond to 
that compulsory requirement in the face of $25,000 fines. So at 
best it would appear, from the experience south of the border, 
that you have an up-to-date sex offender’s registry of a quarter 
of the sex offenders in that region where that registry takes 
place. 
 
With CPIC, it’s national first of all, continually updated by 
police services as they find that information has changed, such 
as addresses and so on. There is a flagging process, the special 
interest category, which contains all sorts of information 
including whether the person is violent, possibly suicidal, 
whether they’re a sex offender, whether they’re dangerous. And 
in the event that information is plugged into that special interest 
category, the originating police service, the police service to 
which the person was first released, is informed of that. 
 
So I think there are significant problems — significant practical 
problems — with what the member is proposing. Her concerns 
and her desire to effectively protect children is, of course, one I 
share. But the practicalities of the process she’s providing do 
not — I reiterate —respond to the question that she is 
concerned about. A better way, I remain committed, is to ensure 
— and I remain committed to this — is to ensure that a national 
registry, which covers not only sex offenders but everything 
else, is made more effective and that it is used in conjunction 
with all the other procedures we have in place, of which she’s 
quite familiar, to ensure the protection of children and those 
most vulnerable in our communities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister. If you 
were afraid of constitutional challenge, that says to me that, you 
know, you’re more concerned about protecting the offender 
than you are about the children. 
 
What challenge, what opportunity do children have? I think it 
would be just a great work for some of us legislators in this 
province to sort of re-look at some of the rights that people 
have, that people that have committed crimes in our society and 
have hurt and in fact taken the lives of many people, the rights 
they have are quite, quite extreme and quite high — and I think 
there’s been a protest by many people in our country about that 
— as opposed to the rights and privileges of those that have 
been at the receiving end of the crime. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you what you intend to do in the meantime 
then, until CPIC is beefed up? 
 
I challenge you with this, Mr. Minister, because I believe that 
when police — who are very brilliant police in our province — 
chiefs of police have seen that this kind of a registry could be 
very helpful, would not take a great deal of complexity in order 
to initiate these measures, are requesting and asking you to do 
this. I think they would take issue with you when you dismiss 
this whole idea of such a necessary initiative to assist them in 
the work that they are trying so desperately to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to give you an example of something that 

was brought to the attention of my office. And that was of a sex 
offender that had been released back into community. And 
because of the inability of police to really know . . . be able to 
monitor this person, the offender had established a residential 
address in one community, and in fact had moved to another 
community, rented a space in a building and was working at 
Early seed and feed in Saskatoon with young people who had 
been placed there, Mr. Minister, for a summer job, summer 
employment. No one there — not even the employer — knew 
of the history and background of this person. 
 
(1345) 
 
Now I think, Mr. Minister, if you look at a situation like that 
and the police would have the ability to monitor the 
whereabouts of these people a little closer, I think that it would 
assist everyone. And I think that, you know, if there are 
provisions, parole provisions and so on that are in place, that’s 
great. But I think we need to respect and honour those people 
— namely the police — and communities who are trying so 
very hard to ensure that there is safety in their communities. 
 
This initiative would be one of the initiatives that we could take 
in this province to assist the work of the special committee that 
is certainly working to stop the sexual abuse and exploitation of 
children in our province. We need to take every initiative that 
we can. 
 
I say again it’s not enough to speak of support and compassion 
without taking some action and doing something about it. So I 
would ask the minister to comment on that. 
 
And I have one other — after that time — I have one other 
issue that I need to bring forward, and time providing, some of 
my colleagues would also like to present some questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the 
member raises an important concern, and indeed one which 
over the years we read about in newspapers; and many of us 
will know situations in which volunteer organizations find 
themselves having employed or have as a part of their volunteer 
base, people who are offenders and who can harm those whom 
they try to help. 
 
But in response to the member’s question, I would really have 
two . . . three points I guess. The first is, in order for monitoring 
to take place the police would have to know that the person is 
where they are. And the experience, as I’ve said many times 
with registries in the United States, is that only one in four 
persons who are sex offenders register. Consequently, three out 
of four would not be known . . . their whereabouts would not be 
known to the police other than through CPIC, and consequently 
it would be very difficult of course to monitor them. 
 
Secondly, the point I’d make is that this really . . . the 
monitoring question is a question really of resources. Once you 
know that somebody who is dangerous is in a particular place 
and a particular city or in a particular location within that city, 
then it becomes a question of resources to effectively monitor 
that person. 
 
I think the member would have to agree that our commitment to 
200 new police officers across the province in the term of the 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

government, the work we’ve done along with other provinces to 
ensure that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) will 
be filling about 147 vacancies in the province from last October 
to next October, will ensure a great deal more resources so that 
monitoring can be done more effectively. 
 
With regards to the member’s specific question, I think it is 
worth noting, and the member probably is aware of this, that the 
national association of volunteers which is essentially the 
umbrella organization which represents community 
organizations, is not of the view that a sex offender registry 
would assist. 
 
They are of the view that the most appropriate response to the 
question the member raises, the issue the member raises, is to 
have more effective screening mechanisms in place in the 
organizations in question so that they can access criminal 
records which would then show that the person was or was not 
a sex . . . had a criminal history of sex offending and indeed a 
whole raft of other offences. They’re of the view that better 
screening is the appropriate mechanism to follow, thereby 
ensuring that they effectively know who they’re hiring. 
 
And they are in the process — national association of 
volunteers, as the member probably knows — is in the process 
of increasing the capacity of organizations through training 
programs to ensure that they can effectively ensure that the 
people they hire and those whom they have working as 
volunteers also, they know as much about them as possible. 
 
So I think the response to the member’s question is the one that 
the national association of volunteers has taken, which is better 
screening and better training to do that screening. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I’m really 
very happy to hear of the association’s work, and I really wasn’t 
aware of that. So I thank you for bringing that to my attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just wanted to revert back again to the Bill that I 
have tabled. And you commented that you didn’t believe that 
this registry is going to work simply . . . I mean you commented 
about this I guess, Mr. Minister, in the House a few days ago, 
that the sex offenders just simply would not register — they fail 
to do so. 
 
Okay, in the legislation there is a provision for a penalty. 
Sometimes penalties are things that make people think twice. 
Without that, they just simply continue to say, oh well that’s 
fine, I don’t have to. I don’t have to be responsible and I can go 
wherever I want, do whatever I want to do, and nobody’s 
monitoring me. 
 
Now it’s not only the $25,000 fine. In the event where that 
would be extremely burdensome on a person, I think if you read 
further in the legislation you would see clearly that there is up 
to one year of a return to prison. 
 
I believe, I do believe in holistic healing, Mr. Minister. I believe 
in proper rehabilitation for inmates — for specific rehabilitation 
according to a person’s life and the needs that they may have 
specifically. I believe in reconciliation. And I believe in what 
many of the Aboriginal people are bringing forward, is 
restorative healing while in prison. Because I think it’s a time 

spent where one can restore one’s own soul as well as restore 
their communion with community. 
 
And I think it’s important that we do those kind of things 
rather than just put people in prison without any kind of effort 
to look at the needs of . . . all the needs of a human being and 
to move towards healing in that way. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Minister, I think that we do need 
to make sure that there are deterrents up so that those 
deterrents and those penalties speak loud and clear to people 
in our society that would otherwise just sort of laugh at the 
law. I think we need to have some deterrents that tell people 
that no, we will not accept this kind of abuse of our children, 
of terrorizing our communities, of having people have to 
watch every step their children make. I think we need those 
deterrents in place also. 
 
And I would hope that when there’s an Act that is very 
simple of registering . . . a sex offender registering with the 
local police upon their release from prison, which isn’t a 
great deal to ask. And I just think it’s something that they 
would do rather than have to worry about $25,000 fines or 
returning to prison. I think it would be something that would 
be done. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave that issue for the 
time being. I think we have agreed that it would be 
advantageous for possibly both of us to sit down and to 
discuss the matter further, and I hope this kind of a Bill will 
come to pass in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to draw your attention to the 
Provincial Ombudsman’s report. Speaking of prison, there 
are problems at the Regina Correctional Centre, I guess you 
probably have noted if you read her report, and I’m sure you 
heard about it before. But I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, 
do you know what I’m referring to specifically, the cameras 
that would monitor activities that are in the cell areas? 
 
And I was wondering if you could give me an update on what 
kind of action has been taken by your department to better the 
situation at the Regina Correctional Centre. Because there 
again, we have this horrendous abuse of some of the prisoners, 
and although they’re in there for a reason, I don’t think that 
that’s any reason why we do not ensure that their dignity, while 
they’re in there, is protected a little bit. 
 
To have to go through the kind of physical and sexual abuse 
that the said prisoner went through, I think is just 
unconscionable, and I think we need a review of the whole 
justice system in regards to correctional centres in this province. 
 
I think there are many, many archaic situations in our 
correctional centres, and especially pertaining to our youth, 
things that need to be changed. But I would ask if you could 
give me some indication of what is being done in the case of the 
Regina Correctional Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Well 
this is a matter of significant concern to all of us. And while I’m 
responding to this, just let me introduce Don Head on my left, 
who is head of corrections Saskatchewan and Elizabeth Smith, 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

who is the person who controls the purse strings mostly, in the 
department. 
 
In response to your question, in fact I was at the corrections 
centre on Wednesday, Wednesday morning, and I met with the 
inmates’ committee and with staff and discussed some of these 
questions and other questions with them. And I can say that in 
response to the issues which the Ombudsman raised and the 
member raises and indeed have been raised before and have 
caused us concern before, the Saskatchewan corrections has 
approached the issue in the following way. 
 
Minimize the use of that facility as much as possible, first of all. 
Secondly, responded by a higher staff complement in that part 
of the Regina correction centre which, as the member quite 
rightly states, was designed for a different corrections 
philosophy which was designed for a different time. 
 
And I’m not sure if the member’s been there, but if she 
contrasts that building with the more modern buildings she will 
notice, as everybody would, the different philosophy of 
corrections. You won’t find blind spots; you won’t find 
facilities which are of the sort of the main building. But that 
building was built what, 85 years ago. 
 
Secondly . . . thirdly I mean, we are of course considering what 
we can do about that building and what other facilities we could 
have instead of the Regina correction centre and that will 
continue. But as the member can appreciate, I’m sure, replacing 
a facility of the size of the Regina correction centre, even a 
smaller facility is extremely expensive and must take its place 
in the priority of other spending commitments of the 
government. 
 
And I close by saying that in the Ombudsman’s report, she 
quite rightly, and I think we should recognize this, compliments 
the Saskatchewan corrections department, Don Head and his 
staff, for responding to her concerns in as effective a way as 
they did and as effective a way as possible. 
 
And I think it’s important to remember that, within the 
constraints of resources and finances, Saskatchewan corrections 
is doing everything it can to ensure that inmates in our facilities 
are as safe and secure as they possibly can be. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for your comments and I 
take a great deal of interest in your comparison that you made 
between the Regina Correctional Centre and other facilities. 
 
Now if you were referring to the correctional centre in 
Saskatoon, I have to say that I’m not impressed with that 
correctional centre. Some of these places are hellholes. It pays 
to go and visit them. I think that proper rehabilitation for young 
offenders is necessary. I think they need to have rehabilitation, 
but they have to have access also to a humane environment 
while that’s happening, or else they’re going to be returning to 
prison over and over. 
 
Buildings that are as old as that one are . . . Certainly I’m not 
placing any fault on you, Mr. Minister, about the building — 
obviously it’s old — you’re doing what you can with it. But I 
think that we have to ensure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Right. But I think we have to ensure that the kind of monitoring 

and the kind of services that are provided in those centres are 
adequate and are protecting people against activities like that 
that are just . . . certainly should never be happening in that 
environment. 
 
So I will just thank you and your officials. But I wanted you to 
spend a couple more moments — some of my colleagues have 
got questions that they would like to put forward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, my question to 
the minister deals with a pension issue that is raised by 
employees of the government in various agencies. I have in my 
hand a statement of claim that was filed on October, in October 
of 1999 on behalf of a number of employees, with the 
assistance of SGEU, and it’s against the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation. 
 
And what my understanding of the issue is, is that . . . what has 
happened is back in 1981 there was changes to the 
superannuation Act which allowed non-permanent employees, 
part-time and casual employees to join the pension plan. And 
part of the regulations stated that it was the employer’s 
responsibility to inform these employees that they were eligible 
to join the plan. 
 
(1400) 
 
Apparently that was not done and sometime later the employees 
found out that they were eligible and asked to buy back their 
service. For some reason they were denied this, and as a result 
they had to take this legal action. 
 
Now my question to the minister is how many other 
departments and agencies of the government have had this 
statement of claim filed against them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well on the 
member’s first point, as he points out, the issue of pensions in 
this regard is before the courts and I think he can understand 
that it would be inappropriate for me to respond to it. 
 
His second point, which I take it is about other actions against 
other government departments. I can’t give him the answer 
right now, but if he would allow me, I’ll talk to my colleagues 
in other departments. It’s probably more appropriate for them. 
But I’ll talk to them and see the extent to which we can respond 
to that question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, just to follow that up. To the minister: 
it’s my understanding, I’m told, that in total there is — well, 
I’m not sure exactly the number but that’s why I asked the 
minister — four or five or six other statements of claim and it 
affects approximately 250 employees. 
 
I might, just for the minister’s information, give the case of one 
of the claimants. In the statement of claim against crop 
insurance was the former employee of crop insurance who used 
to work in the Wynyard office. 
 
When the Wynyard office was closed and she then had to drive 
to Raymore as part of her condition of employment because of 
the closure of the Wynyard office — now this person had some 
additional difficulties with your government. One day when 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

going home from work she was involved in a very serious car 
accident and suffered, you know, substantial injuries. She is 
now in a dispute with SGIO . . . SGI, I should say, through the 
no-fault insurance claim and that whole scenario. And now 
she’s being denied her pension benefits because she wasn’t a 
part-time employee and that sort of thing. So she’s suffering a 
double whammy and that sort of thing. 
 
And also, I have a memo in my hand that SGEU wrote to all 
government members of the Legislative Assembly urging the 
government to simply just settle this issue. It’s not dealing with 
a large number of employees. I would assume that the number 
of dollars that are involved in this issue are not large and that it 
is creating some hardships for quite a number of these 
employees that are directly affected by this. 
 
And I would just simply urge the minister and his government 
to do the right thing, as the memo from SGEU suggests, do the 
right thing and just settle this thing rather than dragging it out 
through the court system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well in 
response to the member’s question, again, I think he’ll 
understand that as it is before the courts, it would be 
inappropriate for me as Attorney General to respond. 
 
But I might say, I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, being a Crown corporation, does 
not have the Department of Justice as its lawyer. In fact, if the 
question is an appropriate one at all, bearing in mind that there 
is litigation in place, the appropriate minister would be the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, one further question. I believe there are 
other department agencies and government departments that are 
involved in this situation. And yesterday during the Committee 
of Finance, my colleague the member from Spiritwood, asked 
the Minister of Labour about . . . raised this issue with the 
Minister of Labour. And at that time she suggested that we take 
it up with the Minister of Justice. And so that’s why I’m raising 
this question this afternoon. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, my questions are regarding the 
correction centre too, and Arlene had touched on it. I’m not into 
the . . . not going to talk on the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The member I think recognizes the 
problem already. It’s against the rules of the legislature to use a 
member’s name. Just carry on. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — My question was regarding corrections and 
the whole issue of the no smoking policy for all people in the 
correction centre — staff, everything else. I’ve had a number of 
phone calls and know a number of the people personally that 
are staff in the correction centre. And they had some real 
concerns with it. 
 
And I just want to know where that is. What is . . . where are 
you at with that now as far as . . . is there no smoking of course 
in the building, on the grounds, in the parking lot — thinking of 
the Regina correction centre. In other words, if they go off the 
grounds, then are they leaving their post, and addressed 

accordingly? Just where are you on that type of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well this is an 
important question. 
 
As you know, we introduced the smoking ban at Regina 
correction centre first — I forget the date; April 1 I think. And 
that is progressively being continued through the system in the 
province. 
 
The member’s right — there is a smoking ban in the institution 
and on the grounds of the institution for both inmates and staff. 
This is not always an easy transition, as you can imagine, either 
for inmates, in particular new inmates, but even those who’ve 
been there for some time, nor on the part of staff. 
 
We are addressing those concerns as they arise. And we will 
continue to do that and continue to try to address the concerns 
of staff as the process continues. 
 
I might say that there are any number of methods of assistance 
to inmates to enable them to deal with their inability to respond 
to their nicotine addiction in the institution. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Okay, I can understand, you know, the 
principle in the building and I have no problem with that. I 
really question what’s the meaning of, on the grounds? You 
know, you have a staff member that takes a coffee break. 
They’re going through the withdrawal of the inmate and all the 
stresses that go with that, then themselves, and they go out on a 
coffee break to have a cigarette. It’s 40 below out, and they’re 
willing to go ahead and do that outside the doors on their coffee 
break, and you’re saying, no, they can’t do it. 
 
And that’s just the staff. I mean with the addiction of nicotine, 
which fortunately enough I’ve never been involved with it, I’ve 
never smoked in my life, but it’s got to be one of the toughest 
addictions to break. And you’ve got inmates that are under all 
sorts of stresses, and now they can’t go outside and have a 
cigarette. They come back in, and they’re put in the 
environment where staff is going through withdrawal and they 
can’t even go out and have a cigarette in the parking lot. And I 
really question the whole logic behind that. Who is it hurting 
and why are you doing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think the response to the member’s 
. . . the member, I think, understands why smoking is prohibited 
on the grounds of the institution for inmates. I don’t think he’s 
raising that question. The problem, as he will realize, was when 
smoking was permitted outside and in designated areas within 
the institution, the rules were constantly broken and were very 
difficult to enforce. 
 
That interim measure lasted for several years and the inmates, 
as occurred, did not respect those rules and regulations, and 
consequently the only effective way was to ban smoking on the 
part of inmates in the whole institution — the same measure 
taken for staff. 
 
And with regards to the member’s specific point about why 
don’t you let staff smoke outside, the approach taken by 
corrections Saskatchewan was permitting that would not 
contribute to harmony within the institution that we would 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

expect — and indeed there must be evidence from before — 
that we would expect disruptions on the part of the inmates, 
because of course it would be visible to them, the staff outside 
smoking on the grounds or outside the door. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, just a couple of quick statements 
to end. I understand that harmony thing, but I would really 
believe that there is lack of harmony out there right now from 
the reports that I’ve had, just on that very issue. 
 
And one of . . . the one point about the inmates and they had 
areas where they could smoke, and they weren’t sticking to that. 
Hearing from people inside that I have talked to, said it was 
never enforced. It was never enforced. And that, you know . . . 
So you’re wiping the whole thing out because you didn’t 
enforce the problem. That’s what I’m hearing from people 
inside the building, both staff and inmates. 
 
And so, you know, you’ve really, I think, caused a lot of 
problem where the problem didn’t need to be caused. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me just respond very, very briefly. 
I mean the issue is a health issue, and I think the member 
understands that. The province, and indeed the people of 
Saskatchewan, are of the view that it’s a health issue and that 
we should do what we can to address it. And indeed the 
legislature has had a committee studying this question, 
specifically with regards to children. 
 
So I mean it was a health initiative, not a corrections initiative. 
And it was an initiative that had been delayed really, or its 
implementation had been delayed for quite some years. 
 
In order to protect the health of inmates and staff in the 
institution from second-hand smoke, this was the only avenue 
available after trying everything else. And I would say to the 
member that the enforcement of the partial ban in the institution 
was extremely difficult to enforce, and the conclusion of 
officials was that it just simply was not enforceable. 
 
And I should add that other provinces are moving in the same 
direction as this, Mr. Chair. And indeed there are many, many 
institutions across North America where smoking bans of this 
sort are in place. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials. Just a couple of questions here. First of all, regarding 
yesterday’s ruling by the Supreme Court, and I believe the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix describes it very fittingly. It says: “Gun 
law legal but still stupid.” 
 
Mr. Minister, as I look at the debate that’s taken place, I have a 
concern, and we all fall into the next comment I’m going to 
make, that sometimes politicians really are out of touch with the 
population in general. And certainly it appears that the federal 
ministers of Justice, Mr. Rock, and now Anne McLellan, have 
just decided that they’re going to just go full bore ahead as a 
result from the push of a few concerned citizens and groups, 
and forget about the rest of Canada. 
 
The concern I have, Mr. Minister, is while this issue has been 
more of a western issue . . . And again we find ourselves sitting 
in a situation where we’ve got a group of politicians in Ottawa 

who have just decided that they could care less about Western 
Canada. Then they rely on the Supreme Court, which is 
basically a politically appointed group of people and there for 
life . . . And I begin to think that maybe it’s time we have at 
least a term on the Supreme Court so that former parties that are 
elected to government don’t always have to rely on somebody 
else’s appointment in the past. 
 
But the concern I have here, Mr. Minister, is where do we go 
from here? I know a lot of gun owners across Western Canada, 
certainly in Western Ontario too — it’s not just Western 
Canada; it would be outside of the Niagara Peninsula and west. 
And it’s not just men; there’s a lot of women who enjoy the 
recreation of hunting as well. 
 
And in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, we’ve 
taken a strong stand. I believe your party has given some 
leadership, and I’d just like a clarification of where we go from 
here. 
 
(1415) 
 
And I think one of the . . . when you look at provincial 
jurisdiction, last night Ms. McLellan basically said, well, we 
have federal prosecutors, we have federal police. Ontario, I 
think, has a provincial police, Quebec has a provincial police, 
we use a national police force —what are the avenues that the 
province is going to pursue now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well very briefly, Mr. Speaker, my 
comments remain the same as yesterday and our 
disappointment with regards to the Supreme Court of Canada. I 
should remind the member that six provinces and three 
territories shared in this constitutional challenge, and he quite 
rightly points out the difficulties that this legislation has caused 
many across the country. And there is plainly a prairie or a 
Western Canada perspective on this which is different than that 
of the federal government. 
 
Having explored all of the legal options, I mean both before and 
after the failure of the constitutional challenge — and I think 
your party agrees — the possibilities are extremely limited. 
We’ll still look at them but they are extremely limited on the 
legal front. This remains or this then becomes solely — it seems 
to me almost solely at any rate — a political issue now which 
requires us all to bring as much pressure to bear on the federal 
government. 
 
We know that they have not responded effectively to the 
pressure which has already been quite significant. I think it’s 
our obligation to continue to call upon the Minister of Justice to 
prove that this works. We think it’s very, very unlikely that you 
could ever prove that this was an effective way of responding to 
concerns about violence in our communities and safety and 
security at home. 
 
So we will continue that process. We will continue to not 
enforce the Firearms Act. As you know, the government made 
that position clear in 1996 and reiterated it in 1998. So we 
won’t be using our resources to enforce the firearms legislation. 
If charges are to be laid they will have to proceed through 
federal prosecutors and we will continue the political pressure, 
as I’m sure the member will as well. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I appreciate 
that and I think you’re right. It certainly is a political question 
and it’s going to have to be addressed probably in that manner. 
That’s the only way that some people may begin to listen. 
 
One other question I have and a concern I have, Mr. Minister, 
and it comes to . . . As I understand it, in this country you’re 
innocent until proven guilty. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 
if indeed that is the rule of law. And the reason I ask that 
question, while I’m not always defending police officers, but I 
think police officers work very diligently to try and establish 
. . . not establish the law, but uphold the law. But I’m concerned 
about the fact that in Saskatoon we’ve had a couple of officers 
that are under question for some activity, and now we just had 
an announcement in Regina as well. 
 
And it would seem to me whether it’s police officers, whether 
it’s an individual person, that if we’re innocent until proven 
guilty, I’m concerned when groups start saying, well you’re 
suspended. 
 
If there’s a suspension required, until a decision is made and 
until you find out the facts and whether or not there was 
actually a charge should be laid or a guilty verdict, I am 
concerned about the fact that people maybe have their salary 
removed. Because it seems to me the message we’re sending is 
that that person is actually guilty of the offence. 
 
And I think what we should be saying, that anyone, regardless, 
until a final verdict is reached, is innocent. And that is the 
concern I have, and I just wonder if there is a response, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think the appropriate response, Mr. 
Chair, and one I hope the member will understand, is that with 
this matter before the courts, it would be inappropriate for me to 
comment on it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the Minister of Justice here, along with his officials. 
 
I have some questions that I have asked to the Minister of 
Energy and Mines, but as he correctly pointed out, they fall 
within the purview of Justice in dealing with the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a letter here that was sent . . . a copy of a 
letter that was sent to you in dealing with resolutions passed by 
the Southeast Surface Rights Association, and I wonder if you 
could give me some indication as to what your response is to 
these particular matters. 
 
The first resolution deals with additional funding for the board, 
that is the Surface Rights Board, under The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act, for the board to actually 
have hearings in the rural municipality in which the action is 
taking place, so that the board members can actually see the 
location that they’re making a determination on, to gain a better 
understanding of all of the issues involved. 
 
In most cases the board hearings are held in Regina or 
Saskatoon or a major centre. It’s a major inconvenience and 
cost to the land owner to travel into that centre for the hearings 

because this is where the Surface Rights Board has its hearings, 
it’s more convenient for the companies involved because they 
can fly people in from Calgary or Edmonton or Toronto or 
wherever they might come from, and putting a large imposition 
on the land owner who is being inconvenienced by the 
operation. He may very well have not wanted that operation on 
his land but is being forced to put up with it and feels extremely 
put out when he has to travel, say, from the southeast part of 
Saskatchewan to Saskatoon for a board hearing. 
 
What are you doing about those circumstances, Mr. Minister, to 
make it . . . make the board more aware of what is actually 
happening at the site? And what are you doing about making it 
more equitable for the land owner when he has to travel great 
distances for a hearing that conveniences the board and 
conveniences the oil companies involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well as the 
member will know, there have been extensive discussions over 
the years about this and other matters affecting the Surface 
Rights Board, and plainly it would be preferable to many if the 
hearings could be heard closer to their home. 
 
We do the best we can, and I think the member would recognize 
that, to ensure that the timing of the hearings and so on are 
designed to inconvenience those participants as much as 
possible. The point remains that sometimes these hearings are 
inconvenient geographically, and therefore from an economic 
point of view, for the participants. 
 
It is, as I’m sure the member can appreciate, primarily a 
question of — or significantly a question of — of resources. If 
more resources were committed to the surface rights arbitration 
process then these are some of the things that could be 
addressed. 
 
I’m not sure whether the member is suggesting that we commit 
more resources to this process, but that would address the 
concern at our . . . At the present stage, Mr. Chair, we are not 
considering additional resources to the board but we continue to 
discuss this matter and indeed other matters with surface rights 
. . . with people who are affected by surface rights. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Since 
cost seems to be a factor in being available to the landowner in 
particular, perhaps the resolution no. 3 that was put forward by 
the association would help in dealing with those costs. 
 
They’re recommending that mediation be a part of this process, 
that both the landowner and the company involved sit down and 
participate in mediation to try and resolve some of these matters 
before it goes to the quasi-judicial board for a final 
determination, to try and settle some of the issues before it 
happens . . . before the major costs become involved. 
 
And that a failure to comply with a mediated agreement then be 
given some teeth to force the offending party, either the 
landowner or the oil company, once they have agreed to the 
results of mediation, that that compliance be carried out and that 
the board be able to enforce those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, this is a matter we’ve also 
discussed at some length with surface rights organizations. And 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

certainly in terms of mediation there’s a long-standing 
commitment on this side of the House to mediation and to 
supporting mediation. And we would certainly encourage all 
participants in this process to attempt to mediate their dispute 
before taking any further action. And mediations take place, as 
the member will know, not infrequently, and will continue to do 
so. And we will continue to encourage it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
mediation does take place an agreement occurs. There are times 
when that agreement is not followed, and yet there is no teeth 
within the legislation to enforce a mediated settlement 
agreement. But the board, when they do put forward a 
settlement, what kind of penalties or enforcement capabilities 
does the board have to ensure that the parties involved are in 
compliance to a board order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the decision would be, would be filed as a 
court order and then the normal court enforcement mechanisms 
would apply, and in the same way as if it had been a decision of 
a court. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could explain that a little bit more in context of a 
settlement that has been ordered by the board. One of the 
parties does not comply — does that mean that the other party 
is then responsible to seek compensation or redress through the 
court system incurring therefore all of the legal costs involved 
on that party even though the board has ordered a particular 
action to take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the short answer to the question, 
Mr. Speaker, and I will — Mr. Chair — and I will give a short 
answer — is yes. 
 
But if the member has any specific cases in mind which he 
could bring, to which he could bring our attention; we’d be 
happy to look at them, but he is raising a hypothetical issue. But 
if there are specifics then we’d be happy to look into them for 
him. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I had a 
case that I brought to your attention last year on this. But what 
you’re telling me is that the board can make an order, and then 
either party to that order doesn’t have to follow it if they feel 
that the other party does not have the financial resources in 
which to pursue it. So what is the value of this board if parties 
to the actions can simply ignore it if the other party doesn’t 
have the financial resources to pursue the matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member’s — Mr. Chairman — in response to the member’s 
question, like all boards, like all court decisions, like all 
decision-making processes in our society, a decision is 
rendered, the responsibility to enforce that decision is upon the 
person who’s seeking the redress. That would apply whether it 
was a Court of Queen’s Bench action, a decision made by the 
Surface Rights Board, or any other board. 
 
That is the way the system works. You get an order, the 
responsibility to enforce that order is with the person who wants 
it enforced. And that process is through the court process, Mr. 

Speaker. That would be the case in every legal system that I 
know of. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, that certainly . . . 
well maybe the actual application. Because if the government 
takes somebody to court and the court ruling goes in 
government’s favour, let’s say a fine is to be paid by an 
individual, and they don’t wish to pay it, the government would 
certainly then pursue that because they have the financial 
resources to do so. 
 
In this particular case though, if you have a quarter-section 
farmer taking on a huge multinational oil company, that can 
provide for all of the high-cost lawyers and all of the hoops that 
they have to jump that they can take advantage of within the 
legal system, it certainly does seem to be an unfair playing 
field, and that is what the Surface Rights Arbitration Board is in 
place for, is to try and level that playing field. 
 
Otherwise there is no use for the Surface Rights Arbitration 
Board to be in place. Why not simply let the parties go to court 
and hash it out there? Because that’s what you’re saying at the 
end of the day is going to be the net result if one of the parties 
does not want to follow the rulings of the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. 
 
Why even involve the Surface Rights Arbitration Board if the 
parties involved do not have to follow the rulings that that board 
has made and the only recourse of the offended party is to go all 
the way through the court system? They might as well do that in 
the first place. 
 
So you’re waste . . . if you’re not prepared to provide the 
support to the individuals once a determination has been made, 
then simply disband and get rid of the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, I might just point out to him that section 87 of the Act 
deals with a decision which has not been enforced, which at the 
behest of one of the parties can be enforced by the sheriff or his 
bailiff or somebody that he designates. 
 
So in terms of enforcing the order, that is the appropriate 
process to go to. Or if the person is seeking, in this case the oil 
company I suppose, to do anything or to pay any compensation 
or damages, and that is not forthcoming after the board has 
made an order, then the appropriate vehicle is through the Court 
of Queen’s Bench. 
 
It’s not, I think, accurate to talk about the whole judicial 
process. An order is registered with the Court of Queen’s Bench 
and then the normal enforcement measures are followed. 
 
I think the member should recognize, and I’m sure he does, that 
the vast majority of decisions made by the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board are complied with by those who are ordered 
to comply. And the reason for the board is because it is a 
significantly more efficient, more effective, and a speedier 
process to boot, to deal with these kinds of questions. 
 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

I doubt that the member is really suggesting that all disputes 
about surfaces rights should be addressed personally between 
the two people involved if they can’t make an agreement and 
that then you go to court. That, Mr. Speaker, would be, or Mr. 
Chair, would be a much more cumbersome, much more 
expensive, and much less effective a process. And I doubt that 
the member is suggesting that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I certainly am not, Mr. Minister. 
But I question the viability of the Surface Rights Board if its 
orders cannot be enforced and when one party can arbitrarily 
simply ignore them. 
 
I’d like to ask you: what is the procedures then if one . . . if a 
judgment has been made against one of the parties they simply 
refuse to do whatever the order indicated they were to do and an 
application is made to the Court of Queen’s Bench. Is it simply 
a matter of filing an application and then the court deals with 
the matter, saying that has been dealt with by the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board, now you will do X or else? Or does the 
applicant have to go in there and defend their application? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, the 
member raises the issue of the effectiveness I suppose of a 
decision of the board and continues to discuss the question of 
how you enforce, or how that order is enforced. 
 
The Act is clear and it’s I think relatively straightforward. If the 
order is not complied with — as I mentioned, the vast majority 
of orders are in fact complied with — but if the order is not, 
then the aggrieved person, the owner usually, or occupant, may 
file with the local registrar of the Court of Queen’s Bench in the 
centre nearest to the land involved. That then becomes a court 
order which is enforced by the sheriff in the normal way. 
 
That, Mr. Chair, is the way in which legal decisions, disputes 
between individuals, civil actions, are enforced in this province 
and every other province and in every other country in the 
world. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then does 
every other country in the world also have a Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board to deal with these matters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Indeed not everybody does have a 
Surface Rights Arbitration Board. But I think you can easily 
envisage the alternative, Mr. Chair, and the hon. member I’m 
sure can too. 
 
Rather than a farmer going to the Surface Rights Arbitration 
Board for the matter to be resolved with a relatively modest cost 
involved in that, and the relatively modest commitment in time, 
the alternative would be for that farmer to go to court, to the 
Court of Queen’s Bench, with the incredible expense of lawyers 
and so on, to enforce that claim. 
 
So the presence of the Surface Rights Arbitration Board in the 
province saves farmers significant resources, both in terms of 
dollars for hiring lawyers and so, and in terms of time. I mean I 
think it’s pretty clear, the benefits over the court alternative. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s certainly of benefit to those parties 
that wish to comply with the board decision. In those cases 

where a party does not wish to comply with a board decision, it 
seems to be of no assistance whatsoever that they end up back 
in the court system where they . . . and simply could have 
avoided all of that in the first place. 
 
What needs to change here, Mr. Minister, is that the Surface 
Rights Arbitration Board needs to have the ability to enforce its 
own rulings, which it presently does not have. 
 
And one of the recommendations being put forward by the 
surface rights association is to allow the board of arbitration to 
reconvene a hearing with powers to impose penalties and 
punitive measures for non-compliance of a board order. Have 
you considered that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, as I’ve said a number 
of times, this is the procedure followed in all boards and indeed 
in all provinces. 
 
The member’s suggesting that the Surface Rights Arbitration 
Board should have enforcement powers, I take it he would 
assume then that other boards should have enforcement powers 
too, whereby you would have a myriad of sheriffs working for 
boards around the province enforcing the boards’ decisions. 
 
Rather than the process we have now, which is a system 
whereby the enforcement process is through the Court of 
Queen’s Bench and through the sheriffs who respond, who 
work out of the Court of Queen’s Bench . . . a more efficient, 
more effective service, Mr. Speaker. And I can’t, Mr. Chair, and 
I can’t imagine that the member’s suggesting that every board 
should have its own enforcement mechanisms with the huge 
expense of personnel and processes and paper and so on to 
enforce it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Certainly not, Mr. Minister, but not 
every board has the power to authorize access onto individual 
owners’ property. This board certainly does have and this board 
certainly does do that. 
 
A landowner who may not wish to have . . . to allow access 
onto his property, at the end of the day appears before the 
Surface Rights Arbitration Board and is told, they’re coming on 
whether you like it or not. Now he can say, no you’re not; and 
he simply winds up in court again or with the sheriff doing 
whatever the sheriff has to do and allowing access onto that 
property. 
 
However, on the other side of the story, if the court has ordered 
compensation or a certain way of dealing with the matter, then 
— and that company does not wish to comply with that — the 
sheriff doesn’t show up and say, yes you will. The landowner 
has to go to the Queen’s Bench court and make an application 
to have the circumstances rectified. It doesn’t seem very 
equitable, Mr. Minister. 
 
So why does the board, the Surface Rights Arbitration Board, 
which is allowing companies to have access to individual 
owners’ property; not have some mechanism in which to 
enforce the orders that it has applied against the parties without 
it having to cost or take additional time for the landowner? 
Because the landowner is certainly being forced to comply. 
 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have anything to add 
to my previous answers other than to say that the department is 
looking at a more overarching creditors’ remedies project to 
assist in the enforcement of remedies of the sort the member is 
talking about through the Queen’s Bench of court process . . . 
through the normal judgment enforcement process which one 
would hope would facilitate these matters. 
 
But I don’t have anything to add about the enforcement of the 
court orders for the Surface Rights Arbitration Board other than 
what I’ve said three or four times, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister — for not 
answering, I guess. 
 
Another part of their letter deals with resolution 5, Mr. Minister, 
that deals with seismic surveys, geophysical surveys upon the 
land, in particular deals with rural municipalities and having the 
geophysical surveys done on right-of-ways, municipal 
right-of-ways, and road allowances as opposed to having it 
done on private property. 
 
And the suggestion that the surface rights association is making 
is that rural municipalities be allowed to levy a licence and a 
permit fee for those geophysical surveys which are carried out 
on public lands. When those geophysical surveys are carried out 
on private property, there is a fee, access fees and damages that 
are paid, but those fees and damages do not apply when the 
surveys are carried out on public lands. 
 
Have you given any consideration to allowing municipalities to 
levy those kind of licences and those kind of permit fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member will probably 
know that the matter of issuing . . . rural municipalities 
licensing geographical surveys is a matter within the 
jurisdiction of the Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 
minister, and it would be appropriate for him to raise that 
question there. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 
issue of compensation, and practices and procedures of the 
board in dealing with environmental responsibilities, waste 
management, restorations of abandoned sites, and 
accountability, what have you been doing in this department to 
bring these up to date with the current practices in other 
jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I think the member will 
know that there are significant initiatives really in Energy and 
Mines jurisdiction in dealing with these questions, significant 
issues, on the part of the government to address the concerns 
he’s raised. 
 
And it would be I think most appropriate if he raised those 
questions with the Minister of Energy and Mines, and with the 
Minister of the Environment and Resource Management, where 
those initiatives are addressed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Then 
perhaps you need to discuss this with the Minister of Energy 
and Mines. Because when I asked him about it, he said it’s your 
responsibility because it deals with the determinations by the 

Surface Rights Board in dealing with compensation, with the 
practices being carried out by the companies on the landowner’s 
land, and the procedures that they use as well as what their 
environmental responsibilities are. 
 
This is clearly, Mr. Minister, not in the purview of the Minister 
of Energy and Mines. This is your responsibility and no one 
else’s. So what are you doing about it? 
 
What are you doing to ensure that the compensations and 
practices being carried out in this province as being mandated 
by the Surface Rights Arbitration Board are standardized across 
Western Canada? And how . . . Actually, I’ll come back to this 
next question. That’s my question now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I must have misunderstood 
the member’s former question. I thought he was addressing 
issues of environmental initiatives in the environmental field 
and that’s why I responded in the way in which I did. 
 
In response to his specific question, he will know that there are 
appeals by all companies based on the board’s recent awards — 
the oil companies claiming they’re too generous. We will have 
to wait for the appeals to go through the court process. And of 
course we continue to monitor this development, but we will 
await the court’s decision here. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 
that comes to the next point. How does the board make a 
determination as to the values that it places on access, on 
nuisance, on whether or not this land should be considered 
agricultural land? Because when a company is given access to a 
landowner’s property, that land may very well be cultivated 
land for the raising of crops; it may very well be pasture land. 
 
But when that company takes ownership or a lease or access to 
it, they’re not planning on raising wheat and chasing cows on it. 
It now becomes an industrial site. 
 
So why is the determination made to make compensation based 
on agricultural land when in actual fact the property is going to 
be used as an industrial site? How is that determination being 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this question goes 
to the heart of in fact having a board at all, an independent 
board, independent from the Department of Justice, indeed from 
the government as a whole. Independent boards set their 
criteria, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, that’s what their job is, and 
then apply those criteria. 
 
And it would be unwise and indeed inappropriate for me to 
second-guess the guidelines they establish. And for those who 
are concerned about the compensation levels of decisions made 
by the Surface Rights Arbitration Board, I presume they make 
those arguments to the board when applications are being 
considered. 
 
But that’s the purpose of the board — to assess how best to 
proceed in an administrative, detailed area and then to proceed 
in accordance with their own guidelines. 



June 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well in 
explaining how they make those determinations and where they 
gather their information from, certainly doesn’t second-guess 
the decisions they make based on that method of determination 
and the information they have. 
 
So how do they gather that information that they use to make 
their assessments and what is the process they use to make 
those assessments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I don’t know how much time the 
member has, Mr. Speaker, but I could go through the various 
different mechanisms the board follows. But I think the member 
will have access to them himself; and he probably also has 
access to various studies, for example, negotiating surface 
rights out of the Centre for Studies in Agriculture, Law and the 
Environment at the University of Saskatchewan which sets out 
the criteria pursued by the board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I reiterate, it’s in this area of administered tribunals . . . the 
very purpose for having boards is to ensure that a detailed area 
of the law which would not be appropriate for this place or for 
the courts to deal with the detailed issues, be addressed by that 
board in accordance with the procedures they set down for their 
activities and then that they, in fact, comply with those 
procedures. I’m not sure if the member is arguing that the 
procedures aren’t being followed by the board, and he has 
avenues to pursue if that is the case. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Let’s deal 
with something that is directly in the Act then. Under resolution 
6, from the surface rights association, it says: 
 

The proponent must deposit an amount sufficient to satisfy 
all compensation claims and costs; and whereas the current 
deposit required under The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act is fixed in 1968 and is outdated, 
insufficient, and inadequate . . .  

 
What is the compensation set out in the Act as it was in 1968 
and currently the rule that applies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chair, in 
response to the member’s general point about the desire for an 
increase in deposits, these are matters that we constantly look at 
and we constantly discuss with affected parties, and we’ll 
continue to do that of course. 
 
But it appears that the deposits at the present time are $1,200 
for a well site or a roadway, and $150 an acre to 2,000 for a 
flow line or a service line. 
 
And what the member is referring to is a resolution by the 
surface rights association, the Southeast Saskatchewan Surface 
Rights Association, to increase those numbers to 20,000 and 
$2,000 respectively, which would be difficult to justify such a 
huge increase at this time. 
 
But I might add that, or might reiterate that we constantly look 
at these kinds of issues with those affected and will continue to 
do so in the future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not quite sure 

why you would think it would be difficult to justify at the 
present time, when the cost of servicing, drilling a lease — a 
three and a half, four acre lease — will run easily into a half a 
million dollars. And to put down a deposit on possible claims of 
$20,000 seems to be very minimal in that case. 
 
The same with flow lines. You can cause considerable amount 
of damage with a leak on a pipeline that could easily amount to 
greater than $2,000 worth of damage, particularly in this age 
when environmental concerns are so critical, where the loss of 
value of a piece of property can be astronomical when such a 
leak occurs. 
 
I think that there is some value in taking a very serious look at 
increasing this dramatically; $150 and $1,200 for a well site 
certainly does seem to be very low. And it’s time, Mr. Minister, 
that that be visited and corrected. 
 
And my colleague from Moosomin has one question left. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just one 
question here, and I don’t know if you have a total answer for 
me today, and maybe it’s something your department is 
struggling with. 
 
But I’m just looking at Leader-Post, June 14, “Judge struggles 
with sentence for FAS victim,” fetal alcohol syndrome. I know 
as . . . Certainly the Department of Social Services, it’s been an 
issue that’s been raised considerably, and something that we’re 
going to have to deal with. And it certainly appears that it’s 
going to be an issue that is going to confront the legal 
community and judges in particular as well. 
 
And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could make a 
quick comment. And maybe even at a later date, just fill us in as 
to what your department is doing to address this problem that 
seems to be becoming just maybe a fairly large problem that 
we’ll have to deal with in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I can very briefly, but I will provide 
the member with significant details of the approaches being 
pursued by the government, and indeed there is an 
interdepartmental working group working on this that has been 
in effect since 1993. 
 
And the lead department is the Department of Health, but in 
fact we met just recently about the various initiatives. I think we 
all share the member’s concern that we provide responses to 
these questions in a timely and effective way. This plainly is a 
significant issue for us. 
 
Subvote (JU01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU03), (JU04), (JU05), (JU06), (JU07), 
(JU08) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Land Information Services Corporation 
Vote 159 

 
Subvote (SL01) — Statutory. 
 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2000 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1999-2000 
General Revenue Fund 

Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU03), (JU06), (JU07), (JU08), (JU09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Have a safe, pleasant weekend and return next 
week at 1:30 Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:58 p.m. 
 
 
 


