





























































Hansard: May 12, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1177 
 May 12, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
would like to see improved cellular telephone coverage in their 
area. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Prud’homme, Cudworth, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present as 
well today for cellular coverage in the Watson area. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Wadena 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are all from Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, St. Benedict, and Pleasantdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. And this petition is in regards to the fuel tax as well. 
Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Saskatoon and Martensville. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by people from Govan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about cellular telephone coverage in the 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth areas. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Cudworth, Rosthern, and St. 
Benedict. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition from the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. This petition is to reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from Bengough, Regina, Chamberlain, 
Turtleford, Saskatoon, Davidson, Imperial, Bladworth. There’s 
even one signature from New York, who thinks we pay too 
much tax here. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition with citizens 
concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel by 10 
cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Leroy and Lanigan. 
 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the communities 
of Bulyea and Silton. 
 
I do so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

To cause the government to provide reliable cellular 
service in Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea; 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To ensure reliable cellular service to Watson; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve 
accounts; and 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide the names and 
salaries of all the chief executive officers, chief financial 
officers, directors of client services, director of human 
resources, directors of organizational development, 
directors of health promotion and prevention, and directors 
of communication in each health district in Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Hon. members, by your leave, I would like 
to take the opportunity to introduce to you in the Speaker’s 
gallery, a long-time family friend who has travelled from 
Churchill, Manitoba, to visit with myself and my family and be 
here in the gallery this morning to watch our proceedings. 

I would ask you to kindly welcome him to our Assembly, Mr. 
Lyle Turgeon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Violence Against Women 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan why members on this 
side of the House are wearing the purple ribbon which 
symbolizes violence against women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next week is set aside to raise public awareness 
for violence against women. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has decided to wear purple ribbons today 
because we feel that violence against women should be 
denounced every day of the year, not just once a week . . . once 
a week a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the past couple of weeks the Saskatchewan 
Party has been questioning this government on what their 
priorities are and, Mr. Speaker, their priorities are to fund 
pornography. 
 
Last night some of my colleagues and I from this side of the 
House went to the Queer City festival, and what we saw was: 
violence against women, violence against children, and, Mr. 
Speaker, violence against humanity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are organizations in our province that are in 
desperate need of funding such as Sofia House and Souls 
Harbour Mission, which do not receive any government 
funding. Mr. Speaker, Sofia House is a safe house that is run 
predominantly for women and children who suffer abuse and 
Souls Harbour is to help those who are less fortunate in our 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one has to ask: what are the priorities of this 
government? Mr. Speaker, there is not one person in my 
constituency and possibly the whole province that I could 
probably say to, I spent your hard-earned tax dollars on the 
degrading material I viewed last night. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Jobs in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we prefer 
to deal with issues of genuine concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We work to improve the health system that is 
already the best in North America. We make sure working 
people are given the protection of fair labour practices and safe 
workplace conditions. 
 
We provide training and support for people to escape poverty, 
and we are keeping the economy humming and Saskatchewan 
jobs growing. This, Mr. Speaker, is hot politics — not hot 
button politics like the opposition wants to waste time on. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

And here’s a really hot issue. Later today the Minister of 
Economic Development will be at the official opening of the 
DirecTel call centre in Saskatoon. This new business brings 
with it 225 new jobs. This is a direct result of our hot business 
climate and our JobStart/Future Skills program. This is a 
business coming to Saskatoon, not leaving. 
 
In addition my Regina colleagues want me to point out the 
headline in the business section of today’s Leader-Post, quote, 
“Sears expands here, 250 more workers at call centre.” 
 
I repeat jobs coming, not leaving. Good things happen, Mr. 
Speaker, when you stick to the people’s business and do hot 
politics, not hot button politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Film Festival Not A Celebration 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I and three 
other members of our caucus attended screenings of the Queer 
City Cinema. I didn’t see any members opposite at the theatre 
last night, therefore I’m sure that none of them will be rising in 
the House today to speak to the contents of those movies. 
 
I on the other hand will be. And I have three words for the 
members opposite. It was degrading, demoralizing, and 
dehumanizing. I was absolutely appalled by what I saw at this 
so-called festival. That the members opposite see fit to defend 
this is testimony to how little they actually know about the 
subject matter. 
 
Three years ago I lost a very good friend to AIDS (acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome). He was kind and a gentle man 
and I miss him very much. And yes to the members opposite, he 
was homosexual. 
 
The movies that are being shown at the Queer City cinema are 
an insult to the friend I lost. These movies did not celebrate his 
life, nor do they give a fair or just depiction of him or his 
lifestyle. This is not something I want his memory to be left 
with. 
 
We all have a responsibility to the society that we live in. We 
must leave something behind that our children can be proud of 
it. As members of this House, we have a responsibility to the 
people that we represent. We must also leave something behind 
that our constituents can be proud of. 
 
I say again, as I’ve said from the very beginning, this 
taxpayer-funded gay festival is horribly wrong and the members 
opposite should be ashamed for the defence of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Headwaters Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the positive spirit of 
co-operation is alive and well in the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to congratulate 

The Headwaters Project from northern Saskatchewan for being 
chosen as one of Canada’s 12 smart communities demonstration 
projects. 
 
The Headwaters Project is managed by the Keewatin Career 
Development Corporation and includes the community of La 
Ronge. It is one of the 12 communities from across Canada that 
has been chosen to receive funding under the smart 
communities program. 
 
The smart communities program is a federal program that 
assists communities in becoming world leaders in integrating 
information and communication technologies into community 
life. In order to be chosen, communities went through a 
rigorous selection process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Headwaters Project is an example of the 
Saskatchewan spirit of community and co-operation at its finest. 
 
Many partners and supporters have been involved in this 
project, including 26 municipal, First Nations, and Metis 
governments, 11 school divisions, post-secondary institutions 
and First Nations education authorities, two health districts, and 
the regional library system. 
 
This project not only provides information and communication 
technology services to remote communities in northern 
Saskatchewan, but it moves the province another step closer in 
competing in the global, knowledge-based economy. 
 
Please join me in congratulating The Headwaters Project in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Milestone Prairie Players Receive Awards 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure to stand in the House today and tell you about a group 
of amateur performers in my constituency — the Milestone 
Prairie Players. 
 
The Prairie Players are a theatrical group that have been hosting 
a dinner theatre in Milestone for the past 16 years. This group is 
no ordinary group, however. Their successes are many — too 
numerous to mention in the time that I have allotted today. 
 
I do, however, want to touch on a few of the successes, one 
which was mentioned yesterday. They won the best play in the 
provincial Theatre Fest — not only the best play, but they won 
best actresses also. 
 
In 1999, they also won the best play and best director — two 
years running. They’ve had many, many other 
accomplishments. 
 
In 1991 and 1992, they cleaned up at the Theatre Fest 
competition and were chosen to compete in a competition in 
Ireland. When in Ireland, they didn’t only just compete but they 
won a number of the competitions in that festival. 
 
They are a world-class theatre group which receives no 
government funding. They are true artists in every sense of the 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

word. I’d like to congratulate the Milestone Prairie Players and 
continued great success. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again Yorkton is the centre of the world’s attention. The city of 
Yorkton and its citizens are playing host to the Yorkton Short 
Film & Video Festival. 
 
The film and video festival runs from May 11 to 14 and is the 
end result of a lot of hard work by volunteers from Yorkton and 
the area. 
 
It was established in 1947 as the Yorkton Film Council and the 
film festival was first held in 1950. Approximately 1,800 people 
attend this conference on an annual basis, and this, Mr. Speaker, 
is Canada’s first and North America’s longest running film and 
video festival. 
 
The festival was the idea of James Lysyshyn, who is often 
referred to as the father of Yorkton’s International Documentary 
Film Festival. Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival is 
recognized internationally by film producers as a showcase for 
the film and video industry. 
 
This year’s festival receives over three . . . will receive over 400 
entries, including 38 of those international entries competing in 
over 30 different categories of film and video. 
 
The film attracts people from not only the province but the 
continent . . . and this continent, but the world. The festival 
celebrates and rewards the best in short film and video 
productions. 
 
Because Yorkton is surrounded by fields of wheat, and wheat is 
a major commodity in our province, it was suggested the award 
be named after the respected symbol of the prairies, the Golden 
Sheaf Award. Golden Sheaf Awards will be presented at the 
gala banquet on Saturday evening, May 13, 2000. 
 
Once again I’d like to congratulate the conference organizers 
and invite people to attend the conference and congratulate 
those people in advance who’ll be receiving the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recycling Centres Hold Open House 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Tuesday and Wednesday respectively this week, the Pipestone 
Kin-Ability Centre and Kipling Industries both hosted open 
houses. And the reason why I want to talk about these two open 
houses, Mr. Speaker, is because of the work that these two 
centres do to provide opportunities for individuals with 
disabilities to be productive and caring individuals in our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the open houses were held to just show what they 

have both done and accomplished in the areas of recycling in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly in our community 
with their SARCAN depots, recycling of cans and plastics and 
paper. As well the Pipestone Kin-Ability Centre has now begun 
a laundry service, providing the laundry services to the health 
care centres in the communities — surrounding communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because of the work and efforts of the 
individuals of many volunteers, who have given of their time 
and devoted their time, and certainly the employees and the 
clients, that we have such productive centres; that we have 
centres that our communities can be proud of; and that as 
individuals we can be proud of the positive initiatives we have 
provided for members of our community with disabilities, 
giving them the opportunity to be productive citizens as well as 
the privilege of living closer to home. 
 
So I commend both of these centres for the work they have 
done in our area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests 
who may leave before question period ends. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the House a group of students, number, 63 students, 
grades 4 to 5 from the Langham Elementary School who are 
visiting us today, and they are sitting in the east gallery. 
 
I’d like to introduce their teachers: Alvin Kolach, Jon 
Yellowless, Evelyn Kasahoff, and Cheryl Hardcastle, and 
Miriam Buswell. 
 
Please join me in welcoming them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Funding for Film Festival 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, last night my 
colleagues and I attended the Queer City Film Festival which 
receives taxpayers’ dollars from your government. I watched 
some of the most degrading, dehumanizing, and disgusting 
images I have ever seen. One scene after another of graphic 
sexual violence against young women; necrophilia, bondage, 
torture, rape. These films would normally be banned in 
Saskatchewan but they have been given a special exemption by 
the Film Classification Board. 
 
Mr. Premier, why on earth would your government grant this 
exemption and why are you giving taxpayers’ money for films 
depicting graphic violence against women? 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, can I again correct the member on the fact of . . . on 
the way in which films are classified and exemptions are given 
in this province, and indeed, across the country. She knows 
fully well that it is not the government that grants this 
exemption but it is the arm’s-length Film Classification Board 
which does that based upon the advice of the BC (British 
Columbia) Film Classification Board, which viewed most of the 
movies the member is talking about. 
 
And I should, I think, remind the member that this is not about 
what she likes, what she will tolerate, what I will tolerate, what 
anyone of us will tolerate. It is about, Mr. Speaker, an 
assessment of community values, of community standards. It is 
about whether or not the community at large is of a mind to say 
that this is so reprehensible that it should never be shown. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we do not believe in censorship on this side 
of the House. The member opposite plainly does. And the 
member should look at herself and say, can I not find an ounce 
of tolerance, an ounce of recognition that other people have 
different values than me and say, okay, then . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, to answer that member’s question. 
Tolerance for violence? Never. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the films was called Hubcap. It features 
scenes of necrophilia — graphic images of a police officer 
performing sexual acts on the bloody murdered bodies of two 
young women. Mr. Speaker, films depicting necrophilia are 
specifically prohibited under section 7 of the film classification 
regulations, yet your government gave this film a special 
exemption and you are using taxpayers’ dollars to show this 
disgusting activity. 
 
Mr. Premier, how can you justify using taxpayers’ dollars to 
show necrophilia? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me say once again, it 
is not the government that is granting this exemption. It is the 
Film Classification Board. And that board, as the member 
knows fully well, proceeds through a series of criteria and, in 
the end, asks itself: is this something which violates community 
standards? 
 
The board, Mr. Speaker, concluded that it did not. And indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, these movies have been shown across the country. 
Other boards in other provinces have made exactly the same 
assessment. 
 
And I say again to the member, this is not about your views. 
This is not about anyone’s individual views, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an assessment of what the community will tolerate. It is about 
recognizing other people’s points of view. The member seems 
to avoid that altogether. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to that 
member, it is the government that has been given the 
responsibility to ultimately be responsible that regulations are 
followed. 
 
Mr. Premier, the film Lez B. Friends consisted entirely of 
graphic images of sexual violence against young women. 
Young women were kidnapped, tied up, and tortured for sexual 
gratification. A young woman, no more than a teenager, was 
tied up and tortured, forced to live in a dog cage, and only let 
out to perform sexual acts on her captors. A young mother had 
her two-year-old boy stolen from her and sold while her captors 
forced her to become a prostitute. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have spent the past five years fighting against 
those who would turn young girls and women into prostitutes 
only to see your government giving taxpayers’ . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member has 
been quite lengthy in the preamble. Kindly go directly to your 
question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Premier, how, how can you justify using 
taxpayers’ dollars to exploit this kind of violence against 
women? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make one point 
clear. It is not a question of whether this is something that I find 
disturbing or not. I’m sure I’d find it just as disturbing as the 
member opposite. 
 
It is about something other than this. It is about something other 
than this, Mr. Speaker. And this is not about what I like and 
what I don’t like. It’s not about what the member likes, what 
she doesn’t like. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Classification Board has said that these 
movies and these videos should be shown under very strict 
conditions; that they should be shown to people over the age of 
18. And I understand the member last night was even asked 
about whether she was 18 or under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also there is a large sign which explains what 
these movies are about. This is for an audience of mature 
Canadians, Mr. Speaker. It is not about what we like, what we 
don’t like. 
 
And the Classification Board is — once again let me say this — 
is arm’s length from the government. It is not a government 
decision. It is a decision based upon the Film Classification 
Board’s assessment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
yesterday your government issued a news release urging 
Saskatchewan people to wear a purple ribbon to show their 
opposition to violence against women. At the same time, you 
are using taxpayers’ money to show pornographic movies 
depicting the most degrading forms of violence against women. 
 
Mr. Premier, the members on this side of the House are wearing 
their purple ribbons because we oppose violence against 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

women, whether it’s done by pimps, whether it’s done by 
husbands, or whether it’s done by a filmmaker who calls it art. 
 
Mr. Premier, how on earth can you justify using taxpayers’ 
dollars to screen movies depicting graphic sexual violence 
against women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister 
responsible for the Status of Women, who has a part in helping 
to fund the purple ribbon campaign, and certainly would share 
the sentiments that there is too much violence generally in our 
films and whatnot, the fact of the matter is this is a debate that 
has been going on for a long time in Canada. In order to find a 
way to mediate that debate, there are classification systems, and 
certainly anybody who attends commercial films, I think would 
have these same concerns. 
 
But we don’t support violence. There is a system by which 
society mediates those debates, and in all of our programs in the 
Women’s Secretariat and throughout government, we work on 
ending violence and opposing violence to women and children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, last night after I 
left the film festival, I went home and Global News ran a story 
about Sofia House, a transition house for battered women and 
their children here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government provides no money to Sofia 
House, yet you have $5,500 to show pornographic movies 
featuring violence against women. This is just plain wrong. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is your government. It’s time for you to stand 
up. If you truly believe in using taxpayers’ dollars to show 
degrading violence against women, then stand up and say so. 
And if you can’t do that, then stand up and cancel the funding. 
 
Mr. Premier, quit hiding behind the Arts Board, quit hiding 
behind your ministers. Do you support taxpayers’ dollars being 
used to show violence against women? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
in this province this government provides a great deal of 
revenue to many women’s organizations to talk about violence 
against women. I want to say to the member opposite from 
Kelvington that in this province today we provide a great deal 
of funding to many, many organizations who respect and 
provide shelters for women who have been assaulted or have 
been violated. And so this government is doing that. 
 
I want to also say to the member opposite, it was this 
government in the early ’90s that brought legislation to this 
House and proceeded to pass legislation in this House that 
condemned violence against women and children. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, to this member opposite, if she makes 
accusation about this government not acting to protect women 
and children against violence, it’s a false, false attachment. 
Because this government has gone a long way in funding and 
legislation to protect women and children in this province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Boards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, across this province when municipal 
governments, school boards, and other publicly run boards 
introduce their budgets, they do so so that the public can have 
input and so that there can be debate. It’s also actually how it 
works with the provincial government. 
 
But you take another approach with health districts. You’ve 
muzzled them from making any comments on their plans for the 
coming year until you sign off and give your approval for them. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, that’s just simply not fair to the 
taxpayers, it’s not fair to the district health boards, and it’s not 
fair to the health care providers who are trying to cope under 
your administration. 
 
You’ve said in this House that there’s no gag order. Well if 
that’s the case, then why can’t district health boards talk about 
their preliminary plans? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member may know, in the province of Saskatchewan we 
have 32 health districts. As the member may know — and I 
made this very clear the day of and a few days after Paul 
Martin’s budget — that we were expecting genuine increases to 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer. Mr. Speaker, we did not 
receive adequate funding from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day in this Assembly when the Finance 
minister delivered his budget, I indicated that day that 113 
million new dollars was not enough to sustain the present 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have given each district their preliminary 
financial number; we want to understand the implications of 
that number. They will provide their health plans to us by May 
15. We will look at it in a provincial context. The plans will be 
approved, varied, or not approved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1993 the NDP (New Democratic Party) closed 28 hospitals and 
23 integrated facilities in Saskatchewan. And just over a year 
ago they shut down the Plains Health Centre. 
 
In 1993 the NDP Minister of Health said they needed to take 
this action in order to save the health care system. Health 
minister of the time Louise Simard said, and I quote: 
 

The transition period will be difficult, but we have to keep 
our eye on the ball that we’re going to have a much better 
system when we’re finished. 

 
Well, Madam Minister, you’ve lost sight of the ball, and you’ve 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

struck out. We’ve come full circle and once again the minister 
says tough decisions are needed. Madam Minister, people in 
this province remember 1993. Will you remove the gag order 
on the health districts and allow them to disclose their 
preliminary plans for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once the health plans are approved, or varied, or not approved, 
our health districts will have an opportunity to discuss their 
health plans with their communities. Mr. Speaker, these are 
preliminary plans that are being given to the Department of 
Health. Once we’ve had an opportunity to look at those 32 
individual plans within a provincial context, they will be 
returned to the communities to have discussions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have in this budget, even with the $113 
million increase, a $150 million health transition fund that we 
think will be very helpful for districts as they deal with the 
financial realities that we have in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a letter sent to the South East Health District signed by the 
deputy minister of Health. If there’s no gag order, Madam 
Minister, how do you explain this? The letter says, and I quote: 
 

Public and staff consultation of any proposed changes 
should not occur until the department has had the 
opportunity to review and approve any such changes. 
 

How possibly can district health boards determine what changes 
might be made without staff input? Why should the public be 
shut out of the consultation process until after you’ve stamped 
your changes and made them mandatory? 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t health care professionals and 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have input into the direction the 
districts are going to be forced to take this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, and I know I have to be careful 
here, but it’s very important for the members of the opposition 
to present factual information to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member has indicated, and he quotes a letter, 
that boards have been told that if this information leaks out 
they'll be removed from office and the government will appoint 
a public administrator. Well, Jill Johnson, the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Living Sky says that this is simply not 
true, Mr. Speaker. It’s not true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Health District has spoken to its health 
providers; it’s spoken to its doctors; it’s spoken to the public. 
 
In the case of Living Sky, they spoke to their public; they spoke 
to their mayors; they spoke to their municipalities. Mr. Speaker, 
this member is simply not presenting factual information to this 
House or the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
be happy to send a copy of the letter over for the minister to 
read because it’s there in black and white. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve heard two health board members from 
two different districts this week say major changes are coming. 
They’re calling the plans destructive. They are saying what’s 
coming will be a bombshell. The changes will rival the closure 
of the Plains hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, we are hearing from district boards that 
hospitals will be closed, long-term care homes may be closed. 
You can keep . . . try to keep it quiet, but the dirty little details 
are getting out. 
 
Madam Minister, when you receive all of the district health 
board plans on Monday, will you come clean and release them 
to the public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say again to this member, if you 
read the letter from Jill Johnson, the CEO of the Living Sky 
Health District, she indicates that they’ve invited physicians, 
leaders from their staff, community mayors, reeves, councillors, 
and union representatives to meet with them to discuss their 
health plan. So has the Regina Health District, and so have 
other health districts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what I would say to the member, which I find extremely 
interesting, I have said for some time now that we can’t 
guarantee that all hospitals will remain open. And in fact that 
member, on February 4, 2000, indicated — even though he was 
criticizing me — that the Saskatchewan Party itself would not 
necessarily oppose hospital closures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is clearly taking the opportunity to selectively ignore 
what her own deputy minister signed in a directive to these 
health boards. 
 
Madam Minister, what we’ve said all along is that before any 
closures even are considered, that a full and complete review of 
the health care system needs to be done. Madam Minister, 
you’ve been saying all along that maybe the health system 
should be reviewed. Then you’re saying maybe we shouldn’t 
review it. Then maybe it should be done on a national level. 
Then maybe it isn’t going to be done at all. Then maybe the 
Premier should do it. 
 
Madam Minister, will you at the very least confirm to 
communities that until such a review is done, you will put a 
moratorium on any closures in this province until you figure out 
what you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I have this little document called The 
Way Up which was given to the public during the last provincial 
election. And what they want is the Provincial Auditor to go in 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

and look at the health system in terms of is the money being 
spent here, is it being spent there. We’re not talking about a 
financial audit of the health system, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking 
about a review of the health system, not only in this province 
but all across the country. 
 
We need to understand, and the public needs to understand, the 
implications of the financial situation in this country and how 
we need more money from the federal government. 
 
What these people would do is freeze — freeze — health 
spending in this province; they would freeze health spending, 
and in fact they’re saying that the federal government shouldn’t 
give the provinces any more money until our Provincial Auditor 
looks at the health system. Well that’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reporting of Political Contributions 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Give up the names or 
give up the money — do you remember those words, Mr. 
Speaker? That is what the Liberal Party said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I will remind hon. members that 
the Chair is not to be involved in any debates. I would ask you 
to rephrase your question . . . Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That is what the Liberal 
Party said when it accused the other parties of breaking the law, 
for failing to disclose the names of political donors. As a result 
of that debate the law was changed, and who is the first party to 
break the law, Mr. Speaker? It’s the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the 
Liberals are refusing to identify all of their donors. This is a 
clear violation of section 240 of The Election Act, 1996. Mr. 
Minister, what action are you taking against the Liberal Party 
for breaking The Election Act, 1996? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my capacity as Deputy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I will remind the 
hon. member from Rosthern that I need not any direction as to 
who’s required to respond from the executive government side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my capacity as the Deputy House Leader for the government 
side, and I want to thank the member for the question. It’s a 
very interesting question, Mr. Speaker, about the relationship of 
the federal Liberal Party and the provincial Liberal Party. We 
would expect there to be some relationship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is not so clear, Mr. Speaker, is what is the relationship 
between the so-called Saskatchewan Party and the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Can that 
member confirm or will he deny that Rick Swenson, the former 
acting interim leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, a 
former cabinet minister under Grant Devine, and a PC 
(Progressive Conservative) cabinet minister, and now a 
Saskatchewan Party member, is in fact one of the trustees of the 

PC metro fund, a fund that was set up to collect donations for 
the Progressive Conservative Party? 
 
Can he confirm or deny that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about anonymous 
political donations, Mr. Speaker. And if he wants a history 
lesson, I’ll give him a quick one. 
 
Here are the parties that have accepted anonymous political 
donations: the New Democratic Party have accepted them, the 
Liberal Party has accepted them, the PC Party has accepted 
them. Only the Saskatchewan Party has never accepted an 
anonymous political donation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when The Election Act was changed 
back in 1996 largely due . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The clear intention of this change was to eliminate 
the practice of hiding the names of donors by funnelling money 
through a third party — a corporation trust fund or a federal 
party. No one was more vocal in opposition to anonymous 
donations than the Liberal Party, but now that they’re in 
government they seem to be above the law. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Liberals are hiding the names of donors. 
They’re accepting anonymous donations, and section 241 of the 
Act states that all anonymous donations must be handed over to 
the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to recover these illegal 
donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, now the member who was asking the question, Mr. 
Speaker, also at one time worked for the Progressive 
Conservative administration in this province. 
 
Now perhaps that member is in a position to let us know what 
has happened to the donations that were made to the PC Party 
and are part of the PC metro fund, whether any of those 
donations which were made to the PC Party have in fact been 
diverted to the Saskatchewan Party, or have been spent by the 
PC metro fund on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party. Can the 
member confirm or deny that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are asking questions 
about the enforcement of The Election Act, 1996 in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’re asking them to the Justice 
minister of this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’d like some 
answers. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members I recognize that 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

it’s Friday and it’s almost as if this is becoming a tradition. But 
I would ask all members to kindly allow the question to be 
heard. 
 
Mr. Wall: — My question is to the Minister of Justice and the 
issue is anonymous political donations. And don’t get us wrong, 
Mr. Speaker, we fully understand why people in the province 
would want to remain anonymous if they donated to the Liberal 
Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’re hoping that there is a 
refund policy over there. But we might have to wait for three 
years for that to happen. 
 
To the Minister of Justice. The question is very simple: why are 
you allowing the Liberals to hide anonymous donations? What 
actions are you taking against the Liberals for breaking The 
Election Act, 1996? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, sometimes 
silence tells us a lot. And that member refuses to confirm or 
deny that funds which were donated to the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan had been used or spent on behalf of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Kindly allow the minister to 
answer the question asked by the hon. member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now we know their interest in 
these matters because Conrad Black, the wannabe Lord Black, 
Mr. Speaker, who has donated very significantly to the 
Saskatchewan Party, that Lord Black, or wannabe Lord Black, 
has some concerns about the Liberal Party and would use every 
opportunity to attack the Liberal Party. 
 
The fact of the matter is that any donations that were made 
federally are accounted for as per law, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
issue here. The real issue is were funds expended by the PC 
Party which were donated to the PC Party — were they 
extended on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party? Is there 
collusion there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I very quickly have to 
introduce the guests that are leaving from your gallery. I would 
like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the 
Assembly, 20 grade 11 and 12 students from Glaslyn High 
School. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we could, I would like to welcome them 
and mention that I’ll be meeting with them. And on behalf of 

my colleague, the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, thank 
you . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will just generally 
introduce representatives of the construction industry who are 
here today to witness first reading of The Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Amendment Act. And I ask you to join me in 
welcoming them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also seek leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to 
introduce to all members of the Assembly, through you, two 
persons seated in the west gallery. They are Lawrence Joseph, 
the Fourth Vice-Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, and also Paul Laliberte, who is here today on behalf of 
the Aboriginal Walk For Justice. 
 
I understand they have already walked 20 kilometres today, in 
what of course we all realize is something less than ideal spring 
weather. 
 
Mr. Laliberte is the organizer of the Aboriginal Walk For 
Justice to draw attention to Aboriginal justice concerns. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, I would too like to welcome Mr. 
Lawrence Joseph and Paul Laliberte and wish them well and 
commend them on their walk for justice. 
 
Congratulations and very good luck in the future. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to welcome 
Vice-Chief Lawrence Joseph here to the Assembly. I have had 
occasion to speak with him in the last few months over several 
sad events that have occurred in Saskatoon. 
 
And I have been extremely impressed with his tenacity and his 
desire to pursue economic and social justice for Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan. So I do welcome him here. 
 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 221 – The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Nullification Act 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move first 
reading of Bill No. 221, The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Nullification Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48  The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 48, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 – The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, 
The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi d'interprétation de 1995 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 
The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Interpretation Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 51, The Interpretation Act Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 53 — The Wildlife Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 53, 
The Wildlife Act Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54, The 
Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 10:55 a.m. until 11:05 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 47 
 
Trew Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Lorje 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Hillson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley Elhard 
Heppner Julé Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Hart 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could by leave, 
move a motion dealing with referral of estimates to the 
Estimates Committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

MOTIONS 
 

Selected Estimates Referred 
to Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That the Estimates of the Legislative Assembly (Vote 21); 
the Provincial Auditor (Vote 28), the Chief Electoral 
Officer (Vote 34); the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner (Vote 55); the Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate (Vote 56); the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
(Vote 57); as well as Supplementary Estimates for the 
Legislative Assembly (Vote 21) be withdrawn from the 
Committee of Finance and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Estimates. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, if I could, by leave of 
the Assembly, move a motion, seconded by the member from 
Cannington: 
 

That not withstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday May 18, 
2000, it stands adjourned until Wednesday, May 24 at 1:30 
p.m. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day . . . 
Order. Order. Order, please. Hon. members, on Wednesday the 
Opposition House Leader raised three points of order. One I 
dealt with yesterday; the other two were reserved until I had the 
opportunity to consider the context of the remarks in question. 
The comments were made during a debate on a private 
member’s motion that stated that government funds were being 
used to promote pornography. 
 
I thank the member for raising these concerns. As members 
know from previous rulings the use of personally offensive 
language in debate is a matter of growing concern to me. It 
should be our mutual goal to achieve hard-hitting politically 
effective criticism of policies, positions, and actions without 
having to resort to rude, intemperate and simplistic attacks on 
the integrity and motives of others. 
 
I recognize that achieving this goal is the most difficult when 
the matter under debate is an emotional one that involves 
passionately held personal beliefs and values as was the case on 
Tuesday. Parliamentary practice offers members some guidance 

in this area, and I refer all hon. members to a summary in 
Marleau and Montpetit’s House of Commons Procedure and 
Practice on page 525 as follows. This is quite a lengthy quote 
members: 
 

The proceedings of the House are based on a long-standing 
tradition of respect for the integrity of all Members. Thus, 
the use of offensive, proactive or threatening language in 
the House is strictly forbidden. Personal attacks, insults 
and obscene language or words are not in order. A direct 
charge or accusation against a Member may be made only 
by way of a substantive motion for which notice is 
required. 
 
If language used in debate is questionable, the Speaker will 
intervene. Nonetheless, any Member who feels aggrieved 
by a remark or allegation may also bring the matter to the 
immediate attention of the Speaker on a point of order. 
 
In dealing with unparliamentary language, the Speaker 
takes into account the tone, manner and intention of the 
Member speaking; the person to whom the words were 
directed; the degree of provocation; and, most importantly, 
whether or not the remarks created disorder in the 
Chamber . . . Although an expression may be found to be 
acceptable, the Speaker has cautioned that any language 
which leads to disorder in the House should not be used. 
Expressions which are considered unparliamentary when 
applied to an individual Member have not always been 
considered so when applied “ in a generic sense” or to a 
party. 
 

The member raising the point of order claimed that the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast, on page 1105 of the debates, using the 
guise of a literary device, in essence described four members of 
the opposition as homophobic. After reviewing the verbatim, I 
find the member’s point of order well-taken. However 
disguised, the effect of the words were personal, offensive and 
unparliamentary. 
 
The second point of order concerned the words of the member 
for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley on pages 1107 and 1108 where 
he made statements that connected current members of the 
opposition with criminal convictions and cast doubt on their 
moral standing. The member for Regina Qu’Appelle spoke 
generally of people on the opposite side of the House, but 
individual members found it offensive as a personal attack. 
Again I find that point of order well taken. 
 
(1115) 
 
The parliamentary authority quoted above refers to provocation. 
In moving the motion, the member for Kelvington-Wadena no 
fewer than 14 times accused the government and government 
members of promoting pornography or supporting the 
pornographic industry. The nature of the debate that followed 
demonstrates that the mover’s speech was inflammatory and 
provocative to other members who participated in the debate. 
 
On a positive note, I would like to point out that the speech of 
the seconder of the motion, the member for Humboldt, 
demonstrates that the issue could be addressed passionately 
without calling into question the morals and motives of 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

members on the other side of the Assembly and inciting 
disorder. 
 
Despite the provocation, the accusations made by the members 
for Saskatoon Southeast and Regina Qu’Appelle Valley have 
exceeded the bounds of fair debate and I therefore call upon 
those members to rise, withdraw the offensive comments, and 
apologize to the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the remarks 
and I apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, hon. member. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 
remarks and I apologize to this House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Here it is, Mr. Speaker, the answer to 
question 139, and I’m pleased to submit it. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 139 is tabled . . . the answer to 
question 139 is tabled. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Kindly state briefly your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday you 
asked the Minister of Health to withdraw her remarks and 
apologize on page 1155. The minister apologized but did not 
withdraw the remarks in Hansard. 
 
The Speaker: — In reviewing the verbatim, there was an 
apology but not a withdrawal of the remarks. Hon. minister? 
 
Although it was only recorded as an apology, will the minister 
just wish to comment on that point of order? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I thought I did, Mr. Speaker. But just to 
bring order to the House, which is so important, I withdraw and 
apologize for the remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the hon. minister, and I am told that, 
yes, it was recorded in the Votes and Proceedings not in 
Hansard. I again thank the hon. minister. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I now would also like to rise on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — State briefly your point of order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as you have pointed out 
in your very lengthy and wise and well-researched ruling, there 
have been comments traded on both sides of the House that 
members have found offensive. 

And I would like to state that I personally have found it deeply 
offensive that both directly and indirectly, as noted in your 
ruling by a count of 14 times, the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena has accused members on this side of the 
House of promoting pornography. And I would ask that the 
member withdraw those remarks and apologize to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I do appreciate . . . and this is 
what it leads to and I would hope that all hon. members . . . Do 
you wish to speak to that point of order? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the evidence is clear that this government has provided funding 
to an avenue that has indeed promoted pornography. That 
pornography was broadcast last night for public viewing for 
those that attended that theatre. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, if the comments that were made by the 
member from Kelvington do offend the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast, the member from Kelvington has 
indicated she is prepared to apologize. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 
remarks and I apologize to the members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I sincerely thank all hon. members for 
recognizing what perhaps unintentional comments may . . . how 
they may affect individuals. We’re all hon. members in this 
Assembly and I applaud you for what you have recognized, and 
I appreciate what has just happened here. And I’m sure all hon. 
members will continue to be respected by one another and by 
the people that we serve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act describes 
Saskatchewan’s universal, mandatory automobile insurance 
plan administered by SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), also known as the auto fund. The auto fund provides 
basic insurance coverage for all Saskatchewan drivers at 
affordable rates. 
 
The proposed amendments to the Act will ensure that rates stay 
affordable while making coverage as fair as possible for all 
Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
The first amendment deals with high-speed chases. We all 
know how dangerous it can be when a driver evades the police 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

at high speed — not only for the driver and police involved, but 
also for the public. It is important that those who engage law 
enforcement in high-speed chases face serious penalties such as 
being denied insurance coverage in the event of an accident. 
 
The wording of the Act currently excludes coverage for 
individuals involved in a race or speed test. Unfortunately SGI 
has been unsuccessful in using this provision to deny coverage 
to those who engage in high-speed chases with law 
enforcement. The proposed amendment will expand the 
wording to include, quote, “use of a vehicle with intent to evade 
a police officer” as a reason to deny insurance coverage. 
 
This will ensure that drivers who lead police on high-speed 
chases are held accountable for their actions. 
 
The second amendment will give SGI the authority to ensure 
that all people in possession of stolen property face serious 
consequences. Often police apprehend more than one individual 
when they stop stolen vehicles, and police are unable to 
determine which person stole the vehicle. In these cases, all the 
occupants found in the stolen vehicle are charged with 
possession of stolen property. 
 
Currently SGI does not have the right of recovery under this 
charge. The proposed amendment will allow SGI to initiate a 
recovery action against anyone found in possession of stolen 
property. In addition, SGI will be able to recover any insurance 
money paid out for vehicle damage, as well as suspend drivers’ 
licences in these cases. 
 
The proposed amendment will ensure those in possession of a 
stolen vehicle will not be able to act with impunity. 
 
Another amendment deals with the rights of recovery and the 
suspension of drivers’ licences. The changes will speed up the 
process while ensuring that honest Saskatchewan motorists do 
not have to pay for the actions of the few who drive while 
uninsured or while in breach of their insurance. 
 
At present, if SGI is obligated to pay out money as a result of an 
uninsured motorist’s collision, SGI may suspend the driver’s 
licence of the uninsured motorist who is at fault. However, the 
current legislation is unclear. It states that SGI may suspend the 
licence of an uninsured motorist forthwith. This loose definition 
occasionally results in a failure to suspend in a timely fashion. 
The proposed amendment would enable SGI to suspend an 
uninsured driver’s licence at any time. 
 
The next proposed amendment tightens up the legislation with 
respect to consequences for motorists who operate in breach of 
their insurance. Currently SGI can recover against and suspend 
the driver’s licence of a driver operating in breach of insurance 
once a judgment is obtained against the individual. However, 
there is currently no provision to recover against and suspend 
the licence of a driver operating in breach of their insurance if 
that driver is involved in a single vehicle accident where they 
do not own that vehicle. In these cases SGI may be obligated to 
provide insurance coverage. 
 
The proposed amendment will allow SGI to recover losses from 
damage to a vehicle the driver does not own, and suspend the 
licence of a motorist who is operating in breach of his or her 

insurance at any time. 
 
I will now discuss three amendments to the Act that deal with 
changing the coverage available to Saskatchewan motorists. In 
some cases coverage is expanded; in other cases it is limited. 
The goal of these changes is to ensure fairness and to keep . . . 
to continue to keep rates affordable for all Saskatchewan 
motorists. 
 
The first amendment deals with after-market electronic 
equipment, which includes stereo and communications 
equipment. The proposed amendment would provide a coverage 
limit for after-market electronic equipment, particularly 
high-end stereo equipment, and exclude coverage for radar 
detectors. 
 
Presently there is no coverage limit for after-market electronic 
equipment. This equipment is prone to theft and SGI continues 
to experience excessive claims in this area. By SGI capping 
insurance coverage on these items to a maximum payout of 
$1,500, it will ensure rates stay affordable. 
 
Private insurance can fill in any coverage gap by providing 
additional insurance coverage on those high value and high risk 
stereos. SGI will continue to provide full coverage through the 
auto fund for all manufacturer installed sound and 
communications equipment. 
 
This proposed amendment will also address anomalies with 
respect to radar detectors and cellular phones. Currently 
coverage is provided for radar detectors but excluded for 
cellular phones. The proposed amendment will reverse that. 
Coverage will now be provided for cellular phones. This would 
be in line with the current legislation in Manitoba. 
 
Insurance coverage would also be expanded in some specific 
cases. At present, basic plate insurance does not provide 
coverage for a passenger or other person who causes bodily 
injury or property damage to a third party. An example would 
be a passenger who opens the door of a vehicle and scratches 
the car opposite the vehicle he or she is exiting. 
 
SGI CANADA’s auto pack and commercial pack does provide 
coverage in these cases to the passenger or other person who 
“operates any part of the insured vehicle.” The proposed 
amendment would extend basic plate coverage to these cases, 
bringing the auto fund in line with SGI CANADA. 
 
This will ensure continuity of policies between the auto fund 
and SGI CANADA and be less confusing for the customer. 
 
The next amendment deals specifically with better meeting the 
needs of individual SGI customers by expanding coverage in 
certain circumstances. 
 
SGI and the provincial government understand that there are 
instances where a strict application of the legislation creates 
hardship for Saskatchewan residents. SGI has encountered 
situations where concerns for customer service or about undue 
hardship to individuals have required SGI to act contrary to 
legislation. 
 
For example SGI will occasionally issue a farm plate to an 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

individual who does not meet the criteria but can be considered 
to be legitimately farming. On occasion SGI will review an 
individual case before denying coverage where a policy has 
expired, and in some special cases, new arrangements are made. 
 
The amendment will permit SGI to exempt an individual from 
meeting the strict requirements of the legislation if it is 
determined that it would create an undue hardship and would 
not be contrary to public interest to allow the exemption. 
 
(1130) 
 
I’ll now turn to the topic of commercial trailers. SGI is 
proposing that coverage be changed with respect to commercial 
trailers to better meet the needs of Saskatchewan trucking 
companies. Information from the private insurance sector and 
the commercial trucking industry indicates support for SGI’s 
proposal to change the current system of registering and 
insuring trailers. 
 
Trailers are susceptible to different risks than motor vehicles. 
The majority of trailer claims are for physical damage, losses 
from collision and weather conditions, while virtually none are 
liability claims or claims for injury benefits. Therefore SGI 
concurs with private industry that they are better able to 
underwrite this risk and respond to market conditions. 
 
The amendment would allow SGI to eliminate coverage for 
certain commercial trailers and instead provide multi-year 
plates or perpetual plates which many other jurisdictions 
already provide. At present the renewal sticker process creates 
problems for those Saskatchewan companies operating 
interprovincially. The new multi-year or perpetual plates would 
help Saskatchewan trucking companies compete with other 
jurisdictions by eliminating an administrative burden. 
 
The final proposed amendment involves accident surcharge 
appeals. Currently motorists who want to dispute a surcharge on 
their driver’s licence may appeal to either the Rates Appeal 
Board or to a judge of the Provincial Court. A driver may 
dispute the surcharge if he or she believes the circumstances of 
the accident do not warrant the imposition of a surcharge on 
their driver’s licence. 
 
The surcharge hearing is an assessment of risk rather than an 
assessment of fault. However, the current legislation does not 
make this clear. The current wording describes the hearing in 
terms of a driver’s liability to pay the surcharge. This is 
confusing to Saskatchewan motorists. The proposed amendment 
clarifies the purpose of the surcharge review by removing any 
reference in the Act to liability. 
 
That concludes the outline of proposed amendments found in 
this legislation. These amendments work to make our insurance 
system fairer, more efficient, and more socially responsible. 
These changes will keep auto insurance rates affordable and 
ensure fairness for all Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, after listening to the minister’s comments, he’s 
certainly making a large number of changes to the automobile 
insurance Act. 
 
A number of these changes, I think, are certainly worthwhile. A 
number of them need to be further examined to determine 
exactly what they mean and what kind of impact they’re going 
to have. 
 
The minister started out talking about the case of insurance 
dealing with high-speed chases. We believe that we need to do 
everything we can in this province to eliminate high-speed 
chases; that they do indeed endanger the general public and the 
police that are involved in them. But we also must do what we 
can to make sure that those individuals involved in high-speed 
chases do not profit by them and are, indeed, met with the full 
severity of the law when they are apprehended for such. 
 
If that means that they get their licences revoked, I think that 
would be a positive step forward, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, 
though, I have to wonder just how much of an impact that 
would actually have on an individual that is prepared to steal an 
automobile. To simply have their licence removed is not much 
of an impediment since they’ve already shown that they’re not 
prepared to obey the law. 
 
In dealing with stolen property, Mr. Speaker, again the law 
needs to have the ability to deal with those that are to be 
charged with an offence. Obviously the courts make the 
determination as to guilt. But when it comes to charging, the 
law needs to be able to charge the appropriate individual to 
proceed with a prosecution and either a guilty or not guilty 
verdict. If this Bill does indeed aid in that, then we will 
certainly be supporting that. 
 
SGI though needs to be able to pay out to the individual whose 
vehicle has been stolen, whose vehicle has been damaged in 
some way, shape, or form, the proper insurance. If that means 
going back and recovering some of those funds that they have 
expended on behalf of the individual who owned the vehicle 
from the person who was found guilty of the theft, well and 
good. And we support that, Mr. Speaker. But again, we are 
going to have take a very serious look at exactly how all of this 
is going to impact on this particular legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks though about putting a cap 
on the amount of money that might be available for 
after-market additions to vehicles, he is talking about 
electronics. But there are a number of other after-market 
additions that are also added on to vehicles such as special 
wheels, special tires, spoilers, special paint jobs, various 
modifications to motors, transmissions, etc., etc. I’m wondering 
if the minister is also including those things in modifications 
when it comes to a $1,500 cap, or is it going to be strictly 
limited to electronics such as stereos? 
 
And some of these stereos, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, are 
extremely expensive and need to have insurance available to 
them. If that insurance is to be made available through SGI 
CANADA and other private carriers such as The Co-operators 
or Wawanesa, whoever, Mr. Speaker, then we need to know 
about that and need to know the viability of providing that kind 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

of insurance through package policies. 
 
Does that mean, Mr. Speaker, when these caps are limited — 
because obviously at the present time, according to the minister, 
they are not limited — does that mean that there will be a 
reduction in the insurance premium because they’re not 
covering as much as they did before? 
 
Now that individual who owns this equipment is going to have 
to buy additional insurance to provide themselves with that 
protection. Does that mean that SGI will be reducing their rates 
correspondingly because they’re not covering as much as they 
were previously? 
 
Cellular phones I think, Mr. Speaker, virtually we’re reaching a 
point where almost every vehicle now has a cellular phone in it. 
The fact is vehicles are coming out now with cellular phones 
built right into them. And so I think the coverage of cellular 
phones is extremely important as they are becoming, indeed, an 
integral part of motor vehicle use. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, these changes are many. Certainly some 
of them have some value. Some of them need to be given some 
consideration to determine exactly where the minister is 
heading with these particular items. 
 
He talks about commercial trailers and providing perpetual 
licences for them as happens in other jurisdictions. The trucking 
industry, I believe, should have some input into this, and 
hopefully the minister has been in consultation with them and 
they have had the opportunity to have some input. 
 
How is this going to work? What kind of fees are going to be 
charged for these? Are they going to be a fee that they submit 
every year even though the plate doesn’t change? How is all of 
this going to work, Mr. Speaker, I think are some of the 
important issues that we need to be able to deal with. 
 
The minister at the end talked about the rates appeal, the 
surcharges that are applied to licences. This is extremely 
important, Mr. Speaker, because SGI, even though there may 
not have been a charge, there may not have been a conviction 
that the court decided person A was responsible for the accident 
over person B, SGI in a lot of cases makes that determination 
internally and assigns a fault to a driver. That driver’s insurance 
is then correspondingly increased. 
 
The minister is talking about changing the appeal. It sounded to 
me that it wasn’t an appeal as to who was liable, who was at 
fault for the accident, but rather the appeal process dealt with 
the ability of the individual to pay the additional surcharge. I 
think really an appeal process needs to be in place, Mr. Speaker, 
that deals with the assessment of fault, of liability, by SGI 
outside of the court system. Internally is the way they do it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The driver, who is affected by this, needs to have the 
opportunity to appeal that decision to SGI and have that appeal 
. . . have that decision overturned by the appeal process if it’s 
proven that the driver was not the person at fault, that SGI was 
improperly placing the blame upon them. 
 
With all of these points in mind, Mr. Speaker, I believe we need 

the opportunity to review this. The stakeholders across 
Saskatchewan need the opportunity to see exactly what the 
minister is proposing to do with this particular piece of 
legislation. Therefore I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
The Motor Carrier Act is the provincial legislation that licenses 
commercial truck and bus companies, monitors their safety 
performance, and sets the insurance requirements they must 
meet. These amendments will improve the safety of the 
commercial trucking industry. 
 
All jurisdictions in Canada have agreed to eliminate the 
economic regulation of the trucking industry that has been in 
place since the 1930s. As a result, operating authority 
certificates are no longer required to operate a commercial truck 
in Saskatchewan. This means that government no longer sets 
trucking routes or the rates that can be charged. 
 
To ensure that trucking companies operate safely, however, the 
provincial and federal government, in co-operation with the 
industry, developed the new carrier safety program based on the 
National Safety Code. 
 
Under this safety program, a carrier’s safety performance is 
monitored based on the National Safety Code safety certificate 
provided to each trucking company. If a carrier is found to be 
operating in an unsafe manner, the Highway Traffic Board can 
impose safety requirements to protect the public. 
 
Amendments to this Act require carriers to obtain a National 
Safety Code certificate. The amendments also ensure that the 
insurance requirements and the bills of lading requirements, 
established by the Highway Traffic Board, apply to those 
carriers operating under the new safety certificates. 
 
In the past, commercial carriers have been obligated to meet 
these requirements as a condition of holding an operating 
authority certificate. The amendments address the existing gap 
in legislation resulting from the deregulation of the trucking 
industry and the change to a more safety oriented program. 
 
Finally, the amendments will make the changes to the cargo 
insurance requirements for commercial truckers. Currently 
trucking companies must carry a specified level of cargo 
insurance irrespective of the value of the commodity they are 
hauling. As a result, water and gravel haulers, among others, 
must carry up to $32,500 in cargo insurance, far exceeding the 
value of their load. 
 
The proposed amendments will allow the Highway Traffic 
Board to exempt haulers of certain low value commodities from 
the requirement to hold cargo insurance. 
 
Liability insurance requirements for commercial truckers will 
remain unchanged. 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Motor Carrier Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the 
minister brings forward another Bill that looks like it certainly 
has some value and will have some benefit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. You might even call it privatization of the 
trucking industry because it removes that the government will 
be setting routes and rates. It will allow the trucking industry to 
make its own determinations. And we believe that, Mr. Speaker, 
is a move to the positive. 
 
We do have some questions and concerns though, Mr. Speaker, 
as to the national safety standards, exactly what is involved 
there and what kind of new requirements the trucking industry 
in Saskatchewan may face. 
 
Those areas, Mr. Speaker, I think the trucking industry needs to 
be discussed, become aware of exactly what’s happening, what 
the minister is proposing again. As in the previous Bill, 
hopefully the minister has had some discussion with the 
trucking industry in this province to determine whether or not 
these new changes will be appropriate for Saskatchewan. 
 
The issuance of removal of cargo insurance for low value loads 
though, does have some concern for me, Mr. Speaker, since as a 
farmer I do hire commercial truckers to transport my 
commodities to market. 
 
And it might be applicable that my grain would be classified as 
a low value commodity because certainly the prices are 
extremely low, Mr. Speaker, for those commodities. And I 
would hope that the trucker that I hire would have insurance in 
place protecting my commodity before it reaches market such 
that if there is a loss of that commodity; that I am protected by 
that. 
 
(1145) 
 
So I think it will be important to ask the minister exactly what 
kind of financial value is being placed on the cargo that it be 
classified as a low value cargo and therefore exempt from the 
requirement to carry insurance. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other industries in this 
province that might also benefit if the minister was to take a 
look exactly at doing for them as is happening for the 
commercial trucking industry. And I think of the busing 
industry, the public transport system in this province. Perhaps 
that is another area that the minister should be taking a look at 
when it comes to determination of routes and rates that are 
applied in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this deals with an important industry in 
this province when it comes to dealing with the commercial 
trucking of this province, they need an opportunity to be able to 
see and discuss exactly what the minister is proposing. We need 
the chance to have those discussions with them. 
 
Therefore I would move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Public Libraries Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill 
No. 37 is an Act respecting public libraries and introduces a 
number of amendments which will improve provisions of 
public library services in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill proposes to address four major issues that have been 
identified by the discussions with the public library community. 
At the proposal stage the amendments were circulated to 
stakeholder groups which include the regional, municipal, and 
northern systems of public library boards, Saskatchewan 
Library Association, Saskatchewan Library Trustees 
Association, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and the 
cities of Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton, and their local 
library boards. 
 
The changes in this Bill will illustrate our commitment to 
enhance the effectiveness of the public library system and its 
ability to provide public library services to the residents of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our first proposal responds to programs with the 
existing process for revising regional library boundaries. The 
existing process has proven to be cumbersome, lengthy, and 
costly. The Bill proposes that the process of revising library 
boundaries be modified to be similar to the process of revising 
municipal boundaries. 
 
The participating municipalities are familiar with the process. 
This process provides citizens the opportunity to be consulted 
about proposed boundary changes that may affect their quality 
of life. The process could also be . . . could also reduce the cost 
of municipalities if the boundary changes request is disputed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our second proposal relates to the issues arising 
from the public library system but tend to have difficulty 
getting resolved. Often the issues arise due to conflict priorities 
and interests between and among municipalities and public 
libraries. The municipalities and public library boards are 
interested in a process that will help to resolve these issues 
within the library system. 
 
Therefore the Bill proposes a new three-stage process for 
addressing issues and investigations. Under the three-stage 
process, the responsibility of resolving disputes will be assigned 
in this way: first, to the library board system; secondly, to the 
provincial public library system; and finally, if required, to an 
appointed independent commission. 
 
The independent commission will have the powers of 
commissioners pursuant to The Public Inquiries Act. The order 
of decisions and the independent . . . of an independent 
commission can be filed with and enforced by the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. The independent commission is the final stage 
of the process. 
 
This new dispute resolution is comparable and compatible to 
the process established under The Urban Municipalities Act of 
1984 and promotes local decision making, accountability, and 
conflict resolution. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

Mr. Speaker, the third proposal reduces the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ambiguity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . ambiguity — thank you very much, Mr. 
Member — the ambiguity and paperwork associated with 
regional library agreements. Since all municipalities participate 
in the library system, the purpose of a regional library 
agreement has become unclear. 
 
As a result, we are recommending eliminating of the 
requirements for the council of every municipality participating 
in a regional library . . . to enter into a regional library 
agreement. Rather we are recommending that the use of a 
regional library agreement be voluntary. This proposal 
simplifies the legislation and provides flexibility to the parties 
who wish to enter into the agreement to deliver local library 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final proposal involves the governing bodies 
of the regional libraries. As we know, the governance structure 
of any organization is an underpinning of good decision 
making. A good governance structure balances the diverse 
interests and expectations of the various members. 
 
The amendment will require the composition of the executive 
committee of regional library boards to be comprised of a 
balanced representation on the basis of population of rural and 
urban members. This change will help to balance the needs and 
interests of urban and rural communities and will enhance a 
democratic provincial public library system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial public library system has 
traditionally been built on a foundation of co-operation, 
participation, and support. Saskatchewan public libraries strive 
to provide equitable access to information and library material 
for all of Saskatchewan residents. This Bill will reinforce 
Saskatchewan’s library foundation and will help to balance the 
interests and needs of residents, municipalities, and local and 
regional library boards. This Bill promotes a higher local 
responsibility, autonomy, and democracy within the public 
library system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill No. 37, an Act 
respecting public libraries. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we all recognize the importance of libraries. 
And fact is, Mr. Speaker, when I was somewhat younger — 
ages five, six, seven, eight, in that area — we used to receive 
books from the public library in Regina on a regular basis, 
every two weeks or so. And those were very much valued in our 
home and gave us access to a much larger number of books 
than we had at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public libraries continue to perform a very, very 
important role in our communities. Not only do they provide the 
citizens with access to books and publications, but also to 
activities that are related to literacy and learning, which are 
extremely important, Mr. Speaker. Today many public libraries 
offer access to Internet and to computers to learn what is not 
only happening within their own communities but around the 
world. 

Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, we have seen over the last 
number of years a reduction of library services in some 
communities. Particularly with the loss in some communities of 
the mobile libraries. My own home community of Alida has lost 
the services of mobile library. And that is indeed a great loss 
because that mobile library stopped not only . . . was not only 
available to the citizenry of the communities but also stopped at 
the schools and provided them with a greater access to books 
than is currently available. 
 
It’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, as you know, to simply look at a 
title and say, yes, I want to order that book. It’s another matter 
altogether to actually pick up that book and hold it in your hand 
and then make the determination as to whether or not I would 
like to read this. 
 
They say you should not judge a book by its cover. But, Mr. 
Speaker, lots of times the covers will indeed tell you somewhat 
of what it’s about, that book is about, and it’s important to 
actually get your hands on that particular book. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any changes to the library Act do need very, very 
serious consultation with the stakeholders. And the stakeholders 
in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, is every library across this 
province and every person who wishes to or may wish to access 
the library system. 
 
I mention the Internet, Mr. Speaker, that is in many libraries 
today. That is a cost that many libraries find difficult to deal 
with and to access. The telephone costs related both to 
telephone services within the library and with the Internet cost 
was one of those measures, Mr. Speaker, that we received many 
contacts on this side of the House — and I’m sure the members 
opposite received many contacts over the fall and winter — 
with a great deal of concern as to what was going to happen to 
their library systems as SaskTel changed its rating structure. 
 
One of the fears that the public libraries had is that they would 
no longer be able to offer Internet services because of the 
prohibitive costs that SaskTel might place on them. 
 
I am concerned though, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talked 
about amalgamations of public libraries and doing it in a similar 
manner to that which was happening in the municipal district. Is 
the minister saying that he is proposing to do forced 
amalgamations — as he was attempting to do in the municipal 
areas — of public libraries? I certainly hope not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Voluntary — if people wish to join their libraries together in 
two different communities, to work together to provide similar 
services and to have access to a greater number of books, yes, 
Mr. Speaker, that would be a good thing. But if the minister is 
saying that he is going to treat public libraries in a similar 
manner to which he is treating municipalities, then I think we 
have a great deal of difficulty, Mr. Speaker, and certainly need a 
very, very significant clarification on exactly what the minister 
is talking about when he uses the terms that he is going to treat 
public libraries in a manner for amalgamation similar to 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of that, we need to take a serious amount 
of time in discussing with the public library system across this 
province exactly the implications and the impact that this 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

particular piece of legislation will have on our public libraries 
and the access that people will continue to have to that very 
important item . . . institution in our province — the public 
library. 
 
Therefore, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Electronic 
Information and Documents Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will recall that this government 
introduced similar legislation in December last year in the form 
of Bill 11, An Act respecting Electronic Information and 
Documents. When Bill 11 was introduced in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan became the first province in Canada to 
introduce legislation to provide a basic, legal framework for 
electronic-based commercial relationships. 
 
The members will recall that when Bill 11 was introduced, I 
indicated it was the government’s intention to broaden public 
awareness and seek comment and input into its further 
development. I’m pleased to report that these consultations have 
resulted in a number of comments and suggestions that are now 
incorporated in the Bill before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all familiar with the speed at which new 
methods of communication are being developed, and how 
quickly they become an integral part of how we communicate. 
 
It’s also becoming increasingly evident that these developments 
are having a significant and growing impact on business and on 
our economy. Saskatchewan consumers and businesses are 
conducting business on the Internet and will continue to do so 
in increasing numbers. New forms of communications such as 
the Internet and e-mail are evolving quickly and are fast 
replacing traditional paper-based communications. 
 
The advent of new communication media, however, threatens to 
outpace the legal roles that have traditionally supported 
commercial relationships. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the law 
supporting legal relationships and associated communications 
was developed with a paper-based system in mind. To address 
many of these uncertainties the United Nations General 
Assembly adopted a model on electronic commerce in 
November of 1996. 
 
The UN model law then formed the basis for the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada’s work in this area. The conference 
approved a uniform Act in August of 1999 entitled the Uniform 
Electronic Commerce Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the legislature today is a further 
refinement on the work of the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada. It is an important Bill, Mr. Speaker, as it will apply to 
commercial relationships and all other legal relationships 
requiring documentation. 
 

It adopts an approach whereby the rules of capacity, can I do 
this, are transformed into rules of proof — have I met the 
standard? It doesn’t mandate the sue of electronic 
communications, rather the Bill allows for its use provided the 
parties consent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that this Bill is 
media-neutral applying to paper-based and electronic 
communications, and technologically neutral in that particular 
technologies or software are not favoured over others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill is divided into two major parts. Part one 
contains many of the provisions found in Bill 11, and changes 
made in response to the comments received from stakeholders 
during consultation on the Bill. 
 
(1200) 
 
The Bill provides for the following. Basic rules to ensure 
equivalent treatment of electronic and paper-based documents 
and information; general principles that will apply to electronic 
communications; and thirdly, rules for particular electronic 
transactions including the formulation and operation of 
contracts, the use of automated transactions, corrections of 
errors, and presumed time and place of the receipt of messages. 
 
Part II of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, contains substantially the same 
provisions found in The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
which was passed by this legislature in 1998. That Act currently 
provides legal framework to support initiatives for the 
electronic filing of information with government. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, including The Electronic 
Filing of Information Act in this Bill will bring the legislation 
closer in substance to the Uniform Law Conference of Canada 
model legislation. 
 
To summarize, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before this legislature 
replaces Bill 11, and includes — and my colleagues will be 
interested to know this — provisions formerly found in Bill 11, 
changes to Bill 11 based on comments received, and provisions 
formerly found in The Electronic Filing of Information Act, an 
Act dealing with filing information with the government. 
 
I’d like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with just a few comments 
from a National Post article of yesterday in which the 
legislation is discussed. Mr. Speaker, Mr. David Akin, the 
reporter, says that Saskatchewan has updated a groundbreaking 
piece of electronic commerce legislation, the first of its kind in 
Canada. He says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We’re at the cutting edge of electronic commerce in so far 
as the recognition of electronic documents. 

 
He says: 
 

No other province has matched Saskatchewan’s initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude by thanking all those who 
took the time to consider and comment on this important 
legislation. I’m proud that Saskatchewan is the first province in 
Canada to advance legislation that will provide a basic legal 
framework for electronic-based commercial relationships. 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again the electronic use of commerce in this province is very 
much of a growing entity. It’s certainly becoming very 
important, even though it would seem that some of the members 
on the other side find it difficult to understand the electronic 
commerce in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, there can be though a great deal of 
difficulty in some of the electronic commerce and the electronic 
activities, particularly over the Internet. We’ve all heard of 
some of the attacks that have been made against the electronic 
commerce industry over the last number of weeks and months. 
And the fact is one of those major attacks is supposed to have 
taken place out of Eastern Canada. 
 
Therefore we do have some concerns as to the security and the 
protection that is afforded to commerce that is carried out over 
the Internet. And, Mr. Speaker, hopefully this particular piece 
of legislation will provide for some of that kind of protection 
that is needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking here about legal and commercial 
activities, relationships, that take place every day in this 
province, every day in this country. And people, when they 
place an order or make an agreement over the Internet, need to 
know that both parties are bound by the same agreement. 
 
They need to know, Mr. Speaker, that someone cannot transact 
a transaction, a commercial transaction, and indicate that person 
A is responsible for that transaction when they indeed did have 
no knowledge of that or were not a participant in that 
transaction, and therefore incur a liability on behalf of a person 
who is unaware that that is taking place. 
 
Hopefully this piece of legislation will provide those kind of 
protections. Security is very, very important. 
 
Canada, on a percentage basis, on a per capita basis, is the most 
wired country in the world. We have more Internet connections 
on a per capita basis than anyone else has. In large part, Mr. 
Speaker, that is because of the huge distances that we have to 
deal with in this country. 
 
We are a very thin ribbon of population along our southern 
borders, Mr. Speaker, yet we are very, very broad. Our 
commerce is carried along that very thin ribbon. And part of 
that ribbon, Mr. Speaker, is the Internet highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan also we are a very spread out 
population, a small population covering a very large geographic 
area, and the Internet plays a very large part in our commerce 
and in our communications with each other. Therefore security 
of that commerce and those communications are extremely 
important. 
 
Legislation is needed to protect that but this kind of legislation 
needs to be scrutinized to ensure that those protections are in 
place; that those protections are in place not only from attacks 

from outside of the system, but from within the system as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a large number of people who will be affected by this 
particular piece of legislation. They need to be assured. They 
need to understand exactly what this legislation will do to their 
commercial interests, to their private interests. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to recognize the Minister of 
Labour and invite her to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today I have 
with me Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of the Department 
of Labour; Cheryl Hanson, assistant deputy minister; Dawn 
McKibben, director of human resources and administration; 
John Boyd, director of policy and planning; Jeff Parr, executive 
director of occupational health and safety; Graham Mitchell, 
executive director, labour services division; Doug Forseth, 
senior labour relations officer, labour relations and mediation 
division; and Peter Federko, chief executive officer of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, is it? I’d like to 
welcome the Minister of Labour and her officials here today. I 
hope it will be a productive experience. There’s a number of 
issues that I want to discuss in estimates and in committee, 
mainly around the rules and conditions of unionization. 
 
But today we have seen the amendments of The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Act, and unfortunately it’s a sad day 
for the Saskatchewan people and the economy of 
Saskatchewan. Normally we have hits from the . . . this 
province takes terrible hits from the weather-related problems 
and from our unfair trading practices around the world, but 
today we have . . . the Saskatchewan economy has taken a hit 
from the provincial government. 
 
And I’d like to start off by getting into some of the comments 
the minister has made concerning the amendments of The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act in previous days, 
and she’s restated some of them today. 
 
Recently, Madam Minister, when you were talking about your 
discussions with the construction industry over the upcoming 
forced unionization Bill, you told reporters that your 
predecessor had met with the construction association hundreds 
of times. And you stated the other day and again you stated this 
morning in the interview, and hundreds of times to discuss 
getting rid of the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) and your withdrawal of the grandfather clause 
when it comes to double-breasted companies. 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

And again this hundreds of times keeps coming up. Can you 
supply to us today the dates of these hundreds of meetings, and 
the minutes from these hundreds of meetings, and who attended 
these hundreds of meetings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we can actually. I don’t have it 
with me today, but we will get it to you, and you will have that 
list of the dates when the meetings were held. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d appreciate seeing that 
information. You’ve said recently that the construction industry 
was simply unwilling to make any compromises. Can you tell 
us how compromising the union leadership, which you are so 
closely . . . you are so close to, were on the issues of the CCTA 
and the double-breasting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say that to a point we had 
movement on both sides of the discussion, and at the end of the 
day it just was not possible to bring it to full conclusion. But in 
fact I would say that both parties moved a bit, but not quite 
enough to get to a final conclusion. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could you, Madam Minister, outline some of 
the areas where the two sides did see eye to eye? And the 
movements that you refer to — what were they? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The areas where agreement occurred 
tended to be on more minor issues. And certainly, when it came 
to some of the things that caused the final breakdown, it would 
probably be fair to say that it was on the kinds of issues that 
were discussed in the press conference today. 
 
There were a number of details that people were able to agree 
on, but at the end of the day it’s very hard for them to come to 
agreement on what is a fair way to divide up the work that 
exists within the industry. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, you’ve gone out of your way 
to connect the CCTA with your upcoming forced unionization 
Bill as if one naturally followed the other. In reality though, 
these two issues aren’t really connected other than through 
policies. In reality, you could repeal your unfair tendering 
policy without bringing in this Bill, which the construction 
industry calls repugnant. 
 
Isn’t it correct that you are simply connecting the two in the 
minds of the media and the public in order to confuse the issue 
and take some of the spotlight off your upcoming forced 
unionization Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m sympathetic with the difficulty of 
the member opposite in understanding this issue, but I’ll try to 
explain it in such a way that I also came to understand it over 
time. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is when you bid on a contract and one 
company is locked into bidding union and another company 
doesn’t have to follow those rules, then they can underbid a 
company that has to meet certain standards that they’ve agreed 
to in a collective agreement. Now what problem that created is 
that a company that was duly certified had those obligations but 
escaped them through spinning off. So they were doing 
something that was really not acceptable in the world of labour 

practice where you’re either a union company or not a union 
company. 
 
To solve the problem that companies that did have contracts 
with their employees and were unionized could not compete for 
projects. The Construction Tendering Agreement was 
constructed to ensure that they at least got a percentage of work 
in the province. And in actual fact, even though the unionized 
sector is 20 per cent of the industry, they only got 16 per cent of 
the contracts, even with that agreement. 
 
And that’s why if we had gone back to the table to negotiate the 
CCTA, they would have wanted a higher standard so that that 
remaining 4 per cent could have been addressed. And I think on 
careful reflection you will understand how these two things are 
linked. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure you’re 
aware of the Queen’s Bench Court ruling concerning the matter 
between PCL industry and Lockerbie and Hole versus the CLR 
(Construction Labour Relations Organization). Given that the 
trial judge determined that the CLR exists as a result of the 
CILRA (Construction Industry Labour Relations Act) and it’s 
therefore an arm of your government, are you aware of the 
complete make up of this organization, its directors and 
members? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, obviously I’m aware of the 
organization. And one of the things we've done in this Bill, 
which as far as I’m concerned should be satisfactory to the 
currently non-union sector of the industry, is that they now have 
to submit their bylaws and whatnot to the Labour Relations 
Board; whereas before they had an independent authority over 
their bylaws. And I think the changes that we’ve made would 
satisfy the requirements of the court decision that recently 
occurred. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members, just a reminder to direct your 
remarks through the Chair. Thanks so much. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m sure, Madam 
Minister, you’re also aware that the trial judge in the Court of 
Appeal determined that the CLR, an arm of your government, 
has breached the Charter of Rights of both PCL industry and 
Lockerbie by denying membership to the CLR. 
 
As an arm of the government and CLR, they’re required to 
submit its annual records including annual financial statements 
to the department which leads us . . . Could you please clear up 
the charge under the CCTA of the twenty-one and a half cents 
an hour per worker that the Crowns pay under the terms of the 
CCTA to CLR, and what is this twenty-one and a half cents 
used for? How much has been collected under this charge? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I’ll just clarify that in every 
province where there’s a unionized sector, a fee is collected; 
and the fee is always in two parts. Part of it is a designated fee 
to have a representative employer organization. The other parts 
of the fee come out of the collective bargaining process. So 
understand that there’s two parts to that fee. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

Now these are the three parts: 10 cents go to the representative 
bargaining organization, the REO (representative employer 
organization); 6 cents go to the Construction Opportunities 
Development Council; and 5 cents to the building trades, also 
because of their involvement in the bargaining process. 
 
The CLR portion of the fees provides funding for the CLR to 
fulfil its role as employer. The CODC (Construction 
Opportunities Development Council) portion is for training and 
development. And the trades council uses its portion to fulfil its 
role as the bargaining agent. And the Provincial Auditor has 
rejected any concerns about these fees. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a charge 
implemented as a result of the CCTA, and will you table this 
information to the House, the financial records of the funds so 
we can ensure all the money is going to where it’s supposed to 
be going. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That is not . . . this is information of the 
organization, it’s not our information and we don’t have it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’m just referring back to the court decision . . . 
that you should have this information and we’d like you to 
make this information public. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That information, as for other 
non-profit corporations, is filed with the non-profits 
corporations branch. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
your opinion, if an individual owns a unionized mechanical 
company that works exclusively on industrial projects and 
invests as a partner in a commercial general contracting work 
that works exclusively open shop in commercial projects, would 
that individual be in conflict with the provisions of the CILA. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, perhaps I’m a little unclear 
about the intent of the question. This Bill only applies to those 
businesses which are certified as a unionized employer. And if 
an independent business is working on a project that’s not 
certified, I’m just not sure exactly what you’re trying to get at. 
If you could be a little more clear, Mr. Chair, that would be 
helpful if I had more clarity on the question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well just to repeat it, if an individual owns a 
unionized mechanical company that works on industrial 
projects, and invests as a partner in a commercial general 
contracting company that works on open shop commercial 
projects, would that individual be in conflict with the 
provisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The investment isn’t the determining 
criteria. It has more to do with common control of a same board 
of directors. It has to do with how payroll is issued. It has to do 
with other control and direction issues not just investment. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — You’re saying an individual could own shares 
in both companies doing . . . one doing unionized work and one 
doing non-unionized work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Shares aren’t the issue, I don’t think, in 
any corporation that determines anything to do with 

unionization. It has to do with who actually controls the 
business. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, that’s what I’m getting at — is in 
your provisions you’re making a connection between ownership 
of one company versus the other. And does that mean that the, 
that the . . . there’s going to be a conflict with the non-unionized 
company? Not a conflict, but so much be under the provisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well let me put it this way, Mr. Chair. 
If the investment is part of a whole package of other criteria that 
have to be met, it would be possible — but not necessarily so. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well could you outline all the criteria that’s 
involved and what level of ownership is allowed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well in fact I can’t because that’s part 
of case law, and the Labour Relations Board would have a body 
of case law as to how related employer has been determined in 
the past. And they would have to ask a series of questions that 
they ask typically in this kind of a hearing. And I wouldn’t be 
equipped to speak to the details of that any more than I would 
of how a court comes to its determinations. 
 
But it has to be a series of criteria. And I know that some of 
them would be things like a common board of directors, a 
common payroll system that’s directed from the parent 
company; it would be a common supervision. Those kinds of 
things. It would not be an independent company that has its 
own board of directors and operations and whatnot. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could you make . . . 
could you ask the Labour Relations Board for that criteria and 
make those criteria public? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can undertake to look at the case 
law and get some clarification for you. I do not consider the 
Labour Relations Board to be staff to myself, but our 
department can undertake that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — It’s a very, Mr. Chair, I think it’s a very 
important question because companies are out there wondering 
where they stand. And they need to know what the rules are. 
 
As Labour minister, do you feel it is appropriate to accept large 
donations from trade unions when you are contemplating these 
major changes to The Trade Union Act? Changes that, as far as 
I can see, no one wants except the union leaders. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well first of all, I would say that I have 
been approached by young non-unionized workers who work in 
the non-union sector, so to suggest that somehow this is just 
some people who are far removed from reality would not be 
fair. 
 
And also if the member opposite, Mr. Chair, had any 
understanding of the trades — these are blue-collar people; 
these are not people who live in some lofty world. These are the 
people who do the plumbing work, do the carpentry work, do 
the labouring work, and probably more so than some of the 
people that you seem to be defending in this in terms of getting 
your hands dirty. 
 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

Although I have to say that I do understand, I do understand 
that most contractors in the province came up through the 
industry themselves. I do understand that, and I have a great 
deal of respect for these gentlemen. 
 
What was his question? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, well that’s the whole point of the 
question. The NDP has received $300,000 last year from unions 
— $32,000 from the construction unions. And I wasn’t referring 
to the individual unionized worker being in agreement with this. 
I was making reference to the union leaders. 
 
And you are stating categorically that these large donations 
have nothing to do with your decision to bring enforced 
unionization Bill for the construction industry that works and 
are asking for . . . that employers aren’t asking for. 
 
The only ones who seem to be asking for it is the union 
leadership who have failed to convince these workers to 
organize. These are the same union leaders who sign these large 
donations over to you and your party. And you say it has no 
impact on the decision making? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Chair, I did indicate that 
workers have approached me on this same subject — about the 
arbitrariness of the rules that they work under. 
 
But the other comment I would make is there were many 
contractors that approached in support of this Bill. This Bill was 
not just supported by the workers; it was supported by 
contractors as well. 
 
And the other comment I would make about the donations. As 
you know, the history of our party is one that we’re affiliated 
with the labour movement. They’re an affiliate of ours. They 
are not some strange person who sits off on the side and donates 
to us. We’re actually affiliated. So it would be not surprising 
that your affiliate donates to you. What’s more surprising is that 
Conrad Black donates to you. 
 
I mean I . . . you’re not affiliated, are you? As far as I know. 
And I would find that to be much more unusual. And I do recall 
saying, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, that a wide range of 
people — including business people, including lawyers, 
including people who work in community organizations — all 
donate to me. 
 
And I don’t know about you, but I believe my role as a 
legislator is to bring my best objective decision making in the 
common good to this forum, and I don’t feel I owe my 
allegiance to anyone. And I think that’s particularly why I 
favour the process we have within the legislature because it’s a 
good democratic forum for legislators to be able to exercise 
their independent judgment. 
 
So your vote might be for sale but mine isn’t. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, that’s the whole point of my 
question. You are affiliated with unions. Unions, by all 
accounts, are writing labour laws which you are passing or 
trying to pass. You’ve admitted to being affiliated with unions. 
When they give you $300,000, I think that, that . . . I don’t 

who’s . . . I think someone else is being bought here. 
 
I don’t think you can make that accusation over here. The only 
affiliation we have over here is to the Saskatchewan people and 
to a thriving economy. And what you are admitting to is that 
you’re allowing the union leaders to dictate to your coalition 
government what the rules and regulations are, and I believe 
that’s very unfair to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’ve heard, Madam Minister, I’ve heard you argue that 
these changes in the upcoming forced unionization Bill are 
necessary to ensure labour harmony in the construction 
industry. As a matter of interest, when was the last time we saw 
a major strike in the construction industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, members. Order. Just before I 
recognize the Minister of Labour, I just want to caution . . . 
Order, order. Order, please. I just want to caution members on 
both sides of the House to be careful and temperate with their 
language, and be careful of insinuations. And I want to just 
make specific reference to the insinuations that have been made 
on both sides about buying and selling. I’ll say no more about 
that. 
 
I just want to urge members — I know there are strong feelings 
on both sides of the House with respect to this issue — but let’s 
be temperate in our remarks about one another. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I will repeat the question. As you’ve argued, 
Madam Minister, that these changes in your upcoming forced 
unionization Bill are necessary to ensure labour harmony in 
construction industry, as a matter of interest, when was the last 
time we saw a major strike in the construction industry in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, that would be about 18 years 
ago. But I have to say this is a trend right across Canada; this is not 
specific to Saskatchewan. This would be the same in every other 
province. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, in fact we have not seen a protracted 
strike since the late 1970s or early 1980s when they were regular 
occurrences. So would you mind telling us the real reason why 
you feel this upcoming forced unionization Bill is necessary? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, I have to take exception, Mr. 
Chair, to the speaker’s constant reference to a forced unionization 
Bill, because this Bill is the same as exists in the labour law of 
every other province. So I guess if you want to accuse Alberta of 
forced unionization and Ontario of forced unionization, I guess we 
can do that. 
 
But I am trying to respectably answer whatever small amount of 
factual questions the member opposite is asking. And I’m quite 
prepared to go to the wall factually, fact by fact. But I would ask a 
little respect, in return, for referring to the Act under its proper 
name, The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act. 
 
And the presence or absence of strikes has nada to do with the 
fundamental right of democratic right to unionize. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, well you’re the one that’s saying that 
there’s tensions in the construction industry and that’s one of the 
reasons why you’re bringing in these amendments. I’m just stating 
the fact that there hasn’t been any tensions, there hasn’t been any 
labour disruptions since the late 1970s or 1980s. 
 
And as far as other provinces, I’d just like to state that in Alberta, 
there is unionized construction industry and there’s non-unionized 
commercial construction industry. So that’s not quite true what 
you said there about other provinces. 
 
Up to this point, has there been anything to stop union 
organizations from trying to organize the workers who are 
employed at these non-union shops? And we have heard that 
there’s only 20 per cent of the construction industry that is 
unionized. That means 80 per cent are not and don’t want to be 
unionized. 
 
Why doesn’t the union get out there and do the work and unionize 
these shops? Or are you going to do the work for them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess there’s two answers, Mr. Chair, 
to that question. You know there’s a young man that met with 
me lately who said that he had been presented in his non-union 
workplace with a petition his employer wanted him to sign to 
oppose his right to unionize. I don’t think I need to explain that 
further. 
 
When the person who pays your pay cheque, in an environment 
where you have no rights, gives you a petition to sign to oppose 
their right to have rights, I think that’s a pretty questionable 
practice. And that’s part of what this is all about. 
 
The second thing I would say is that the whole point to this is 
not to unionize anybody. The point of it is to prevent employers 
from avoiding their collective bargaining obligations. And 
where employers created spinoffs specifically for the purpose 
— that’s the way the Act states it, specifically for the purpose 
of avoiding collective bargaining obligations — those are the 
only companies that are going to be affected. These are people 
who have been proven to have created spinoffs to avoid their 
obligations. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I feel that, that in doing a unionization 
effort that the worker is being . . . has a potential of being 
coerced from the labour unions as well as the employer. And I 
believe it should be fair and equal treatment from both sides. 
 
And the individual worker, if the individual worker has come to 
you and spoken to you about the issue, they have the full force 
of the law behind them. And I don’t see why the government 
has to come in and bring in rules and regulations to do the 
union’s work. If people voluntarily want to join a union, they 
can do that now. 
 
Why would you get involved in forcing people to join a union 
against their wishes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 
times that we’ve experienced this kind of hearing problem, but 
it’s a question of the only time an employer would be affected 

is if it was proven that they were trying to avoid their collective 
bargaining obligations. 
 
Now this, Mr. Speaker, is no different than when someone has 
to pay alimony; and when they don’t pay up, then there are 
remedies. That is no different. This is only in the instance of an 
employer who has been attempting to avoid their collective 
bargaining obligations. 
 
And I ask you, in terms of the power of the employer and the 
power of the union, who has more power over you — the 
person who pays your cheque or the person who doesn’t? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to move on to another issue. Do you 
foresee the current organization, the CLR, Construction Labour 
Relations Organization, the power to negotiate collective 
bargaining agreements continued in that role for sometime to 
come, and will you continue to give the industry that right to 
decide for themselves who will bargain on their behalf? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The way that this is organized in the 
present Act is that organization has the right to 
self-determination. As soon as the Act is proclaimed, they will 
have to meet the conditions of the new Act, and I presume they 
will have a meeting and they will conduct whatever business 
they have to conduct in order to properly submit their bylaws 
and to have their elections, etc. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, so that basically says . . . The 
question is: do you have the intention of enshrining the current 
bargaining organization in this new legislation and thus take 
away the industry’s right to chose for themselves who works on 
the agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, the name is enshrined but 
not what the people choose to do with it. So it’s no different 
than this is called the Government of Saskatchewan, but what 
people choose to do with it varies from time to time. 
 
And so in the same way, that organization with the name would 
exist, but how the members of that organization construct their 
bylaws, conduct their elections, that’s a matter for their 
organization. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chairman, it seems that they’re going to 
have to change their bylaws to suit what regulations and 
amendments that the government brings in. 
 
How many companies, Madam Minister, to Saskatchewan do 
you contend will be affected by the scrapping of the 
grandfathering clause in your forced unionization legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have no way of knowing. One of 
the difficulties with the situation that currently exists is there is 
no way to tell how many companies are related, and there is no 
way to know this. And we have asked the construction industry 
for those figures and they apparently can’t give it to us either. 
So we don’t know and they don’t know, and I guess this process 
will find out. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Are you stating that there will be no significant 
effect on the other non-unionized construction companies? 
 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll go through this carefully one more 
time. The only people impacted by this Bill are people who 
have been trying to avoid their collective bargaining 
obligations. If a company is determined to fall within that 
definition by virtue of having spun off, then they would be 
affected. And I’m sure, Mr. Chair, that these companies know 
who they are because if you intentionally did something to 
avoid something you would know it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — It kind of begs the question why you’re 
bringing in these amendments if you don’t know the result of 
your actions and who it’s affecting and why and when and how. 
But when this grandfathering clause is removed in your forced 
unionization legislation, the general effect would be that the 
non-union arms of double-breasted companies would ultimately 
become unionized and therefore be subject to province-wide 
collective bargaining agreements. Is that generally correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Only if they are declared directly 
related would that happen. And that would only happen is if the 
spin off company was not a true separate, and independent 
company. A true mom and pop will not be affected. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 
statement on Mother’s Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Mother’s Day 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, and thank you colleagues on 
this side and colleagues on the other side of the House. As we 
all know or at least we better not forget, Mr. Speaker, that 
Sunday, May 14 is Mother’s Day — the day in which we buy a 
card and if possible take our moms out for dinner and have a 
good visit. 
 
This one-day effort, Mr. Speaker, in return for the gift of life, 
for a childhood of love and nurturing, for the training by 
precept and example which prepared us to move out into the big 
world with both a sense of direction and moral standards 
encompass us. Not exactly a fair trade, Mr. Speaker, but 
mothers are sometimes used to this. 
 
Dads help. Friends play a role. School and society have their 
own influence. But still when we think of the forces that have 
shaped us, our mothers are likely to be those at the head of the 
line. Mr. Speaker, even politicians have mothers who love them 
despite their sometimes ill-chosen profession. No strings 
attached, no provisions attached except that we be of the best 
behaviour we can. 
 
Those of us who are fortunate to have their mothers still with us 
and have them close by will, I know, make a special effort to 
see them on their official day. Those of us who do not have our 
mothers and who are not close to them, I know, will take a 
private moment to share these memories. 

Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to ask leave to respond to 
the Mother’s Day address. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 
it’s an honour to stand in this Assembly this afternoon and say a 
few words on behalf of mothers in the province and on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party in joining with the member from 
Regina in regards to his comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t any one of us in this Assembly this 
afternoon who will not take the time, I don’t believe, to extend 
their warm wishes and their love to their mothers today. Except 
for the members who unfortunately, as myself, had their mother 
leave them a few years ago. But, Mr. Speaker, that still doesn’t 
remove the memories of what a mother has, and her role has 
been in my life, and certainly, I’m sure, in the lives of many 
members here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we can all be grateful for the love and the 
care and the nourishment of our mothers. Mothers certainly do 
extend a lot. They do give a lot. In fact, I think there was a little 
poem written one time about this child leaving a note on the 
table for his mother that she owed him for the time that he had 
mowed the grass and that she owed him for the time that he had 
done the dishes and that she owed him for a number of other 
issues he had done. 
 
And the mother sat down and she responded to it saying, I just 
wanted you to know how much I appreciated being able to carry 
you for nine months; being able to give you birth; being able to 
cradle you when you were sick; and being able to haul you to 
the ball games or the hockey games — you know, mothers do 
so much for us. And so many times we forget to really show our 
gratitude and our thanks and our appreciation. 
 
So on behalf of our caucus, we certainly want to extend not 
only to the mothers that we represent, but to mothers all across 
this province, by saying thank you for the devotion you have 
shown to your family, and not only to your family but to the 
friends around you. And we wish each and everyone of you a 
Happy Mother’s Day. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could by leave 
before we adjourn, when we were moving a motion earlier to 
have an extra day around the May long weekend, I neglected to 
change or suggest that we change the hours of sitting for Friday. 
And therefore I would move, by leave of the Assembly, and 
seconded by the member from . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thursday, Thursday. 
 



May 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh, Thursday, pardon me. 
Seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly notwithstanding Rule 3(1) 
on Thursday, May 18, 2000 this Assembly shall meet at 10 
a.m., and the Assembly shall adjourn at 1 p.m. subject to 
provisions of Rule 3(2) and Rule 3(3) so far as applicable. 

 
And I would so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I wish you and your loved 
ones, your families, a very, very fine, happy weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:46 p.m. 
 
 
 


