





























































Hansard: June 21, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2035 
 June 21, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people that have signed this petition are all from 
Semans. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of their hospitals. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Drake and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today signed by citizens asking for a ban on smoking in public 
places. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by the good people of Sommerville Road 
here in the constituency of Regina South. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the health care in the province. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Lanigan and 
Guernsey. 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
on behalf of citizens petitioning the government to construct a 
tower for cellular telephone service. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by folks in Minton, Gladmar, Lake Alma, 
and Radville. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present 
a petition on behalf of the youth of Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever will pray. 
 

I humbly present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people in southeast Saskatchewan who would like to enjoy 
cellular telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones, or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Beaubier, Radville, Oungre, and Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people that are concerned about 
lack of cellular service in their area. And the prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones, or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 
 

And this is signed on behalf of residents of Lake Alma, 
Beaubier, Carnduff, Radville, Regina, Tribune, Estevan, 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Grenfell, and the great city of Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
health care petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Nokomis and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about hospital closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Signed by the people from Lanigan and area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of those seeking a ban on smoking 
in all public places: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is on behalf of many young people in Regina. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition of citizens concerned about the closure of hospitals. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the community of Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this afternoon from citizens concerned about the 
massive deterioration of the Saskatchewan highway network. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Paddockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition to retain 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are from Viscount and 
Meacham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
closures of Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Lanigan, Jansen, Lockwood, Leroy and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Lockwood, 
Lanigan, and Plunkett, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

To ensure the Nokomis Health Centre, the Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals, and the Cupar Health Centre remain 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

open; 
 
To rescind the large increases in nursing home fees; and 
 
To legislate a total ban of smoking in public places and 
workplaces. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: regarding the portions of 
highways your department plans to revert to gravel this 
year, what is the traffic count on each one of these sections 
of highways? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a notice of 
a question. I give notice I shall on day no. 70 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: how much 
money has Sask Water invested in operations outside the 
province of Saskatchewan; are there consultants working 
on any Sask Water operations outside of Saskatchewan; 
and if there are, if you could provide detailed information, 
their salaries and names. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice of a 
written question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 70 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: is your department 
developing a policy with regard to citizens wishing to fix 
highways on their own; will your department co-operate 
with citizens wishing to fix highways; if you do plan to 
co-operate, what form will this co-operation take. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through 
you to the Assembly a special member of my family, my uncle, 
Clement Wakefield, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. My uncle is a 
very special person to me. He’s not only an uncle, he’s been a 
mentor and a friend all through my life. 
 
And I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that my uncle, a veteran of 
the Second World War, and being part of the Signal Corps, he 
was one of the initial troops onto the beach at Juno Beach on 
D-Day. And subsequent for his valour, he was awarded 
personally a citation from Field Marshal Montgomery. 
 
I’m very proud of my uncle. I wish the Assembly to wish him a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
everyone to help me welcome today, members of the Prairie 
Implement Manufacturers Association who are in the gallery 
today. And they’re accompanied by the ex-old grey mayor, 
Larry Schneider, who’s the CEO (chief executive officer) of 

their corporation, and also to join me in thanking them for all 
the good work they do in helping to diversify rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you members of PIMA (Prairie Implement 
Manufacturers Association) who are in your gallery this 
afternoon. These manufacturers in Saskatchewan are the 
backbone of many rural communities in Saskatchewan, and 
they are attending the Western Canada Farm Progress Show, 
and they’re very concerned about the government’s labour laws. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just remind the hon. member, in 
introduction of guests, not to enter into a debate. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to add 
that many of us are wearing our pins which say, Please let us 
vote. 
 
I’d like to introduce each individual member representing 
PIMA members in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First there is Carol Vibert, from Harvest Industries in Craik, 
Saskatchewan; Greg Haukaas, Haukaas Industries, Mortlach; 
Brad Nelson, Honey Bee Manufacturing, Frontier; Greg Honey, 
Honey Bee Manufacturing, Frontier; Claude Bourgault, DryAir 
2000, St. Brieux; Myrlen Klieboer, DryAir 2000; Diana 
Kiedrowski, DryAir 2000; Don Henry, Brandt Industries, 
Regina; Jim Carnago, Schulte Industries, Englefeld; Earl 
Schulte, Schulte Industries; Izaak Cruson, Dutch Industries; 
Loren Katzenberger, Precision Industries; Jerome Pratchler, 
Bay Trail Industries from Humboldt; Wilf Koender, Koender 
Windmills, Engelfeld; Lionel Doepker, Doepker Industries; 
Bud Michel, Michel Industries, St. Gregor; and of course, Mr. 
Larry Schneider, CEO of PIMA. 
 
Please join me in welcoming these people to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, I would 
be remiss if I did not also extend my own personal welcome, 
and I would hope that members would join with me again in 
extending a welcome to Larry Schneider of PIMA. It was my 
privilege to have served for six years on Regina City Council 
with Larry Schneider. He was the mayor; I was one of the 
members of council. And after that we parted company. 
 
I made a turn towards the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan as a New Democratic Party member of the 
legislature. And Larry, as we know, went on to become a 
Progressive Conservative member of Brian Mulroney’s cabinet. 
And I’m pleased to see that he’s here today, and I’m pleased to 
see that our paths are crossing again. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in wishing him a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

like to add to the member from Redberry Lake’s welcome to the 
PIMA members in the gallery. 
 
I especially would like to welcome and say how pleased I am to 
see you here today, to all those manufacturers from the 
Humboldt-St. Brieux area. We have a great number of them that 
contribute to the province in that area and I think they deserve a 
great commendation for their work in enhancing economic 
growth in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jerry Bourgeault also is present in the Speaker’s 
gallery, as well as two other members that I can’t quite identify 
from here, and we wouldn’t want to forget anyone. So we ask 
the Assembly to please welcome all PIMA members once 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join in the welcome of the PIMA members today. But I would 
like to put a little different angle on it. I sold many of the 
products that these people represent. They were excellent 
products and . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, but a good quality product is 
easy to sell, Mr. Speaker. And I think that these people 
represent some of the greatest innovation that Saskatchewan has 
to offer the agricultural community in this province and 
worldwide. 
 
Now the name Greg Honey was mentioned in the introductions. 
I didn’t see him in the group; it’s a name that the Minister of 
Highways and the Deputy Premier should be familiar with 
today. And Mr. Brad Nelson is representing that company. 
They are the single most important employer and biggest 
manufacturer in my constituency, and I’m pleased to have Mr. 
Nelson here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 
Dr. Glenn Veeman, who is in your Speaker’s gallery. He is 
accompanied by his son, Chris Veeman, who is presently a 
ministerial assistant in the Minister of CIC’s (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) office. 
 
Chris is on his way to law school this fall after having a stint at 
the legislature. So I want to congratulate Chris in getting into 
law school and I also want to welcome Dr. Veeman to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
next few days the Western Canada Farm Progress Show is 
taking place here in Regina. And it is the premier agriculture 

show — dryland agriculture show — for certainly North 
America and perhaps the world. 
 
It features the latest products and services in agriculture, in 
dryland agriculture particularly; technology; innovation. It’s 
certainly a beautiful day out there today after some rain across 
the province. So farmers will be taking advantage of the 
opportunity to come in to Regina and look over the latest 
innovations. 
 
And certainly as a farmer myself, I’m like a kid in a candy store 
when I go over there — everything I see I want — and I’m 
probably no different than many farmers in that regard. The 
latest and the newest and the brightest pieces of equipment and 
services are available over there. 
 
So I want to congratulate all involved in the organization of the 
Western Canada Farm Progress Show and certainly the 
exhibitors who spend a lot of money and time putting on the 
event for the farm people of Saskatchewan. It’s a tremendous 
show, and I want to, on behalf of the official opposition, 
welcome all to Regina and the Western Canadian Farm 
Progress Show. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Wholesale Sales 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here we go again, Mr. 
Speaker — more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
It appears that the Leader of the Opposition has been out and 
about in the province again, Mr. Speaker, preaching his 
message of doom and gloom. But wherever he’s been or 
whatever he’s been up to, once again he’s proved our theory, 
Mr. Speaker — the more he moans and puts down the 
provincial economy and our local businesses, the better it is for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This time it’s the wholesale trade, courtesy of the rabid NDP 
(New Democratic Party) organization, StatsCanada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What do the stats say, Mr. Speaker? From April a year ago to 
this April, wholesale sales in Saskatchewan have increased by a 
whopping 23 per cent, Mr. Speaker — only the best in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. I would think this means that Saskatchewan 
businesses are confident enough to build their inventories, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
However, the promised land of Alberta didn’t do too badly — a 
mere 13 per cent. And Mike Harris’s Ontario almost made 
double figures at a mere 9.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Just another 
snapshot with how we’re doing in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I suppose we’ll have to settle for being number one — with a 10 
percentage point lead over Alberta, Mr. Speaker. But regardless 
of that, Mr. Speaker, this is good for our province. 
 
Let’s keep the opposition leader on the road talking of doom 
and gloom and the province will continue to prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

National Aboriginal Day 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today in recognition of 
National Aboriginal Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on both sides of this House can 
appreciate the rich culture and heritage that Aboriginal people 
have to share with us. I would like to draw the Assembly’s 
attention today to one particular Aboriginal entrepreneur who 
has taken the Native spirit and incorporated it into her clothing 
designs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eva Lizotte from Saskatoon has designed a line of 
clothing that embraces both traditional European design and 
North American Indian traditions. She has had the opportunity 
to organize many fashion shows and currently is endeavouring 
to market her exclusive designs in Singapore, Germany, and 
Holland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Lizotte’s independent business has grown 
considerably over the past seven years, and one of her most 
recent accomplishments is that she is one of two women that 
can be credited with choreographing the dance routine taking 
place at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum today in recognition 
of National Aboriginal Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also many other Aboriginal women that 
are breaking the barriers of conventional stereotypes such as 
Chief Laura Big Eagle of the Ocean Man Reserve. In 1997, 
Chief Big Eagle and her present council became the first 
all-female chief and council out of 73 bands in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these vibrant and talented women, as well as many 
Aboriginal women across Canada, are to be commended for 
their ongoing dedication to promote accountable governance, 
peace, and respect and the cultural enhancement of our society. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Today is National Aboriginal Day, Mr. 
Speaker and it’s my pleasure to rise in the House to recognize 
it. 
 
National Aboriginal Day was first proclaimed by Governor 
General Roméo LeBlanc in 1996. And June 21 is a fitting day. 
It is a summer solstice — the day of the longest light and the 
shortest dark, the day when many Aboriginal peoples 
traditionally celebrate their culture and heritage. 
 
This occasion gives all Aboriginal people the opportunity to 
share their culture and heritage with fellow Canadians. And it 
also gives non-Aboriginal people the chance to honour and 
celebrate all of the contributions Aboriginals have made to this 
country and its society. 
 
And the Aboriginal peoples have made many contributions, Mr. 
Speaker. Their spectacular artistry, both in the performing and 
visual arts, enriches the multicultural fabric of Canadian 
society. 
 

And all of us can learn from the Aboriginal people’s holistic 
world view. It is a view that honours and respects the earth, and 
a view that honours and respects each member of society, and a 
view that values the relationship between people and the rest of 
nature. 
 
As we move into a new millennium, we celebrate the 
contributions of Aboriginal peoples in the past. We value the 
contributions they are making today, and we look forward to the 
future. It will be a future in which partnership and respect, 
between Aboriginal peoples and non-Aboriginals, will continue 
to grow and strengthen and continue to create a better society 
for all of us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Transmission System 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the election last 
fall and since that time, members on this side of the House have 
committed to endeavour to practice a new style of politics. Part 
of that pledge includes a commitment to acknowledge actions 
and positions taken by political opponents that are positive for 
our constituents. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the Assembly to 
congratulate the minister responsible for SaskPower and his 
colleagues for his announcement on Monday that monopoly 
restrictions on the SaskPower transmission system would be 
lifted. This is particularly good for the two Saskatchewan cities 
that had the vision and foresight to retain their own electrical 
utilities back in the 1960s. 
 
While Swift Current and Saskatoon have been able to operate 
profitable and successful electrical utilities, SaskPower’s 
monopoly has meant that the Crown corporation and only the 
Crown could sell these cities the bulk power. 
 
With the minister’s announcement on Monday, these two 
communities are free to explore other sources of power on 
behalf of their taxpayers and customers. And perhaps most 
importantly the city of Swift Current, along with Saskatoon, can 
look at generating their own power. The revenue implications 
and the potential for economic development through generation 
and cogeneration are now at least part of the potential of these 
two great communities. 
 
On behalf of my constituents who live in the city of Swift 
Current, I would like to offer my thanks to the minister and the 
government for this positive decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Tree-Planting Program 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to inform the Assembly about an exciting project taking place 
in southeast Saskatchewan. A new Weyburn tree-planting 
program designed to combat soil erosion and help local farmers 
is being carried out by area school children. 
 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Producers agree to give up 15 metres of their land that borders 
the Souris River and allow the program to convert it to 
permanent cover. This conversion from farmland helps prevent 
silt from running into the river. 
 
The program has many important goals: to stop wind and water 
erosion on farms, to clean up the Souris River by stopping the 
soil from running into it, to promote biodiversity, and to 
educate our youth about environmental concerns. 
 
The two-year tree planting program kicked off in April with 
grades 4 through 9 students from Griffin, Saskatchewan 
planting eight varieties of trees on various erosion areas at 
Mainprize Park, where the valley has been recently landscaped 
and there is no grass or trees. 
 
There are at least 20 sponsors for the program, Mr. Speaker, 
with trees coming from Shand nurseries and the PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration). A number of RMs (rural 
municipality) have provided mechanical tree planters, and land 
owners will provide the tractors to pull them. 
 
Twenty schools are participating, including Weyburn, Fillmore, 
Griffin, Benson, Estevan, and as far away as Rocanville and 
Crane Valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us congratulate all the students who are taking 
part in this very important project. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislative Assembly Staff Long Service Awards 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today to congratulate all of those members 
of the legislative staff that received long service awards today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals have been valued members of 
this Assembly for many years, and without their hard work and 
dedication, this House would not run as smoothly as it does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 10 years of service awards went to: Ms. 
Cheryl Behrns, Ms. Onnolee Rafoss, Ms. Darlene Trenholm 
from Hansard; and Ms. Allison Gartner with the Law Clerk’s 
office. 
 
The 15-year service awards went to Mr. Ben Block, Mr. Floyd 
Goertz with the Sergeant-at-Arms office; and Ms. Iris Lang, 
Sandra Yungwirth with administration services; and Laura 
Pogue from the Legislative Library: and Arnold McKenzie 
from visitor services. 
 
Last but not least, Mr. Speaker, the 20-year service award went 
to Ms. Barbara Lindenbach from Hansard. 
 
I ask that all the members of the Assembly join with me in 
congratulating these outstanding members of our legislative 
family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, at the 
news conference earlier today, Chief Perry Bellegarde indicated 
that the SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) board 
found out about the missing $360,000 about a month ago and 
passed a preliminary motion at that time to try to legitimize 
these expenses. 
 
Madam Minister, when did SIGA first learn of this matter? And 
when did the Liquor and Gaming Authority first learn of this 
matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak for the 
SIGA board. I can say that on Wednesday, late Wednesday, 
June 8 — 7 or 8 — the external auditor in the preliminary 
working papers discovered the information in question, 
immediately contacted the Provincial Auditor, who then 
contacted Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority on 
Friday morning. I was informed then and awaited confirmation 
rather than acting on speculation or information passed on in an 
unofficial way. 
 
I received official confirmation from the Provincial Auditor in 
writing June 14, Wednesday the 14th. I then made the statement 
to the public Friday morning of the 16th. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I’m sure the Provincial 
Auditor must have addressed these matters in his letter to you. 
 
According to the Provincial Auditor, when did KPMG first 
learn of the missing $360,000; when did KPMG first notify the 
SIGA board; when did KPMG first notify the Provincial 
Auditor; and when did the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority first learn of the missing money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have 
the exact times before me, but I can say, as I said in the first 
reply, that the KPMG auditor in their very preliminary working 
stages on the audit for the fall identified the concerns at hand. 
That was Wednesday, June 7 or 8. They then talked to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Provincial Auditor alerted Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, who then wanted to conduct interviews to 
confirm that information. The information was passed then to 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians asking for 
confirmation. 
 
The Provincial Auditor then sent me a letter, June 14 — 
Wednesday, June 14 — outlining the two concerns that I 
brought forward Friday morning, last Friday morning in the 
statement to the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No matter what 
question I ask I seem to get the same rhetoric. 
 
So, Madam Minister, since you’re not prepared to answer these 
questions, I’m sure the Provincial Auditor has answered them in 
his letter to you. Will you table that letter today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I will obtain the auditor’s 
letter as quickly as I can and provide it to the member opposite. 
 
I want to emphasize that this was very early on in the working 
papers of the auditor, KPMG, who then alerted the Provincial 
Auditor. Mr. Speaker, the system that we had in place works. It 
was working when we received the information. We worked. 
It’s working. We acted swiftly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, the new Chair of the SIGA 
board talked about a focused inquiry. Those were his words: 
 

A focused inquiry will be conducted by the Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Licensing Authority . . . and the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 

Madam Minister, why does he mean by a focused inquiry? Are 
you and SIGA trying to limit the scope of his inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have also mentioned in 
my statement last Friday, and I will restate, an auditing team 
has been assembled. The auditing team will work in close 
association with the Provincial Auditor. I know that SIGA 
wants to conduct its own audit, but they also said that they 
would co-operate fully with the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority) auditing team and provide full 
information. The auditing process is underway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I hope the Provincial Auditor 
is included on that auditing team. But this scandal has shaken 
the confidence of Saskatchewan people. It has shaken the 
confidence people have in SIGA. It has shaken confidence 
people have in this government’s management of gaming. And 
now we learn that SIGA may have known about this much 
earlier than anyone expected. 
 
Madam Minister, that is why this audit should have as broad as 
scope as possible, to restore confidence in the Saskatchewan 
gaming industry. Madam Minister, what mandate will you be 
providing to the auditors? Will they be looking into the actions 
of all the SIGA board of directors and not just Dutch Lerat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge 
the statement made by the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations) at noon today indicating that they will comply 
fully with SLGA’s directives and co-operate fully and comply 
fully with our auditing process. 
 
The audit team, Mr. Speaker, will review all aspects of the 
issues identified. They will be the same that we use in normal 
auditing processes that will include system controls; it will 
include actions taken by SIGA; it’ll include the actions by the 
CEO and the board of directors and key staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a full, transparent audit process by a team of fully 
competent auditors working in coordination and co-operation 
with our Provincial Auditor. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Has the Provincial Auditor made any 
recommendations regarding the scope of this inquiry? And what 
does the Provincial Auditor say with regard to the mandate of 
this audit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor has now 
become part of the auditing team and will work in full 
co-operation with them. 
 
I, as I stated, am very much acknowledging and encouraged by 
the full compliance from the FSIN. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as their Chair, Mr. Merasty said he’s not going to 
speculate on the details or the status of the audit. It’s left in the 
hands of the independent auditors, the Provincial Auditor, and 
we don’t want to interfere in any way with the auditors teams’ 
ability to do their work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Union Certification Process 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
Minister of Labour. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has introduced 
legislation which will allow employees to vote by secret ballot 
on union certification, decertification, and strike action. 
 
Presently in this province, employees vote by secret ballot on 
whether or not to decertify, but the original certification process 
is not done this way. Many employees involved in a union 
certification drive feel a secret ballot would remove employees 
from feeling caught in the middle between union and their 
employer. 
 
Madam Minister, this would make the whole unionization 
process completely democratic. Will you support this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I will 
say to the member is that the process for certification has the 
identical rules to the process for decertification. 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that there are I believe four 
provinces in Canada where there is a second vote — which is 
the vote you’re talking about — there’s a second that takes 
place on certifications. But the number of certifications that 
occur in those provinces is essentially in the same ratio as the 
number that occur in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to know 
what the minister’s afraid of. What is she scared of in a secret 
ballot? 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do employees want the right to a secret 
ballot, but they also want the right to hear both sides of the 
story. Under the current Trade Union Act, employers are 
prohibited from explaining the effects unionization will have on 
the business. 
 
We are proposing amendments to The Trade Union Act which 
will provide freedom of speech within the workplace. If an 
employee is considering signing a union card and they have 
questions of the employer, the employer will be able to freely 
give information to that worker without facing retribution from 
the union relation . . . Labour Relations Board. 
 
Madam Minister, this is a fundamental right of democracy. Will 
you support the amendments to The Trade Union Act which 
will allow freedom of speech in the workplace? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, certainly this is a matter 
for the House to decide. But what I will say to the member 
opposite is the last time The Trade Union Act was reviewed 
was in 1994, and at that time it was a process chaired by Ted 
Priel with representation from Mike Carr on the business side 
and from Hugh Wagner on the labour perspective. 
 
And that this was a coming together of their best view of the 
industrial relations that would best recognize the needs of 
employees and the needs of employers in what is often and 
recognizably a very difficult situation. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that since 1944 no government at 
any stripe has decided to change this provision. And certainly I 
will indicate that it does not prohibit the union or the employer 
from discussing anything with the employees as long as the 
intention isn’t to interfere, restrain, intimidate, threaten or 
coerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
appeal is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, please come to your 
senses. Think about what the Prairie Implement Manufacturing 
Association means to Saskatchewan. Think about what the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth means to this 
province. Think about the jobs, Mr. Premier. Think about the 
huge contribution that they have made to this province, the 
taxes that they pay. 
 
And what are they asking you for, Mr. Premier? They’re asking 

for a meeting — a meeting before you barge ahead with Bill 59. 
They want to have a meeting to talk about labour reforms, 
legislative reforms to labour legislation we have. 
 
Mr. Premier, considering their contribution to this province and 
considering your responsibility as a Premier, will you meet with 
them? Will you have a discussion? Will you put some partisan 
politics aside and actually do what’s good for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of 
respect to the Leader of the Opposition who served in the House 
of Commons and serving in this House, that I frankly don’t 
understand the question that he advances. Because as I 
understand, the only piece of legislation before this House at the 
current time is legislation dealing with the so-called double 
breasting in the construction labour industry operation. 
 
Now what these people opposite I think are getting at is an 
amendment to The Trade Union Act on the right of the 
employer to address the employees in the course of a 
certification drive. That is his argument, which is not before the 
House and the legislation. The legislation is private. 
 
Now what the Minister of Labour has said is the fact. In the vast 
majority of the provinces of this country, the Canadian labour 
law, there is the right of the employer to speak during 
certification with some exemptions and some exceptions, as 
he’s outlined. That’s the law and in the result we have worked 
together with PIMA, and with business, and trade unions to 
make this the fastest-growing province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, it’s all right to 
make these platitudes, but let’s look at the facts. Major 
industries in Saskatchewan are thinking about leaving this 
province. If they leave this province they take jobs with them 
— and you know that the population is decreasing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They take tax revenue from Saskatchewan. It shrinks your tax 
base and that means you have to raise taxes. It means you can’t 
fix the highways. It means you can’t fix health care. It’s a blight 
on your record. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing and have a fair, labour 
environment in Saskatchewan so we can keep these industries 
here and so we can actually build our province and tell our 
young people there’s a reason to stay here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the leader of the 
so-called Saskatchewan Party has his facts wrong again. 
 
The June 12, 2000 — not Roy . . . not my figures, not the 
government, coalition government figures — but Statistics 
Canada’s figures show that the Saskatchewan economy has 
created an average of 13,100 new jobs in the first five months 
of this year. Not the job losses that the leader is talking about. 
 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

Mr. Speaker, 13,100 jobs a month in the first five months of this 
year, coupled with job training programs, skills training 
programs, and tax reductions — which I might add you voted 
against, every one of you voted against personal income tax 
increases. All of his facts to do not jive with what the reality is 
according to StatsCanada. 
 
We want to work with PIMA, employers, and the working men 
to keep our . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to talk about the facts. And the facts are that industries like 
Bourgault Industries, Doepker Industries, and other prairie 
manufacturers are thinking about their future in this province. 
 
The fact is that in the last 12 months, 16,000 people have left 
Saskatchewan when Alberta’s population has grown by 
thousands, and even Manitoba has seen a 6,000 person increase. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is serious stuff. We’re not playing politics. 
We’re talking about the future of Saskatchewan. We’re talking 
about jobs and taxes and prosperity . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. All hon. members I was not able to 
hear a question. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, will you pose 
your question? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I was trying to impress upon the Premier is that this is 
serious. We need to do the right thing. We need to forget about 
our union contributions; we need to forget about some debts we 
owe. We need to think about the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you do the right thing and fix the poisonous labour 
relationships and environment that you and your government 
has created in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize to 
this House, to the people in the gallery and the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that there has not been a change to 
The Trade Union Act of Saskatchewan for . . . Since 1994 — no 
change. 
 
We’ve done nothing there to . . . We’ve done nothing to make 
the atmosphere poisonous — we’ve done nothing. And in the 
result . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I wasn’t able to hear the question; now 
I’m unable to hear the answer. Kindly allow one another the 
respect to allow the answers and the questions to both be heard. 
Hon. members, I ask you please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No change 
in The Trade Union Act to which this member is talking about. 
And since 1994 to the year 2000, we have seen the figures that I 
just gave a few moments ago — roughly approximating 14,000 
jobs for five months in the year 2000. 

And he goes up and he says we’ve created a poisonous 
atmosphere. There hasn’t been one change at all to the Labour 
Relations Board. In fact this province is growing. 
 
Now that Doepker or some company has a problem with respect 
to certification, that’s got to be straightened out by the employer 
and the employees in accordance with the law which has 
existed since 1994. 
 
What the fact is, is that we have seen this province on an 
unprecedented rate of growth, and we want to do it in 
partnership and in co-operation. And we want you to do the 
right thing and stop politicking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Brkich: — On Monday I attended a meeting in the village 
of Tugaske where representatives from over 20 towns, villages, 
and RMs from the immediate area had gathered. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Please, I ask you. While 
the question is being asked, it can’t be heard if there’s heckling 
going on both ways. And I’m sure who’s asking the question 
. . . whoever is asking . . . the member asking the question 
wants it to be heard in order that the person that’s to answer can 
hear it as well. Please co-operate. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll start from the 
beginning. My question is for the Minister of Highways. On 
Monday I attended a meeting in the village of Tugaske where 
representatives from over 20 towns, villages, and RMs from the 
immediate area had gathered. 
 
They met to discuss the poor conditions of Highways 19 and 42 
and their fears that the provincial government intended to turn 
these highways back to gravel. There was a very good meeting, 
Mr. Speaker, but it was very disappointing that the Minister of 
Highways chose not to attend even though he’d been invited. 
Not only did he not attend but he didn’t send anyone else from 
his department either. This, Mr. Speaker, this is a slap in the 
face to those community leaders. 
 
Mr. Minister, why didn’t you or anyone else from your staff 
attend this meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I thank the member for the question as well. The member well 
knows he brought this meeting to my attention Friday just 
before the noon hour. It was the first time I’d even heard about 
the meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We immediately responded sending a letter back to the 
community. Mr. Speaker, I was unable to attend because of 
prior commitments and that commitment was, Mr. Speaker, my 
attendance, which we had arranged some eight to ten months in 
advance of the Sixth International Symposium on Heavy 
Vehicle Weights and Dimensions in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

and the member was well aware of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you what was involved in the 
meeting in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We had representation at 
that meeting, Mr. Speaker, from across the world, Mr. Speaker, 
who came to Saskatchewan to see what wonderful things our 
Department of Transportation was doing, Mr. Speaker, the 
innovative things that the department is doing here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we brought up 
concerns of other communities about local highways, the 
minister stood in this House and said he would be working 
closely with these communities to discuss these solutions. He 
had officials travel to Val Marie to meet with people there. His 
staff has talked to the residents of Climax, but he chose not to 
send any of his staff to Tugaske. He chose to completely ignore 
an organized meeting of 20 towns, villages, and RMs. 
 
I don’t know, maybe you wouldn’t attend this meeting on 
Monday, Minister, because you didn’t want to drive the 
highways going out there, or maybe your staff didn’t want to. 
Unfortunately I guess there wasn’t an airport there that you 
could fly there. 
 
Mr. Minister, a delegation of some of these people who met on 
Monday, will be requesting a meeting with you within the next 
week to discuss the conditions of futures of Highway 19 and 42. 
Will you give a commitment today in the House to meet with 
them next week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the 
member not to play politics with these difficult issues, Mr. 
Speaker. But the member also knows, and I will repeat it again, 
I was in attendance as were many, many of my officials who 
arranged this very large symposium in Saskatoon, the sixth 
international symposium on heavy haul vehicles. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to tell the member as well some of the interesting things. 
 
People from Australia, Mr. Speaker, wanted to know about our 
transportation partnership program, Mr. Speaker. People from 
New Zealand, Mr. Speaker, wanted to know about our central 
tire inflation systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And believe it or not, Mr. Speaker — believe it or not — people 
from Alberta wanted to know about our thin membrane 
surfaced road, Mr. Speaker, and how we spend as little money 
as we do and still are able to allow the heavy traffic that we do 
on those roads, Mr. Speaker. People from Alberta were 
interested in what we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the people who attended the 
meeting at Tugaske represent an area of diverse economy. 
Agriculture of course is very important, but tourism, 
manufacturing, processing industries are also very important to 
this area of the province. They rely heavily on Highways 19 and 
42, and feel that the key to economic development in the area 

are these highways. 
 
One RM has already lost a potential feedlot project because the 
developer said the conditions of the road would cost him too 
much in bad roads, trucking . . . and trucking charges, and just 
damage to trucks. 
 
They believe any conversion of these highways to gravel would 
not help that situation, and in fact, would put an end to any 
future economic development. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you . . . I’ll ask again, will you make 
commitment to meet . . . or some of your staff to meet with 
these people next week when they come up, and give your 
commitment that the Highways 19 and 42 will not be reverted 
to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made the 
commitment that I or my officials would meet with any 
community that wants to meet with me. But on that short of 
notice, Mr. Speaker, when we had an international symposium, 
it was absolutely impossible. And we conveyed that message 
late Friday afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member, we’ve made the commitment that 
we would meet with them. My understanding is that we will be 
meeting with those communities this coming Monday. And if 
subsequent meetings are required, which would involve myself 
as well, I’ve agreed to do that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, I’m glad to hear that you will attend that 
meeting on Monday. It’s too bad that you didn’t take the time to 
attend the meeting on the last Monday, because there were 
many good ideas and proposals discussed. 
 
These are not unreasonable people, Mr. Minister. They are 
business people, entrepreneurs, farmers, municipal 
representatives — all concerned about the future of their 
livelihoods; livelihoods which rely on these highways for their 
success, if not their survival. 
 
These people would be very happy to hear that the Department 
of Highways even had a long-term plan for these highways. 
Any type of a plan to repair the pavements on Highways 19 and 
42. 
 
They would even be willing to . . . to say it could be done over a 
number of years, a few miles a year. They just want to hear if 
you’ve any idea at all for these highways and what your 
long-range plans are for them. Mr. Minister, will you present 
these communities with a long-term paving plan for Highways 
19 and 42? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, what would he have myself or my officials do . . . at a 
symposium in Saskatoon that we have spent huge amounts of 
resources by way of personnel in arranging, where we have 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

people from across the world, Mr. Speaker, coming to see what 
Saskatchewan is doing. 
 
When I get a notice of a meeting late Friday afternoon that I 
should attend, he would suggest that I should pull all of my 
officials and myself away from that meeting. It makes no sense, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re here to see . . . people from Australia and 
New Zealand were here to see what we do, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to central tire inflation. 
 
People from Alberta were here to see what we do with respect 
to thin membrane surfaces and our road and railer program, Mr. 
Speaker. People from France wanted to know about our 
transportation program, Mr. Speaker. They wanted to know 
about all the good things that the Department of Highways and 
Transportation is doing here in Saskatchewan — unlike those 
folks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, by leave I wish to 
make a statement concerning National Aboriginal Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to members of the Assembly. I rise today to recognize a day of 
great significance to Saskatchewan and to Canada. Today is 
National Aboriginal Day and on this day we recognize the 
contributions and heritage that Aboriginal people have 
contributed to this nation. 
 
The theme for this year’s celebration is, Diversity: The Strength 
of All Nations. This theme is as true for Saskatchewan as it is 
for all of Canada. In arts, culture, education, business and 
commerce, and in the emerging high-tech world our Aboriginal 
community is enriching this province. 
 
We recognize First Nations and Metis contributions throughout 
our history, in contemporary Saskatchewan, and the 
contribution we know they will make to our shared future. The 
Government of Saskatchewan wants Aboriginal citizens to be 
full and confident participants in the provincial economy. We 
want them to realize their full potential as part of this 
magnificent province, a province built on the strength of 
diversity. 
 
Cree, Dené, Saulteaux, Assinboine, Dakota, and Nakota, the 
First Nations that inhabited this land since time immemorial and 
who welcomed the first visitors, established a relationship of 
mutual co-operation and friendship that guides us to the present 
day. 
 
The Metis are perhaps the first new Canadians — a community 
of different peoples, languages, and cultures. To a great extent 
they established the model of a cultural mosaic we see in 
Canada and Saskatchewan today. The country we love and the 
bright future we see for our children is in large part a result of a 
convergence of people in this land and the decision to forge our 

future together. We are the beneficiaries of that vision. 
 
The motto of our province is found on our coat of arms and 
reads, Multis E Gentibus Vires, “from many peoples, strength”. 
This is the message we wish to echo today. In diversity we find 
strength, and in this province we recognize the significance of 
what we are together and our potential for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan I 
extend our very, very best wishes to all Aboriginal peoples on 
this National Aboriginal Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 215 – The Referendum and Plebiscite 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 215, The Referendum and Plebiscite Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 223 — The Trade Union 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the first 
reading of Bill No. 223, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise prior to orders of the day 
under rule 46 requesting for an emergency motion on the unfair 
labour laws in Saskatchewan. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Unfair Labour Laws in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The motion, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
implement legislation providing Saskatchewan workers 
with a secret ballot prior to union certification or 
decertification, and to allow workers to get all the 
information prior to deciding on certification, and further 
urges the Premier to meet with the representatives of the 
business community prior to passing damaging labour 
legislation in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the member from Kindersley seconds this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just emphasize that we do 
something about these unfair labour . . . 
 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will require the motion. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
implement legislation providing Saskatchewan workers 
with a secret ballot prior to union certification or 
decertification, and to allow workers to get all the 
information prior to deciding on certification, and further 
urges the Premier to meet with the representatives of the 
business community prior to passing damaging labour 
legislation in Saskatchewan. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, I’d like to respond to question number 
188, the most important question the members brought forward. 
 
For the members opposite a pumpjack is a piece of equipment 
normally used in oil fields to pump oil. A musical pumpjack 
makes music. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 188 is tabled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open, 
accountable government, I’d like to table the response to 
question 189 and, with leave, questions 190 through 196 as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has tabled 
answers to questions 190 through 196 inclusive. 
 
Order. Order. I will ask all hon. members to please come to 
order. Would hon. members from both sides take their debates 
behind the bar or outside of the room, please. We can’t hear 
what the Clerk is calling under government orders for adjourned 
debates — that’s the time to debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 82 — The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me, Mr. Speaker, to be able to add some comments to the 

amendments of this particular Act. This is The Income Tax Act 
and The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
This particular Act really focuses on the problems that we’re 
experiencing, particularly in this problem . . . in this province, 
focusing on the tax and the disadvantage that we have here in this 
province with the income tax. 
 
The proposal over the next period of time to have The Income Tax 
Act . . . the income tax decreasing, giving Saskatchewan 
advantage, is a commendable objective, Mr. Speaker, because in 
fact that is one of the leading issues that the Saskatchewan Party 
has been putting forward for a long period of time. We think that 
that is an essential ingredient. 
 
The problem that we have with the tax, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
reduction in tax which will be in the future — and in fact in the 
situation where they indicate maybe two to three years from 
now — we’ll have to have faith that there will be a reduction in 
income tax. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is right now. 
 
And the situation right now with the income tax is that there is 
overall a tax increase offsetting any particular decrease that was 
put forward in this particular year. That is not giving the right 
signals to our industry. That is not giving the right signals to 
economic growth in this province and there is a lot of issues 
that can be shown in the constituency that I’m from, Mr. 
Speaker, in that those decisions are being made today. They’re 
being made almost hourly. There is no time to make those 
decisions and have faith that things will turn around in two or 
three years from now. 
 
The whole point of a tax decrease, Mr. Speaker, is that in fact 
money stays in the pocket of the taxpayer. The actual taxpayer 
then has the opportunity to spend the money as he sees fit and 
not the way that the government collects it and spends where 
they think is the right way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have is that people are in fact 
leaving this province. The statistics have shown that. A recent 
Canada statistics have shown that there is in fact 1,600 people 
left this province in this last year. Now the number is in fact the 
worst record — the worst record, Mr. Speaker — in Canada. 
 
Newfoundland also had a reduction of people but they actually 
lost less people than here in Saskatchewan. And to a large 
extent the problem is the lack of immediacy in trying to address 
the tax problems here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Prior to the last election, Mr. Speaker, it was shown by the NDP 
government that in fact a tax reduction was not a priority. As 
the election campaign progressed, all of a sudden there was a 
revelation that taxes may become an election issue and were an 
important factor after all. 
 
And as it has turned out, they in fact were correct; it is a priority 
issue and it has to be addressed and addressed substantially. 
 
I noticed as well in the provincial election, that the Liberal 
Party, who are now part of this coalition, argued steadfastly that 
tax relief for Saskatchewan residents was not an urgency and 
not a priority. Well times have certainly changed. And I think 
the Minister of Finance has in fact discovered that this is an 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

important issue, it is an important item and we must proceed 
with this. 
 
And I commend them for the direction. I have problems with 
the timing of this reduction in taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of taxes that in fact are put back onto 
the people even though there is an indication of a small tax 
decrease in this coming year. And again I commend the 
minister for that — reducing the flat tax is a good example. But 
there are so many other indications that the tax in fact has been 
expanded. 
 
What we need to do is give confidence to our business 
community. We need to give confidence to those people who 
are going to be investing in this province, that want to invest 
and develop commercially in this province that there is a 
direction, there is plan, and there is a vision that will, in fact, 
give incentives to this development and not disadvantages. 
Because as you know, the urgency of the situation is, in fact, a 
competitive disadvantage for Saskatchewan against our 
neighbouring provinces. 
 
And again, where I’m from, that is a very obvious and direct 
comparison made on a daily basis where these decisions are 
made. 
 
The income tax being a very large part of this, but other tax 
implications are very evident when, in fact, investments and 
investment opportunities come to a city like Lloydminster. The 
company that wants to invest looks at the area, and even the 
area of my constituency is a very vibrant and growing 
community, but when these companies look at the map for 
establishing their business, there is a division right down the 
border and on one side of the map it is showing a black mark 
with the implication, tax implications marked over top of it. 
That is common knowledge in my constituency and in fact that 
is a real problem. 
 
We have to address other issues of taxation, corporate tax, as an 
example. We have to make sure that the property taxes are also 
addressed to make sure that they are contributing and not being 
a disadvantage to investment in this particular province. 
 
Whenever we talk about a tax reduction, I think people just 
don’t look at the income tax portion. They have to look at the 
global tax and the environment of taxation in a particular 
province. And when they’ve looked at it in Saskatchewan, they 
see that maybe there is a reduction in the personal income tax, 
as small as it is this year, but there are other forms of taxation as 
well. 
 
And any money that is offsetting in terms of tax saving will in 
fact be taken back in increased taxation or rates for our utilities 
— particularly SaskPower, Sask Energy, SaskTel. Those in fact 
are an increased cost to the people, maybe not termed a direct 
taxation, but the effect is certainly the same and becomes a 
disincentive. 
 
When the government has decided to make these tax breaks, 
they make sure that there’s a lot of media and acclamation 
about the prospect of these tax breaks working within a 
balanced budget. 

Balanced budgets again, is a very commendable objective, but 
when you look at the overall tax environment, I think you have 
to see that much of that tax break that is being proposed through 
The Income Tax Act is certainly taken back in the downloading 
that is put forward to communities — not only in the municipal 
amounts that are received from the government. Municipal 
governments are struggling to maintain their services and 
certainly the roads in the municipality are an issue at this 
particular point. 
 
There’s downloading, Mr. Speaker, in underfunding to the 
education system as has been debated and shown in this 
particular session of the legislature. And that downloading 
certainly has been noticed by the taxpayers in the constituencies 
and in the regions to the point where tax revolts have been 
conducted in many, many of the school divisions and 
municipalities. That is a true indication of the feeling of the 
taxpayer frustration and downloading. 
 
Again, in the large environment of taxation you can’t just 
isolate income tax. The whole environment has to be looked at. 
 
Health issues are certainly another item that is very timely and 
there’s a lot of frustration and concern over the amount of 
money that has been withdrawn from the health system over the 
last period of time. And that certainly has to be addressed. 
Whenever we talked to constituents, health rates right up at the 
beginning of some of their priorities. And that has to be 
considered as part of the overall tax environment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I’m looking at The Income Tax Act and 
the amendments that we’re speaking to here, I have a lot of 
concerns. A lot if these issues have been brought up and 
debated in other speeches with regards to other aspects of the 
Bills and amendments that have been put forward. I wanted to 
make sure that I was able to highlight some of these particular 
concerns when we’re talking about the debate on second 
reading of this particular Bill. 
 
Now I wanted to also mention that the particular problem that 
we have in Saskatchewan is not only a stagnation of numbers, 
in fact it varies up a little bit, down a little bit. Right now we’re 
seeing that the numbers of people in the province have 
decreased while our neighbouring provinces have in fact been 
expanding considerably. 
 
As has been mentioned before in some of these debates, the 
population level in this province has been almost stagnant for 
some 40 or 50 years. 
 
While other provinces — and Canada particularly — has at 
least doubled their population in that time, and some of the 
provinces have more than doubled and tripled, I think that’s an 
indication of where people want to go. That is a choice that 
people are making. And if the argument is that well, it’s not 
much different on either side of the border, the fact is that 
people decide with their feet and they will make the assessment 
on their own behalf, and they will make the move accordingly. 
 
What we have to do using tools such as The Income Tax Act 
and other tools that I’ve referred to earlier, we have to make the 
environment much more friendly to the development. We have 
to attract businesses. We have to attract the economy. 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

It is that growth that will be the key to attracting our workers, 
our young people, and in fact not sending them out of the 
province. 
 
If we can accomplish that and at least give enough confidence 
in the vision and the direction, then we have gone a great deal 
forward from where we are now. Because that vision and 
direction has not been evident and there are urgencies to putting 
that vision and direction in place. 
 
Some of the jobs that have been created in Saskatchewan in 
comparison to the number of jobs outside of Saskatchewan, is a 
very small fraction. But even the jobs that have been created 
here have not been the high-paying and therefore high-taxable 
incomes that other provinces have been reaping the benefit from 
— what we have been exporting out of this particular province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these issues are very much the centre of this 
particular tax Bill. And again I want to commend the minister 
for the direction that we’re going. 
 
I must say that we have gone not far enough. We have gone too 
little and too late because there is an urgency. Two years, three 
years, four years from now, “trust this attitude” is just not going 
to make it in terms of confidence and vision because those 
decisions are made almost, as I mentioned, daily and certainly 
within this particular year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to be able to address some of these 
issues more fully when we get into Committee of the Whole. 
And so at this point I would conclude my remarks and — 
hoping that we’ll be able to address these in committee — and I 
recommend that we move this one forward. 
 
Oh, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, if I could, before I sit down. I 
would move: 
 

That we now go to Bill No. 234, The Trade Union 
Amendment Act, 2000 (Freedom of Speech in the 
Workplace). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 2:51 p.m. until 3:01 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 30 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 

Lautermilch Thomson Lorje 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Hillson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 82, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I brought 
this to the attention of the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery today as you will see, is a very large 
and distinguished group. I’m going to introduce two of them at 
the end of my remarks because they’re — I suppose one could 
say the leaders, although they’re all leaders — but the formal 
leaders of the delegation. 
 
This group to this Assembly today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
come from Ukraine. The International Finance Corporation, 
which is a member of the World Bank Group, has asked, 
invited, that this Ukrainian delegation come to Saskatchewan as 
part of the farm reorganization project in Ukraine and land 
privatization project in Ukraine. 
 
Thirty-five Ukrainian farmers, processors, and legislators will 
be spending the week touring Saskatchewan farms and 
processing operations. They will also have the opportunity to 
attend the Western Canadian Farm Progress Show that is being 
held this week in Regina. 
 
I’m sure that I speak on behalf of all members when I say that 
we’re very pleased to have them with us today and truly hope 
that they enjoy their visit to Saskatchewan. 
 
Before I ask the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture to 
stand, before I do, may I just be permitted a brief second or two 
to add a personal word. I was very honoured to be over in 
Ukraine in 1995 and had the pleasure of meeting the president 
of the Ukraine, President Kushma at that time, Prime Minister 
Marchuk, and the Minister of Agriculture, and other senior 
officials. 
 
The visit, members of the Assembly, took me to Kiev, to 
Chernivtsi, and to the Lviv. Lviv happens to be the largest 
centre where my parents farmed, closest to where my parents 
farmed. My parents farmed about 40 kilometres slightly north 
and east of Lviv in . . . (inaudible) . . . At the time the Premier of 
that oblast. was . . . (inaudible) . . . I don’t know whether he’s 
still there as the Premier but certainly we had a very important 
visit. And they come from the Ukrainian farm background. His 
dad came over. His timing wasn’t the best. It was about 1929, 
1930, but nonetheless he has still some roots there, had some 
roots in that regard. 
 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

I want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, therefore, and to 
extend a very big welcome and ask him to stand first: the 
Premier from the Volyn Oblast, Premier Vitaliy Zaremba. And 
also the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Dmytruk Pavlovich, the 
Minister of Agriculture here. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave to welcome guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
to add my words of welcome to those that the Premier has 
extended to the delegation from the Ukraine, 35 farmers and 
processors. In Saskatchewan I’m a farmer, so we have some 
things in common even though I’ve never been to Ukraine. 
 
I understand that the farmland and the potential of agriculture in 
Ukraine is exceptional. And as all members in this House know 
we too are very dependent and very appreciative of the 
agriculture sector in this province. I would like to, on behalf of 
official opposition, extend a welcome to Premier Zaremba, and 
also to the Minister of Agriculture, Minister Pavlovich. We 
welcome you to Saskatchewan. 
 
We hope that your stay here is enjoyable. We particularly hope 
you enjoy your time at the farm progress show which is 
currently underway here in Saskatchewan. And may you enjoy 
and also . . . enjoy so much your time here that you will come 
back and enjoy our hospitality again. Welcome to 
Saskatchewan. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With leave to also introduce guests and make 
a few comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
My Ukrainian isn’t that good. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mine is not 
as good as the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 81 — The Income 

Tax Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, while our guests are leaving 
the gallery I’m going to just . . . I had a couple of comments 
with regards to the Bill No. 81 that we’re about to debate at this 
particular moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the comments that I have echo very much the 
comments that I’ve made in an earlier Bill 82. The concerns are 
just as relevant; the concerns are just as timely; and the 
concerns are just as urgent as I tried to stress in the Bill No. 82. 
 
A couple of items that I would like to add with regards to this 
Bill because they are very similar Bills, one certainly working 
with the other one for probably housekeeping reasons. One of 
the things that I wanted to include, however, in discussing this 
particular Bill was the fact that the expanded tax base of PST 
(provincial sales tax), the downloading onto both the municipal 
governments, the health districts, and the boards of education, 
certainly are offsetting factors that do not attract the people and 
companies into this province, and certainly have not given our 
people a vision. 
 
That’s a point that I wanted to stress again. Because I think that 
people need the vision and the confidence that our Income Tax 
Act, while it is being amended, should include those kind of 
visions, and I’m not sure that I see them here, particularly in the 
urgency of it. 
 
Another point that I wanted to make before we move this on to 
committee, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that to be competitive 
with other provinces and jurisdictions we have to be very much 
aware of what is going on in their jurisdiction as well. 
 
We are in a competitive mode to try to attract not only our 
people from leaving, we have to make sure that we are 
competitive enough that we want to bring these people back, we 
want to bring businesses back. And one builds on the other. 
And so success will generate from that particular synergy of 
both opportunity and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that I see with these amendments is 
that we are focused too much on the short term. Because if we 
want to remain competitive, we have to be aware that the 
environment in other provinces, particularly in Alberta — and I 
have to keep referring to Alberta because I live very close to 
that situation as you well know — when they proposed to 
de-link their income tax from the federal income tax, that I 
think was a very positive aspect. 
 
When we got the report from the Vicq report, where we found 
that that too was a recommendation to this particular 
government, I was very pleased to see that that recommendation 
was picked up in this . . . by this government and is being 
proposed in the budget to de-link Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this competitive aspect with Alberta is in fact a 
moving target. When the minister talked about the . . . 70 per 
cent of our population will be paying the equivalent amount of 
tax with Alberta, that is no longer the case because the Alberta 
flat tax rate has now been adjusted. That is an important factor, 
Mr. Speaker, when the flat tax is being contemplated here in 
this province. 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

The fact is that before, when it was aligned by a percentage to 
the federal tax, we often had an advantage in this province when 
the federal tax increased. 
 
When the federal tax decreases, as it has in the past and as 
we’re anticipating the decrease to be effective in the federal tax 
coming up shortly and in the next few years, that definitely 
becomes a disincentive, a disadvantage, because Saskatchewan, 
or any province for that matter that has their income . . . 
personal income tax connected by percentage to that factor will 
be at a disadvantage. 
 
By going to a flat tax, I believe in this case, the taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan will in fact be paying more than they would 
have, or potentially more than they would have, if we had kept 
the percentage factor in place with the federal tax. 
 
(1515) 
 
I believe, however, that the flat tax route is exactly the way to 
go. But we have to be cognizant that if we want to give our 
taxpayers an advantage, we had better be aware that . . . what 
other provinces are doing and be prepared to reduce that kind of 
a percentage as well so that our people here in this province will 
be able to get a tax advantage, which is really the root of the 
economic development strategy that I think has to be put in 
place. 
 
With those comments and basically, Mr. Speaker, the comments 
that I had mentioned in the earlier debate on Bill 82, I would 
propose that we now move this along to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
But before I do, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I want to 
make a motion, and it’s moved by myself, seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Redberry Lake: 
 

That this Assembly does now proceed to Bill 233, The 
Democratic Unionism Act. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:17 p.m. until 3:27 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 

Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 81, The Income Tax Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 83 — The Income 
Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
Bill, The Income Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2000, 
really requires little comment because it relates so closely to the 
other two Bills that we’ve already sent to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
But I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that points 
that I talked about earlier, the urgency aspect of making income 
tax changes, the vision needed in the short term for people to 
build a confidence level in our tax regime so that we can try to 
be at least competitive, if not given advantage, those are the 
kinds of items that are very important in these particular income 
tax Acts. 
 
(1530) 
 
The idea of reducing the personal income tax, I have no 
problem with. In fact that is the program and platform that the 
Saskatchewan Party has put forward for some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really have no other comments other than 
looking forward to going through the Act in more detail in 
committee. And I would be willing to move this forward now to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 84 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 84 — The 
Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add some 
comments to this particular Act. While the other ones pertain to 
the income tax portion of the Act and the amendments that were 
being put forward in the income tax aspect of the tax regime, 
this one, as you well know, Mr. Speaker, is looking directly at 
the education and health tax aspect of the proposed budget and 
platform of this government. 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

There are several things here that give me some concern and I 
wanted to highlight several of these things before we suggested 
that it move forward. I guess I have some problems generally 
about increasing taxes in this particular province. 
 
I’ve already talked about the increasing tax being a 
disadvantage to the economy of this province, to the 
development of this province, and certainly to the attraction of 
both businesses and people back to this province, particularly 
the ones that have moved away on their own accord because of 
their feeling of lost opportunity here and the advantage that 
they’ve been able to find somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have five granddaughters growing up in this 
province, and I want to see the opportunity develop here in this 
province for those five granddaughters of mine so that they do 
in fact have an option to stay here. And I’m pleased that if we 
put the right conditions in place we can in fact cause the 
pendulum to swing the other way and in fact make the 
necessary changes to attract businesses and opportunities here 
for our young people in particular. 
 
That hasn’t been the case with the E&H (education and health 
tax). I know when the minister put his budget forward there was 
certainly some direction in decoupling or delinking the income 
tax from the federal percentage and also with the proposed 
reduction in income tax over a period of time. 
 
The other side of the pendulum though in this case has been the 
expanded E&H tax. I guess the name is going to be now called 
the provincial sales tax. And that too is a bit of a . . . maybe has 
been a misnomer because of the fact that tax designated by 
name for education and health hasn’t always gone in that 
direction. 
 
It’s much like the fuel tax — probably is a misnomer because 
only a very small percentage of the fuel tax goes back to the 
actual construction of roads and those expenses that users of the 
roads need in terms of fuel consumption. 
 
This particular E&H amendment, or now the PST amendment, 
has of course expanded the tax base considerably for the 
residents. The recommendation of this expansion, of course, by 
the minister went back to the Vicq commission. The Vicq 
commission, although the initial mandate was for a review of 
the income tax, was expanded to the provincial sales tax that the 
minister referred to earlier in another question period that I was 
able to engage with the minister. 
 
The Vicq commission however made a couple of 
recommendations that I think is quite important to highlight in 
this debate. One of them was that the Vicq commission 
recommended strongly that you could not cherry-pick out of the 
recommendations. The recommendations should be taken as a 
whole or not taken at all. That of course was not the case. 
Certain aspects of that report were chosen to be implemented, 
others were not. 
 
That is a bit disconcerting because the other aspect of this Vicq 
report was that the sales tax be reduced to 5 per cent. That 
reduction in my view, Mr. Speaker, is a positive step in trying 
to make our province competitive again in an economic sense 
and in a commercial development sense. Any time we see a 

reduction, I would have to commend the instigator of that 
particular program. 
 
This one however has gone the other way. The PST was not 
reduced. In fact, the expansion was considerable. The list of 
items now included in the PST is rather onerous and it’s 
certainly not the incentive that I was hoping to see in terms of a 
revision of our whole tax environment. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, the thing, the one particular item that 
probably remains in the craw of most of the taxpayers, is the 
expansion of the PST in a lot of different areas. 
 
Another item that has really seemed to have struck a nerve of 
discontent with the taxpayers is the increase of rates for usage, 
for instance, in parks and for licenses and so on. Items that are 
not a big issue in themselves, but in fact are an indication that 
even though the minister is trying to show that there is a 
revision of the tax environment and for an overall decrease, 
those small items do not give any comfort to our taxpayers that, 
in fact, this government is serious in an overall manner in trying 
to reduce the taxes. 
 
The expansion of the sales tax is rather significant. And if you 
just look at some of the items that the sales tax refers to, it’s 
really quite comprehensive in terms of a universal expansion. I 
know there was certain areas that the tax could have been 
expanded further, but in fact the ones that were chosen are very, 
very significant. And I don’t think there’s any merit in saying 
that we could have done . . . we could have been worse. So by 
only going part way, we should be recognized as leaders. That 
is not the case. 
 
Some of the items that we’re going to now have to pay an 
expanded tax on, and therefore offsetting any advantage that we 
have from a personal income tax point of view, are things like 
dry cleaning, a service that is really a necessary service. Credit 
reporting and collection service and even equipment 
maintenance is something that everybody is going to have to 
endure one time or another. And now that there’s going to be a 
tax on it, the tax in fact is going to apply not only to an 
expanded number of services but is in fact going to have to 
apply to virtually all the people. 
 
Real estate services is an item that we’ve had a lot of calls on. 
Security and private investigation. Probably the one that I’ve 
heard the most from from my constituents, and probably letters 
that have been submitted to the minister, would be advertising, 
accounting, legal, commercial cleaning, and the real estate fees. 
 
I think those particular items are very significant in not 
allowing our province to be competitive with the other 
provinces. 
 
Another area that I find that is a real problem is in the areas that 
apply to the items that most everybody in the province is going 
to have to use, and not the ones that choose to purchase these 
things, but items that very much apply. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the problems that I’m having with this 
particular amendment, I’m going to have to indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, that I cannot support this particular amendment. 
 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

The division bells rang from 3:42 p.m. until 3:53 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley  
 

Nays — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Boyd Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 85 — The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to enter into the debate on this Bill, the 
post-secondary graduate tax credit. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 
something that I might say leads to public cynicism of our 
political process. 
 
We had to . . . During the last election, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
two parties opposite promise the sky to our students. One party 
promised $1,000 free tuition a year; another one promised free 
tuition for the first year. They built up the students’ hopes. 
Parents were asking, you know, when is this going to take 
effect, and so on. 
 
After the election, we saw the formation of the coalition 
government. It made it possible for the parties opposite to live 
up to their election promises. But what did they do? They found 
that it was an ill-conceived program that . . . ill-conceived 
election promises and they were getting feedback from the 
electorate, from their own supporters, saying that you people 
really didn’t think through those promises very well. 
 
So how do we get . . . So they said to themselves, how do we 
get out of this jam? Well we got to go out and talk to the 
people. So we had a series of public consultation meetings in 
January where we saw two ministers of cabinet travel 

throughout the province, talk to the people. 
 
They heard everything from free tuition for all years and all 
students, to saying why don’t you just make sure that our 
post-secondary institutions have enough money so that they can 
fix the buildings, so they can hire well-qualified instructors, and 
keep our tuition costs down in that fashion. So we had a whole 
broad range of suggestions. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, I attended a number of those public 
consultation meetings, and by far the majority of people felt that 
if we just look after the institutions and make sure that they’re 
adequately funded, that the buildings can be repaired, and that 
the government attend to the business of the day and make sure 
that we have a strong economy, that students have jobs when 
they graduate; that’s all we needed. 
 
But in order to appease some of their supporters who felt that 
we should have free tuition for all students for all the years that 
they attend post-secondary education, the government, this 
coalition government felt that they had to do something. So they 
came out with this $350 one-time tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talked to quite a number of graduating students and asked 
them, what do you think of this $350 tax credit. And they said, 
really it’s not going to make a bit of difference as far as where 
they seek employment. They said if we can get a decent job in 
Saskatchewan, certainly we will apply for the $350 tax credit. 
But they said it’s not going to be a factor in determining where 
we go upon graduation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this government purports itself to be supporters of students 
and championing their causes. And I think what maybe what we 
should do, Mr. Speaker, is just do a little balance sheet on what 
they’ve done in the last few months, and just to see how they 
really do support students. 
 
On the plus side, Mr. Speaker, we have this $350 one-time tax 
credit. But now let’s look at the other side of the balance sheet, 
Mr. Speaker. The first thing we hear upon passage of the 
budget, and we didn’t hear . . . it wasn’t mentioned in the 
budget speech — we have to ferret out the information — that 
there was a loss of the six-month interest-free portion on the 
Saskatchewan student loan. So this is how they’re supporting 
students. 
 
Then we find, sometime during the winter months, Mr. Speaker, 
that the much touted Canadian Millennium Scholarship that 
we’re giving to students in Saskatchewan, do the students 
actually benefit from this? No. Because what happens is the 
student receives the millennium scholarship in the form of a 
bursary. But what does the province do? They reduce their 
bursaries. 
 
So who are the net winners in this situation, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
the provincial government to the tune of $9 million. For a 
period of 10 years that’s $90 million — $90 million more 
student debt that students will have to pay for. 
 
(1600) 
 
And then what else? There’s another item on the balance sheet, 
on the minus side of the balance sheet. It’s cancelling a student 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

employment program just at a period of time where students 
need summer jobs. Do we help them find summer jobs? No, we 
cancel a program, so that if they can’t find the jobs on their own 
they have to incur a larger student loan, more student debt, at 
the time. So by the time they graduate with the expanded . . . or 
with the larger student loans because of lost jobs and all those 
sorts of things, higher student loans because of the confiscation 
of the millennium scholarship, this $350 tax credit, they’re in a 
net loss position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Added to that, Mr. Speaker, are some of the provisions of this 
past provincial budget where we saw expansion of the PST to 
things like non-prescription drugs and all the other things that 
my colleague from Lloydminster mentioned earlier this 
afternoon, and that adds to their daily living cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So really I think, Mr. Speaker, students probably would have 
been better off if they would have paid attention to the things 
that needed to be done and not make these ridiculous promises, 
Mr. Speaker, I think. And not only students but citizens of the 
province would be in a much better position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have some concerns with this Bill but I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that most of those concerns can be 
addressed in Committee of the Whole. So I would at this time 
move that we move this Bill to Committee of the Whole, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 80 — The 
Court of Appeal Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
in the Assembly today to speak to Bill No. 80, The Court of 
Appeal Act, 2000. There are a number of provisions of the 
original Act that have remained unchanged since 1915, and so it 
is right that we would look at some additional changes to those 
that have already been made to The Court of Appeal Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that this Bill has been 
brought before the members of the legislature, in part, in order 
to improve the re-enactment of the Act and enable the 
translation into French, which our French community in the 
province has asked for, as well as to accommodate several 
changes that have been requested by the Chief Justice. 
 
There have been a number of Justice Bills introduced during the 
legislative session. This one is particularly important as it 
further clarifies the rules and regulations of the appellant court 
and provides some update into that Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a few other provisions in this Bill that I 
feel that are best addressed in Committee of the Whole. 
 
However, at this time I would like to move, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly does now proceed to Bill No. 231, The 

Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:06 p.m. until 4:14 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Peters Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, the question before the 
Assembly is that Bill No. 80, The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 65  The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the hon. 
minister responsible to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today Mike Shaw, from Crown Investments 
Corporation, vice-president; and Doug Kosloski, as general 
counsel for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you, 
Mr. Minister, for this opportunity and to your officials for 
coming out to answer some of our questions. 
 
Bill No. 65, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2000, 
makes some substantial changes and I guess to set the stage for 
the changes and what those might . . . how far those might go, I 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

guess the first question would be: how much did CIC 
essentially lose on the NST deal some time ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I assume the member’s referring to the 
SaskTel operation in the Illinois . . . the Chicago area? And that 
particular project, I think the net loss was in the $16 million 
range; I don’t have all of the details. 
 
But we also know though that SaskTel has done very well on a 
number of other operations and that on an overall basis they’ve 
done extremely well for all of the people of Saskatchewan. We 
know the Leicester Cable operation, which had approximately 
114 million; their Alouette arrangement, 7 million on the 
positive side; and the latest Austar deal is the $34 million-plus 
side. So on balance they’ve done very well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The purpose of that particular 
question was not so much to get the particular amount, Mr. 
Minister, because there’s other things we could have asked 
about such as Channel Lake and Guyana and SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company). But 
we’re not going to go into those in detail at all. 
 
The key thing that we’re getting after is I believe this particular 
provision ends up taking ministers off of Crown boards. And 
the question is, why exactly are you planning to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as the member knows, there was a 
review of the operation of the Crowns and a policy decision 
made by the government, and ministers are off of virtually all of 
the Crown boards. 
 
This Bill will actually complete the task and remove the 
ministers or at least remove the requirement that they be on the 
board for STC, the Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation; 
the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund; and the 
Saskatchewan land information system. It doesn’t mean that the 
ministers can’t be on the board, it’s just that it’s not required in 
the legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think now we get 
to some of the rather scary parts that this Bill is actually 
working toward. If, as I mentioned earlier on, we have NST and 
we have Channel Lake and we have Guyana and we have 
SPUDCO . . . and the list just goes on and on. 
 
And if the ministers are not on the Crown boards, how in the 
world is the public going to have any confidence that the 
political body is answerable to them in any way, shape, or 
form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the accountability system is very 
solid. It will remain that way. All of the major Crown decisions 
will come to the Crown Investment Corporation’s board which 
is made up of seven ministers, and these resolutions are then 
forwarded and approved by cabinet. And that’s the system that 
we have. 
 
What we are doing is working with the best of the advice that 
we can get from within the community around some of our . . . 
or all of our Crown boards, but we’re also maintaining the 
accountability structures. And I think it’s actually this process, 
this system that we’ve developed, that the Conference Board of 

Canada has said is in the top 25 per cent of accountability 
systems in this country. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the issue of 
accountability, were you prepared to make a commitment that 
you will appear at all committee meetings of Crown 
corporations to answer questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t plan to be there at all of them. The 
normal practice is that I would be there for the Crown 
Investments Corporation but not at the other ones. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I think we’ve come to one of the sources of 
the difficulties. So these committees are going to take place, but 
you as the minister are not going to be there. What is this going 
to do for the public confidence in how well those Crowns are 
run and what their level of responsibility is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the Crown Corporations Committee, if 
there are any questions that you have for the minister, they can 
be asked at the time the Crown Investments Corporation comes 
because all of these other companies are subsidiaries of CIC. 
And so however long that takes then we would be there to 
respond to those questions. So I don’t think there’s any 
diminishment at all in the ability of the members opposite to ask 
questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It seems a phrase you use — 
however long it takes — again is all the red flags that are 
coming up in a real hurry over here. So the immediacy of 
getting responses have been reduced and it’s going to be very 
difficult to go ahead and try and get those answers because 
everyone’s going to be at least once removed from 
responsibility. 
 
This amendment also allows the Crowns to expand into . . . or 
to expand the types of ventures that they can get into. And I 
would like for you, as a minister, to explain what sorts of things 
you might be looking at in that possible expansion that’s there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is not going to expand the range of 
businesses that the Crown Investments Corporation or a 
subsidiary can be involved in, but what it will do is recognize 
the changing business structures that have developed. Not all 
investments are made within corporate structures — there are 
limited partnerships, there are joint ventures, there are other 
things like that. And what this does is recognize that the 
business climate has changed and that there are other 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Other opportunities, as I said earlier on, 
sounds a whole lot like an expansion, but I guess we won’t get 
into the semantics of that particularly. 
 
Probably one of the more disturbing parts of this particular Bill 
is that you’re giving yourself more power to hide information 
from the public. This amendment gives a minister wide open, 
discretionary power not to table certain information when you 
feel it may be detrimental to the Crown. 
 
We often hear you people talking about open and accountable 
government. We hear it almost every time that one of your 
members presents answers to some questions. And we’re 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

wondering for which Crown that wouldn’t be . . . it would be 
detrimental to? And this whole thing kind of flies in the face of 
accountability, and being open, and being accessible when you 
have that particular power to hide that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as the member opposite knows, the 
specific reason for the discretion relates to commercially 
sensitive information, where one is working within an industry 
or with a partner where some of that information can’t be 
revealed. 
 
But the other side of this is that all of the investments end up 
becoming orders in council, which are public, and there is a 
requirement that significant transactions have to be reported to 
the legislature, you know through the reporting through the 
Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
What I guess I would say is that the last number of years have 
seen the accountability levels of the Crowns go up dramatically 
in increments each year. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons that The Conference Board of 
Canada has made the comments about what we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan. We know that we have the annual reports now 
moving towards . . . reports on a more frequent basis. All of this 
is to try to make sure that our Crown corporations are 
accountable to all the people of Saskatchewan, that they’re 
accountable in a way that everybody understands. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It appears that the need for the 
Crowns to submit operating budgets to CIC for approval is also 
being removed. And we want accountability. And I guess the 
question would be, why has that change been put into place? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I guess that’s not what’s actually 
happening. Effectively what we are doing is setting up a 
structure which allows for decisions to be made at a 
government level, at the CIC level, and at a board level. 
 
And what we know is that a number of the issues that relate to 
the operating goals and those kinds of things, they’re all 
approved at the CIC level. But they’re developed and brought 
forward at the individual subsidiaries. 
 
But the whole purpose of organizing what we’ve done is to do it 
in a way that provides accountability to the public. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think those number of questions 
bring to light some of the major concerns that we had with this 
particular Bill. And that is the fact that the accountability that 
should be there, the openness that should be there, the 
accessibility, the transparency, all those things seem to be a 
little further removed, and ministers are further removed from 
awareness of what’s happening. 
 
As soon as that takes place — and you already mentioned that 
there was one step difference that’s there now — it means it’s 
that much more difficult for the public and for legislators to get 
the information that we need when we need it, without saying, 
well we’ll have to pass that on to another committee. 
 

And right at the start I talked about some of the fiascos that 
have taken place through your organization and Channel Lake, 
Guyana, and the SPUDCO one — and we’re still not quite sure 
where that one’s gone. 
 
SPUDCO was one of those fine examples where really no one 
seemed to know what was going on. In fact, even at this 
particular point, we’re not sure exactly what happened. Now the 
potatoes may have had their eyes on the problem, but I don’t 
think the government had their eyes on the problem. 
 
So essentially I guess that is our concern with Bill No. 65, is 
that you’re insulating yourself, you’re removing the public from 
having access to the information that they may want. And with 
the record that we’ve seen in the past, it makes this a very 
frightening kind of a situation, wondering where this is going to 
end up at. 
 
And I think that’s essentially the questions that I wanted to ask 
and the point that I wanted to make. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to thank the member for the 
questions, and also the concern around the accountability 
issues. 
 
What I would say is that we know from a number of comments 
that we received from experts in this field, that the 
accountability structure of our Crown corporations is unique in 
Canada in its openness and accountability and it actually is on 
the leading edge of accountability for the country. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the officials who are with me today for their assistance in this 
process. And I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the 
Lieutenant Governor is here. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, the Lieutenant Governor is here in the 
building for Royal Assent, and we’ll just take a few moments 
until Her Honour arrives. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 4:37 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Bill No. 46 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 27 - The Certified Management Accountants Act 
Bill No. 26 - The Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 4 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 32 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 73 - The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
Bill No. 41 - The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 30 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000/Loi 

de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 
services de l’état civil 

Bill No. 3 - The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 2000 

Bill No. 48 - The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act 

Bill No. 38 - The Electronic Information and Documents 
Act, 2000 

Bill No. 66 - The Personal Property Security Amendment 
Act, 2000 

Bill No. 43 - The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 
Act, 2000 

Bill No. 76 - The Research Council Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 40 - The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Act 
Bill No. 39 - The Department of Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training Act, 2000 
Bill No. 7 - The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 35 - The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 36 - The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 54 - The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 

2000 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 78 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2000 

(No. 2) 
Bill No. 9 - The Child and Family Services Amendment 

Act, 2000 
Bill No. 17 - The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 45 - The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
Bill No. 44 - The Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 71 - The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 10 - The Department of Health Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 62 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform) Act, 2000 
Bill No. 29 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 77 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 15 - The Department of Justice Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 28 - The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 

Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 37 - The Public Libraries Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 69 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 68 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 
Bill No. 67 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2000 
Bill No. 13 - The Education Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 

2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:42 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I will invite the hon. 
minister responsible to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today Mr. Myron Gulka-Tiechko, who is the 
general counsel for SaskPower Corporation. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again 
welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your official. 
 
On superannuation, I guess any time superannuation is talked 
about, those people who are recipients are sort of concerned 
how this is going to affect them. I guess the very first question 
is will this change have any immediate or long-term effect on 
SaskPower retirees and their benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s no effect on their pensions. What 
this does do is put one of the retired persons on the board of the 
superannuation fund. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, you’ve just 
taken me to the other area that I want to ask a question or two 
on. 
 
The board traditionally, I believe, had five members on it and 
now has seven. The two questions: first of all, why the 
expansion; and then how are board members in general chosen 
or appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The purpose of the additional two people, 
which I think is the gist of the question, is to make sure we have 
one space for a representative of the superannuates and the 
other spot is for a person from within the management of 
SaskEnergy. Because many of their employees, before it was 
separated from SaskPower, are still part of this pension plan and 
they were . . . it was necessary for them to be included in part of 
this. 
 
But basically that’s the structure, to add those. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, so that says where the sources are for 
the two new ones you’re putting in place. What are the sources 
of the other five? Do they come from any specific areas as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The other five members, who are already 
there, are two employees, two SaskPower management, and an 
independent Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What sort of remuneration do members of 
this particular committee get or receive? 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — They just get their travel expenses. 
There’s no honorarium for this. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s a good answer; I’m glad to hear it. 
Hopefully the government can move a little further in that 
direction and a few other areas. I think it would give the public 
a lot of confidence in it, especially in something such as 
superannuation where people are always concerned where their 
benefits are going and how well they’re taken care of. 
 
That basically takes care of any questions that we have on Bill 
No. 47. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
Mr. Gulka-Tiechko for assisting in this and I would move that 
we report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today John Meldrum, who is the general counsel 
for Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again 
welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your official this afternoon. 
 
Bill No. 19 dealing with SaskTel, I wonder if you could explain 
basically to me and to all of the people who are watching 
exactly what this Bill is supposed to do, and what’s involved 
with connector agreements with competitors and what that all 
signifies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What this does is delete two things: one, 
that the interconnection agreements have to be approved by 
cabinet; and the other point which is that cabinet has to approve 
all equipment which is connected to the system. Neither one of 
these makes any sense any more with the modern 
telecommunications system, and it’s also required to go into the 
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) regulation which is taking effect within a couple 
of weeks. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. With CRTC becoming more a 
part of communications in Saskatchewan, will the general 
public notice any difference with regards to access to the 
Internet or to telephone service because of what’s happening in 
this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Not that we know of, no. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We’ve had a number of concerns voiced in 
recent weeks about the quality and the general service provided 
through Sympatico, and people generally being somewhat 
disappointed with breakdowns and just not . . . service that isn’t 

that good. And I’m wondering, is that going to be rectified in 
any way, or will that kind of thing just continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well in this particular year, the plan is to 
continue to work and expand the amount of money that’s 
involved in the Internet service, which will effectively increase 
the connectability and also bring more people onto the high 
speed Internet. 
 
I think the estimate is that there’ll be some in and around a 
hundred million dollars spent this year to further expand 
SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. You’ve probably noticed over the last 
number of weeks there have been a lot of petitions have come 
through dealing with cellular service in Saskatchewan. What 
changes are there coming in the future on that? Will there be 
better service throughout our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically what’s happened in 
Saskatchewan, I guess around the world, is that with people 
being interested in having wireless access to the Internet, you 
only can do that on a digital service; you can’t do it on an 
analog service. 
 
So one of SaskTel’s tasks as they continue to roll out the 
coverage across the province, is to make sure that we’re 
building for the next generation, which is the digital system. 
And so in the meantime there has to . . . there’s careful 
evaluation of all the different investments that are made. 
Basically the plan would be to provide as wide a coverage as 
possible. 
 
I think at the present time about 99 per cent of Saskatchewan 
population is covered with the analog system, but there are 
clearly some areas where the service isn’t that good and we’re 
working at trying to fix that. 
 
The difficulty is that some of those places are places where 
people travel through but there aren’t many people that live 
there. And we’re continuing to work to figure out how to do 
that. But ultimately the goal would be to have a digital service 
across where we have all the analog now. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And in spite of the fact, as you 
mentioned, the percentage of people who have services high, 
those individuals that aren’t in that particular category who are 
in areas that aren’t covered right now, that’s probably where it 
becomes most critical because communications there involve a 
whole lot of things involving service and safety and all those 
sorts of things. So even though the numbers may be small, it’s 
probably more critical to those individuals than to other ones. 
 
That basically takes care of the questions that we had on Bill 
No. 19 and I’d like to thank your official for joining us this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d just to say thank you for the questions 
and also to say that one of the things that may happen in 
response of around the areas that don’t have service now, we 
may actually go right to digital and bypass analog for some of 
those areas. And that would be good news for them because 
they would actually have a better service than some of their 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

neighbours. But we’re looking at it very carefully. 
 
Thank you very much for your questions, and thank you very 
much to Mr. Meldrum for his assistance. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to move that we 
report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good afternoon again, Mr. Minister, and to 
your official. 
 
Bill No. 20, SaskTel Holdco. Well first of all, that’s probably a 
relatively new term to people across the province, so could you 
just take a few minutes to explain exactly what SaskTel Holdco 
is about and how does it differ from SaskTel, or is it a part of it, 
or what’s the story with Holdco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think SaskTel Holdco is the overall 
operating company. It has, within it, SaskTel and the wireless 
part, some of the other aspects. And so this is the overall 
operation. 
 
I think this particular Bill basically deals with setting out a legal 
footing for creating a tariff as we move into CRTC regulation. 
And the impact on the public will be very, very minimal 
because most or all of SaskTel Mobility’s customers — and this 
is where it really relates to a SaskTel Mobility, the cellular 
phone service — already have written contracts. 
 
This is just sort of to create the fallback contract in case there 
isn’t one, which is a requirement by CRTC. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think, so basically for the 
general public, SaskTel, Sask Holdco, is essentially an 
interchangeable term, and I think they understand what’s 
happening with the CRTC involvement in communications. 
 
But there is an area of concern that I think we need to address to 
some extent, get to some detail on, and that is that there seems 
to have been a definite move over the last while for SaskTel, or 
SaskTel Holdco, to get involved in situations where they’re 
competing very directly with other smaller, private companies 
in Saskatchewan. And I’m thinking particularly of the security 
field. And I think that happened within the last year or two. 
 
So what you’re now asking people to do, you’re asking the 
private people to compete with a company that has the public 
purse at its availability. And I would like for the minister to 
explain how the fairness of that can be justified to the general 
public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, I thank the member for that 

question. I think if you look at model of SaskTel Mobility, 
SaskTel Mobility is basically a dealer network across the 
province where many small businesses throughout the province 
work together with SaskTel Mobility and then provide the 
service component of cellular service in their individual 
communities. 
 
If they had to be involved with all the technology and the 
purchase of the technology, they could never get into that 
business in their local area. But when they hook up in a dealer 
network they can do that. 
 
A similar plan or arrangement on the security side is that as the 
security businesses become more and more high tech, if you can 
use that term, where the costs are quite high, having the model 
where SaskTel provides a lot of the technology and then allows 
local people to be secure tech service representatives or run the 
local businesses, it’s good for the smaller business and it’s also 
good for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. So what you’ve done in effect is 
you’ve taken a certain group of dealers and you’ve given them 
the advantage of a business that has access to the public purse, 
and the other ones that don’t have that particular access to 
dealers that are outside of that particular group, those 
individuals are left out in the cold and stranded and try to 
compete with SaskTel, which is a pretty difficult if not 
impossible situation. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think what I said before is that this 
is a situation where you’re in an industry where the technology 
requirements are greater and greater and greater. And that this is 
a solution that allows for some of the smaller businesses to 
become dealers for the SaskTel. 
 
And basically that’s how this system works. And, you know, it 
provides a service for the people of Saskatchewan. It also gives 
SaskTel some opportunity to provide this service to other dealer 
networks outside of the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer. And I think those 
individuals who have essentially had their business suffer or 
possibly even lost their businesses, because of SaskTel moving 
into that particular area that has been taken care of quite nicely 
by individuals, are not going to be that happy and are probably 
afraid of wondering where else SaskTel is going to decide to get 
into. And as I said, it’s not the concern for competition, but the 
concern is that they have the advantage of the public purse 
behind them. 
 
Apparently in this Bill, there’s a statement made that in a 
competitive environment, SaskTel Mobility does not have to 
give out a list of rates. And that’s a little difficult to understand 
when the customer then doesn’t have a list of set of rates that 
they’re being charged. How do they take that and compare it 
with someone and decide whether they’re getting a good deal or 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think basically the answer to your 
question is that in those areas where there is no competition, 
then all those rates will have to be set out and published. I think 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

they’d be available on the Internet or other places. 
 
But in those areas where there is competition, and I’m thinking 
for example in the Mobility area, then not all of the rates are set 
out. They’re negotiated by contract and people have a choice to 
go to TELUS or Sprint or wherever else . . . what other 
companies are available, as well as SaskTel. And if the other 
company has a better rate, well then SaskTel has to examine 
kind of how they’re setting their tariffs and rates. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. That seems to be turning 
SaskTel’s operation more into much like a used car dealer, 
where you have to go around and negotiate and wiggle through 
a situation to decide whether you’re actually getting the best 
price or whether you’re not, and I think that’s rather unfortunate 
and it destroys a lot of that confidence I think that SaskTel’s 
had in the past. 
 
That, Mr. Chairman, takes us to the end of the questions that I 
had on Bill No. 20. I would again like to thank the minister for 
this opportunity and for his official as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
Mr. Meldrum for his assistance again and thank the member 
opposite for his insightful questions. I would move that we 
report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the minister 
responsible for Liquor and Gaming to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m introducing 
to you this afternoon on my left, Mr. Peter Glendinning, who’s 
the vice-president responsible for licensing, and to my right, 
Ms. Lorna Chomyn, who’s the legal policy analyst for Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all I’d like to 
thank the minister and her officials for being here today. 
 
Madam Minister, what this Bill does is basically level the 
playing field and, Madam Minister, could you first off give a 
brief summary of what you are hoping to accomplish here, 
besides that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question, Mr. Chair. The purpose of these amendments is to 
clarify the legislative rights and obligations that pertain to 
certain substantial endorsements or reviewable endorsements, 
and we’ll accord formally the same processes to them that 
currently apply within the area of permits. 

We did have a decision that stated that we should be doing that 
review in the same way we do our permit review, and so we’re 
putting that into the legislation. 
 
This ensures that substantial changes or additions to existing 
permits are treated in much the same way to allow for public 
input. These changes ultimately provide a solid foundation for 
the implementation of the off-sale review’s recommendations. 
 
And the commission in the courts have been interpreting the 
legislation in this way for a while, and so we’re putting this in 
to clarify and formalize the already existing framework. 
 
It also then will establish what is a matter before the 
commission. And so it clarifies what you would put forward in 
the area of objections and the commission could review that and 
determine whether or not that’s within the purview of the 
commission’s review of the subject at hand. 
 
I think basically, Mr. Chair, that would be the substantive issues 
before us in the Bill. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, in a 
news release from your department dated March 3, it states that 
the government will also implement new brew pub criteria to 
ensure that only brew pubs viable in their own right are eligible 
for off-sale. What is meant by that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There were 
categories or areas where you could receive an off-sale 
endorsement. One of them that was in place was a brew pub. 
 
And then we had a number of regulations or restrictions that 
said that if you were going to get an off-sale endorsement, it 
had to be a certain number of kilometres away from an existing 
endorsement. Population criteria had to be met. The economics 
of the area would be looked at. 
 
We found that this process was leading to a large number of 
objections before the commission when people were vying for 
an off-sale endorsement, particularly in the area of brew pubs. 
 
We found that there was a very lengthy, very aggressive 
litigation kind of process. And even though we would have the 
capability . . . Once we followed a criteria to issue those off-sale 
endorsements, the process that would unfold would mean that 
there is sometimes a number of years before you could be 
granted that, while we hear all of the objections and while we 
would determine, according to the criteria, who would get that 
one or two endorsements that become available in a certain 
area. 
 
And so we’ve moved to, in these areas, removed those criteria 
and established for brew pubs an operating criteria. Existing 
operators say there’s a certain commitment that has to happen 
to that industry to have a product, a good consumer product, 
and that also would have an economic impact on the 
community and in that way be on a level playing field with the 
existing operators. 
 
So we’ve moved to establish that criteria and they’ll be done 
through regulation, Mr. Chair. 
 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, there 
was a study done for this in the urban centres but you seem to 
indicate that the rural centres seem stable. How do you know 
this? Was there a study done for the rural centres as well? And 
if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, in the rural areas we know 
that the sales would be an indicator — the marketplace. For 
example, we knew in some of the rural areas that there were 
endorsements available that are not taken up or there were the 
maximum number available, but no new applications had been 
taken recently. So we would look at that marketplace and also 
the distance. 
 
But also the number of objections heard before the commission, 
it just wasn’t there. And we are talking about a market that’s 
relatively flat in sales. Our numbers would show over the last 
number of years, it’s not a major growth area of consumer sales, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. You 
mentioned in your comments on this Bill that there will be 
changes to the powers and processes of the Liquor and Gaming 
Licensing Commission. What do you mean by this? What 
powers will they have as a result of this Bill, as opposed to what 
they are right now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, we did have, as the member 
mentioned, an extensive consultation process on this issue. And 
one of the things that came up through that consultation 
process, but had been considered in the past, is that the 
commission would not deny anyone a hearing at present. 
 
So when they were hearing a matter before them under review, 
someone could put forward their complaint based on, maybe 
they don’t like the operator or that it would compete with their 
marketplace, or there were a number of items that would come 
before the commission that in law could be considered frivolous 
and vexatious. Particularly now when we’re removing the 
distance criteria, the economic criteria would be based on 
marketplace. And so therefore to clarify before the commission 
why you would want to be an objector and have a hearing on 
that issue, the commission will now have the power to look at 
that and determine if that’s a valid objection and then be able to 
tell people that they would be having a hearing scheduled at a 
certain time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, in 
terms of expanding the market, who will be eligible to sell 
off-sale? Will it be the corner store, certain liquor vendors? 
Could you clarify that? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’re not 
expanding to new categories. I know there was much discussion 
on expanding the category areas, but we are retaining the hotel, 
tavern, or brew pub categories that would vie for an off-sale 
endorsement. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. That 
concludes the questions I have regarding this Bill. And I want 
to thank you again, Madam Minister, and to your officials as 

well for being here today. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman of Committees, and Madam 
Minister, I apologize, and I ask for the indulgence of all 
committee members because as it relates to this particular piece 
of legislation, and I understand as regards to brew pubs in the 
province among other things, I have some questions that I’d just 
like to ask on behalf of a constituent, if I could? 
 
And I understand that this is the translated version of the Bill, 
but certainly the questions are still . . . (inaudible) . . . in either 
English or French. And actually I don’t mind . . . If the minister 
will agree, I should just like to ask the questions that were asked 
of me this very morning when I received this e-mail from an 
operator in Swift Current. 
 
Some of the questions here, first of all one of the concerns that 
this particular operator had was with the timing of the letter that 
they received from the Liquor and Gaming Authority asking for 
his views on the proposed changes to the legislation. He has a 
concern that perhaps the Authority didn’t . . . wasn’t paying 
close enough attention to some of the problems we have in 
terms of the post getting on time to places outside of Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
The day he received his letter asking for his input was the June 
20, and that was of course yesterday, and he was asked to 
provide his input back to the Liquor and Gaming Authority by 
June 20. 
 
And so that was one question he had. He wondered if it was a 
factor of him simply not being in Regina or Saskatoon, and it 
was of a great concern to him. And then there were some 
specific questions he had. But maybe I’d ask the minister to 
respond to the issue of the timing of the letter requesting input. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. And I thank the member 
for his question, Mr. Chair. 
 
This has been an issue that has been ongoing probably for a 
number of years, not only a number of months. But we did then 
announce the Gulka-Tiechko review and invited the particular 
operator to have input into that. He participated. We then had 
consultation on the criteria and talked about what that criteria 
would be. He had also given his concerns and his information at 
the time of the early review. 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

And we do apologize on the tight time frame but certainly 
wanted to be able to go forward from this session to work on 
regulations. So the Bill was brought before the House and the 
second reading speech we made, and now into committee, 
wanted to have the chance for people to comment. And there 
had been an opportunity before but this time frame was shorter, 
based on the number of months that people had had earlier to 
participate in the process. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. Mr. Chairman of 
Committees, some specific questions on behalf of this business 
in Swift Current includes the question regarding the minimum 
production where he indicates in his e-mail that the summary he 
received from the Authority states the minimum production 
outside Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert will 
be 50 hl (hectolitres) annually. 
 
And his question is, how was that number arrived at? Was that 
arrived at arbitrarily, and was there consideration? Specifically 
he’s asking: was there not consideration for smaller centres 
where brew pubs exist where consumption patterns are different 
and where we need to have sensitivity in provincial legislation 
regulations to the fact that certain centres are very different in 
terms of consumption patterns and that affects the ability of a 
business to be successful, to successfully compete. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Chair, the minimum production 
levels through this whole discussion have been a matter of 
debate. The data that we’ve received from other locations that 
talk about economic investment in the community that is 
designed to serve a brew pub customer and the consultation 
process around that question would suggest that if someone 
wanted to be a brew pub, operating brew pub in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the minimum brew would be 50 hectolitres. 
 
There was much concern about people being able to buy a small 
amount of equipment and to not produce a quality product and 
want to use that to vie for an off-sale endorsement. And there 
was a lot of concern with the existing operators in that way, but 
also we didn’t want to bring forward a minimum level that 
would see overproduction and put a stress on the operator. 
 
And with all of that in mind we’ve come to the minimum 
production level, in those areas, of 50 hectolitres. I would 
remind the member that in urban centres it would be about 200 
hectolitres, which is a full brew and more a month. So this will 
be the minimum requirement based on the consultation and the 
data from the industry elsewhere in Canada. 
 
Mr. Wall: — A few more questions, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister. And this particular question I think I could best pose 
by just summarizing or actually reading from the e-mail where 
the operator indicates that: 
 

The Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority is 
proposing to require a minimum 8 hectolitre capacity for 
fermentation, maturation, etc. Our current capacity (he 
says) is 6 hectolitres. (He says) We can however produce 
65 hectolitres over a 12-month period, 15 hectolitres more 
than we are required to produce under the guidelines. Why 
(he’s asked) would we increase our fermentation, 
maturation capacity when we’re already over our minimum 
production quota and, in Swift Current, we won’t be able 

to sell 65 hectolitres over a 12-month period? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I neglected to say, Mr. Chair, that this 
operator also called Liquor and Gaming Authority, and my 
office today, and we did have a good conversation with the 
individual. 
 
It was said to them that when we were talking with the other 
jurisdictions that have similar regulations in place, and the 
discussion that occurred with some operators who were very, 
very concerned about where the minimum requirement would 
be, we felt this was where we should set the limit. And any 
existing operator that’s under that, we believe will have a 
two-year-transition period to get to that limit. So they will have 
some time to get to the requirement. Thank you. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do, I 
would thank the officials that accompanied me today, and I 
would thank the members opposite for their questions. As they 
know it’s been the matter of major review and many months of 
consultations, and I thank them for their interest and concern on 
a serious issue for us. With that, I would move the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Health 
to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Joining the 
Associate Minister and myself today are Carol Klassen, the 
assistant deputy minister, she is to my left; Steven Pillar, the 
associate deputy minister; Rod Wiley, executive director of 
finance and management services; and Marlene Smadu, 
assistant deputy minister. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Madam Minister, some areas that we haven’t touched in our 
previous discussion on health estimates I’d like to go over. 
 
And where we left off, we talked about facilities last meeting, 
and you talked about the fact that the new process for 
evaluation of the relative merits of facility improvements and 
enhancements is done on a point system. 
 
Minister, I have a document dated July 30 and August 15 that is 
headed, 1999-2000 Health Capital Review-Project Rating 
Summary. And there are a whole number of projects and I don’t 
want to go through them in any detail. But I would like to know 
. . . These were issued shortly before the general election, and I 
think a lot of people believe that this was a commitment that 
these projects were going to move forward in a timely way. 
 
Madam Minister, can you update us as to, in general, where the 
status is and would you make an undertaking that we could 
receive the detail of these individual projects that are referred to 
in this document, in writing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This year our capital budget is $41.1 
million. Of that, 37.541 is committed to projects previously 
approved and in progress. That includes 8.129 million for our 
regional care centre projects, 26.125 million towards projects 
approved prior to 1999-2000, and 3.287 million for projects 
given approval to plan in 1999-2000. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, there is a detailed listing in this document, and I don’t 
know if you need a copy of it so you reference what we’re 
talking about. But if you have it, Madam Minister . . . and I 
appreciate your answer in terms of the general projects that 
have been approved so far this year. 
 
What I’m asking for is a detailed update as to the status of these 
exact projects, and I see there are groupings A, B, and C group. 
Could you explain what the A, B, and C groups mean. And I 
see, for example, under the C group in the Central Plains Health 
District, the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital redevelopment in 
Humboldt. Those kinds of projects, Madam Minister. If we 
could have the detailed response as to the status of those 
specific projects as outlined. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll get you that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
And we do appreciate it. 
 
Madam Minister, we as well talked about funding formulas last 
time in general, and I indicated to you that in many instances 
the current ratio for out-of-urban areas, out-of-major centres’ 
policy where there’s 100 per cent of facility cost paid in the 
major — I think just Saskatoon and Regina as a matter of fact 
— that 100 per cent of facility are paid for in those major 
centres in recognition of the fact they deal with patients and 
clients that come from outside of the cities. 
 
Madam Minister, the current situation of 35/65 is also very, 
very difficult for small rural centres in many instances. And I 
would like you to comment about the general principle and then 
my colleague has a couple of questions in specific about that 
whole issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that there 
are facilities that are constructed in the major centres like 
Saskatoon and Regina where communities have to raise the 
local contribution. 
 
An example would be the mental health facility here in the city 
of Regina. As well, Saskatoon has been given an approval in 
principle to go forward with a mental health facility for that 
area, and they will have to raise the local contribution. 
 
The policy is that, should the service be provincial in nature and 
require capital construction, then the province provides 100 per 
cent of the funds. If the facility is not provincial in nature, then 
the province provides 65 per cent of the funds and local people 
raise the 35 per cent. 
 
There are some cases, and I’ll use northern Saskatchewan, 
where the communities have little capacity to raise money 
locally and the formula varies there. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. The minister is quite 
well aware of the current facility in Moosomin. And I guess the 
concern that is raised — an ongoing concern, even as we 
discussed with Mr. Hack when he was here last week — is that 
35 per cent. I believe the formula was 18 and 85 . . . or 15 — 
pardon me — and 85 versus the 35 and 65. 
 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

And I know for a lot of communities in the Moosomin area, 
some of the smaller towns and villages are really struggling 
now to try and come up with their percentage of the local 
funding. It’s become very difficult. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, we talk about access and 
equality, and certainly a community like Moosomin does have a 
lot of cross-border referrals and patients because of the 
Manitoba residents who find that Moosomin is the closest 
facility. You get south in that Carievale area Reston happens to 
service a lot of the population. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the question I have is: has any 
consideration been given to review that formula of the 35/65 
and even move back to the 15/85 to make it somewhat fairer for 
all residents of the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What the member is talking about is 
the formula that was available for special care homes was 
85/15. We obviously have considered this — the contribution 
given by local communities in the past and certainly within the 
past two years — but it’s a matter of funding and the capacity 
of the province to have these revenues available. 
 
What I can also tell the member, in the past, hospital 
construction 70 per cent contributed by the province and 30 per 
cent by local people. We now have a 65/35 formula and I do 
know that there are some communities that find this difficult to 
raise. And I know that we did have a discussion last week. 
 
I think the other thing that I found very interesting about the 
discussion with Mr. Hack was that he wanted the province to 
continue with the whole notion of wellness and personal 
well-being. And that’s certainly something that this government 
supports, is the notion of people taking responsibility for their 
health, and the whole notion is of supporting personal 
well-being in the wellness model. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Madam Minister, I would like to turn now to some 
other issues. 
 
Madam Minister, just a few days ago the Ken Fyke commission 
was announced in the province. Madam Minister, I think we 
asked you in question period and I don’t believe we got a 
definitive answer in terms of the makeup of the commission. 
Certainly the press release said that Mr. Fyke would be heading 
a commission, and I think the question we asked you at that 
time is what other commission members were there envisaged 
to be. And I think that rather than give me a definitive answer, 
you went into one of your rhetorical interludes that provided 
absolutely no information. 
 
So I’d like to ask you in this venue. Is the wording of the press 
release with the announcement of this commission where it says 
Mr. Fyke is heading the commission, is indeed . . . is it a 
one-man commission or is there going to be a process for 
adding members? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It is a one-person commission. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Then, Madam Minister, I would ask you — 
and please for the record, I’m not being critical of Mr. Fyke’s 

credentials — but it strikes me as something as critical and as 
important as this whole commission and the review that is 
necessary in this province, that it might be desirable to have two 
or three members or at least something more than a committee 
of one. 
 
Because obviously when you have that kind of a situation, you 
may end up having some of your very personal situations come 
to the fore rather than having an opportunity for two or three 
commission members to exchange perspectives and that sort of 
thing. 
 
I certainly recognize the problem of a very large commission, 
but why would you dismiss the idea of perhaps a three-person 
commission? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We certainly considered the possibility 
of a number of people serving on the commission. We 
considered the possibility of a two-person commission, a 
three-person commission, a five-person commission, and a 
ten-person commission. 
 
And I think that we concluded that when Emmett Hall did his 
work for the federal — I think it was the Diefenbaker 
government — in the 1960s he was a solo commission. And 
when I looked at the work that was done in Ontario on the 
Hall-Dennis Commission, that was a two-person commission. 
 
There have been solo commissions in the past and what they 
have done has brought . . . they have been able to bring 
expertise to their work and they have been able to consult with 
people broadly. And I think of the Hall Commission on Grain 
Handling and Transportation in the 1970s, when I, as an 
individual, had an opportunity to present to that commission. 
Chief Justice Hall was the . . . he was the commissioner and he 
wrote an outstanding report. 
 
(1745) 
 
There will be a very large public consultation process. Mr. Fyke 
is in the process of putting that together; you know, staff are 
being hired. The commission is being put together in terms of 
staffing and location and those kinds of details. 
 
But I can assure the public and I can assure the member that it 
is Mr. Fyke’s intention to consult broadly and widely with the 
citizenry of this province as well as health stakeholders and 
health providers. And to look at some other ways of consulting 
using the Internet, using teleconferencing, SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network), those kinds of things so that 
communities and individuals will have an opportunity to 
participate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister. In the press 
conference as well, or at least in the questions and comments 
surrounding the press conference, there was a brief discussion 
about the overall budget for this commission, and I believe that 
it was something in the . . . slightly in excess of $2 million was 
discussed. 
 
Minister, I suspect at this stage you don’t have a detailed 
breakdown as to what that budget might be, but I would ask for 
your undertaking when that budget is finalized if we could have 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

a copy of that, please, in writing, including who the personnel 
are that are being hired and what their remuneration levels are. 
Could we have that undertaking, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I will endeavour to get you the budget, 
and I will endeavour to comply with your request. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, I’d like to move to another area of the whole 
Health department issue and budget, and that is the whole issue 
of ambulatory care and the delivery of people from one location 
to other in the ambulance system — air ambulance and land 
ambulance, road ambulance. Madam Minister, in some 
meetings that we’ve had with the people from the ambulance 
association, there have been some concerns expressed by that 
association. 
 
And certainly it struck me is that there are many detailed things 
that are problematic, but there seem to be a very great concern 
about an overall lack of coordination. And the kinds of 
examples where an ambulance team may be delivering a person 
from Yorkton, for example, into Regina, and basically the crew 
are sitting here waiting to see what’s going on. 
 
The care that’s being prescribed or delivered in Regina might be 
delayed and people delay, and quite often then there’s an 
overnight stay required and the ambulance team are sitting here 
or drive back. And there seems to be very poor and very spotty 
coordination, Madam Minister, in the system. And of course as 
you know, there’s different ambulance agencies and all of these 
issues figure into it. 
 
What steps are you taking to address this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have undertaken a look at how do 
we put together a provincial emergency medical services 
strategy or framework for the province. The member, I think, is 
absolutely correct in terms of a lack of overall coordination in 
the province. 
 
At present we have 32 health districts that may enter into 
contracts with private ambulance companies or non-profit 
organizations, or they may have people on staff. And I think 
we’ve had this discussion before. 
 
And what we are doing with our emergency medical services 
project is that we have contracted with two people to make 
recommendations and design a provincial emergency medical 
service system that is client centred, it’s coordinated, and it 
ensures effective use of available resources. 
 
And I could tell you what questions the two people who’ve 
been tasked with this challenge have been asked to address. 
And the first question is, how should emergency medical 
service dispatch and response processes be organized to ensure 
among EMS (emergency medical services) providers, that’s air 
and ground, and designated emergency sites, hospitals, and 
health centres. 
 
Second thing that they’ve been asked to address is how should 
the EMS system be structured — the examples would be base 
locations, cost-effective models for service delivery, for varying 
call volumes because call volumes do vary across the province 

— to ensure consistent and timely response by professional 
personnel to citizens across our province. 
 
And what are the associated costs and then the priorities for 
implementation? How do we begin to implement this? 
 
And the third question is based on a recommended design and 
cost of the provincial EMS system. How will the system be cost 
shared between the province and users of the system? And what 
is a proposed rate structure for the system’s use? So what 
portion comes from the province, what portion may come from 
the citizen. 
 
There are two people who have been tasked with this work. Mr. 
Keller, who is a partner of Fitch and Associates which is a 
recognized expert in medical transportation, operations, finance, 
system design. And the second person that has been involved in 
this task is Dr. James Cross who is a medical doctor in the 
province of Saskatchewan. He is a medical director to 
Saskatchewan Air Ambulance, and he’s presently chief of 
emergency medicine in the P.A. (Prince Albert) Health District. 
So these two gentlemen have been tasked with this job and 
they’re to report to me by the end of September of 2000. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Will that report be a public document or is it a ministerial 
document? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — It’s a report that will be given to me but I can 
assure you that we’ll make a summary of the report available to 
you. And we’re also going to work with the stakeholders in 
emergency services in the province to ensure that there is 
significant involvement in designing a provincial system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I think 
under your first question it talked about the dispatch, and I 
assume that that’s going to be done in coordination with the 
proposed expanded 911 system and would coordinate with 
those issues. And I see you nod in agreement and I’ll accept 
that. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to now move to another area briefly. 
The Canadian Blood Services — of course as you are aware, 
this is an initiative by the provincial governments and right 
across Canada. And I see a fairly significant increase in the 
commitment of expenditure to the Canadian Blood Services. 
 
Is that an expenditure that is looked at as increasing? Are we 
moving to the optimum level or can you explain why there’s a 
pretty significant increase? And is that now up to the current 
formula, or why that significant increase, and is it likely to 
continue at that rate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you know, ministers of Health 
across the country have made a commitment to ensure a safe 
blood system in Canada, and there’s no question that we are 
looking at an increase of approximately $8 million for the 
operation of the Canadian blood system. And that’s an increase 
of 48 per cent over last year. 
 
However, about 4.5 per cent of the increase reflects a revision 
to the budget, the Canadian Blood Services budget baseline, to 
adjust for an underestimate of the CBS (Canadian Blood 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

Services) costs in 1999-2000 and reconciliation to actual 
utilization in that fiscal year. And the remaining 3.5 provides 
for safety and blood quality initiatives, increases in use and 
costs of blood fractionation products, staffing salary, benefit 
increases, systems, equipments, vehicles, facilities, and other 
costs. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that ministers of Health who recently had 
a teleconference are concerned about the costs of the Canadian 
Blood Services. But we do not want to compromise blood 
safety and blood quality because we don’t want to go back to 
the old system where the blood system was compromised. And 
we are now seeing the consequences of that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would like 
to now turn to some personnel — in the general sense — issues, 
Madam Minister, maybe beginning with medical doctors. I 
noticed recently there has been a great deal of concern 
expressed by the whole issue of pediatrics and the number of 
. . . There were some doctors leaving, but more of a concern is 
the fact that some of our residents were indicating that they 
were not staying. 
 
In fact I see in a newspaper article that there was a special 
allocation to the Royal University Hospital of $500,000 to 
provide for some general practitioners to alleviate the strain by 
the fact that we were going to lose some of our pediatricians. 
Madam Minister, where is this project at and where does the 
$500,000 come from? Did it come out of the general operation 
of the department or did it come from the transition fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the member’s information, I’ve had 
an opportunity to meet with the pediatric residents at Royal 
University Hospital, and there is no question that there has been 
significant pressures placed on those pediatric residents in the 
last several months. 
 
What I can say to the member is that presently in the province 
of Saskatchewan, a large majority of Saskatchewan 
pediatricians are compensated through a fee-for-service system. 
And we’ve had an opportunity to look at what the average 
fee-for-service pediatrician in the province, excluding those 
working in the College of Medicine, would earn. 
 
And it appears from the information that we’ve gleaned from 
our records, is that it’s some place over $200,000 per year. Now 
that is not net income, because they would have expenses in 
their offices and so on. 
 
College of Medicine pediatricians earn less fee-for-service 
income, but they do earn income from other sources, that would 
reflect academic and research activities. 
 
So what I can say to the member is that we have four residents 
that are graduating. They’re finished their residency as I 
understand it. There is one resident that is on maternity leave. 
And that leaves us with seven residents that have left because 
they feel as though they have been overworked in their 
residency because there has not been the kind of coverage that 
they believe available . . . should be available by pediatricians. 
 
What we did receive from the College of Medicine and the 
Saskatoon Health District was a proposal to assist in remedying 

the situation. We have . . . and the proposal included the idea of 
having general practitioners with enhanced critical care skills 
being hired, I believe as house doctors, to assist. 
 
We have put forth the notion of $500,000 that would come out 
of the budget of the Department of Health. I also understand 
that there will be eight new residents joining the college, I 
believe July 1 they begin a residency program. So there will be 
eight additional residents that will be in residency at the Royal 
University Hospital through the College of Medicine. 
 
So we’re trying to address the situation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Staying on 
the topic of general practitioners in particular, I note that there 
has been a study or information that we received — and I’m 
sure the department has — from the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association that lists the number of communities where there 
are single-practice clinics, if you like, and then on to multiple 
numbers of practitioners in a number of communities. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m assuming that you have that type of 
information, and certainly in discussions that we have had with 
medical residents and students, one of the concerns that they 
had about their practising in rural Saskatchewan, or in 
Saskatchewan in general, was the lifestyle issues surrounding 
single- or even dual-practice centres. 
 
(1800) 
 
Have you done a study as to what’s going on in these centres 
and a bit of the demographics? I understand that the people that 
are there, some of them ended up in these single-practice 
communities because of a policy that was jointly done by the 
Department of Health and the college of physicians and 
surgeons in terms of offshore doctors coming and spending 
some time in rural Saskatchewan as a prerequisite. And I 
understand that policy’s been dropped. 
 
So what I’m asking in light of that, what steps are being taken 
to address the issue of the fact that it’s going to be difficult to 
maintain single-practice clinics in communities in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question because this is an important question. And it is a 
question that is important to people living in rural 
Saskatchewan, particularly in communities that are smaller. 
 
I think I shared with the House, about a year ago I had an 
opportunity to go on a retreat at Dr. Dale Dewar’s farm, who is 
a rural practitioner in Wynyard. And I was on the retreat with 
family medicine residents and we had a very good discussion 
about what would it mean for you to practise outside of the 
larger centres in this province — what would you need? 
 
And at the time, it became very clear to me that younger 
physicians that were on the verge of graduating did not want to 
practise in a solo practice or a two-person practice, or in most 
cases not even a three-person practice. They wanted to have at 
least four or five general practitioners practising together so that 
they could have a holiday with their families and have 
coverage. 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

Now what we have tried to do to deal with the idea of solo 
practitioners is to have rural practice enhancement grants for 
those practitioners who would like to establish a practice with 
another practitioner. We have also got on-call coverage for 
those solo doctors that may be in three different communities 
where they can cover off for each other, and funding is 
available for that. 
 
We also have money for locum services. So if you’re a solo 
practitioner or a two-person practice and you’re both away at 
the same time, that locums can come out and provide coverage 
while you’re away. There are a number of things that we’ve 
tried to do. 
 
The member raises this issue of the change that was made by 
the college of physicians and surgeons. Fundamentally the 
change was to also recognize regional centres where they too 
were having difficulty in some cases attracting practitioners to 
their areas. And we have always had this policy, I understand, 
that if you were a practice in a city and you were losing a 
physician and it meant the numbers were dropping, then you 
would be able to recruit someone to your practice from outside 
of Canada. 
 
But I do think that the member raises an important point. This is 
why I’m pleased that the Associate Minister of Health is elected 
and is the Associate Minister of Health because she comes from 
a nursing background, and nurses are wanting us to move more 
and more to the primary health care model. With advanced 
clinical nursing skills, nurses could provide some of those point 
of entry into the health system and provide health services to 
people living in more remote and northern parts of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s why we’ve got a number of projects that are on the go. 
We’re looking at the possibility of advanced clinical nurses not 
only say in a practice with a physician who wants them, but 
perhaps entering into a partnership with a physician who may 
not be located there in the community, but through Telehealth 
and Telemedicine could be able to provide support to that 
advanced clinical nurse in terms of diagnostics and so on. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, is there a requirement of doctors who are outside of 
the country and want to practise in Saskatchewan, is there a 
requirement for them to sign a contract, a one- or two- or 
three-year contract to practise in Saskatchewan, in rural 
Saskatchewan, in order for them to be licensed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Usually they come to Canada without 
full licensure. And they need to make a commitment of three 
years to practise in rural Saskatchewan while they get their 
licensure. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, if their licensure is 
complete and their credentials are in order, is that waived? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No. They have to fulfill the 
commitment, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So then it’s irrespective of the licensure. 
That really isn’t the issue. The issue is they’ve got to simply 
make that commitment, a three-year commitment, to rural 

Saskatchewan. But it’s not the issue. Irregardless, they have to 
spend the three years, irregardless of the licensure. Okay, thank 
you. 
 
Madam Minister, in terms of, you talked about the point of 
entry, and I’d like to talk a bit about the interdisciplinary type of 
approach to health care. And if I look at the Estimates book, 
when you look at medical services and medical education 
programs category, there’s a number of subprograms 
underneath that. And really it sort of jumps out at you in terms 
of this whole interdisciplinary practice. 
 
And I know that there are fee-for-service and 
not-fee-for-service categories of medical doctors under the 
negotiated contract or agreement that you have with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Madam Minister, could I get a bit of a breakdown as to what is 
going on in terms of the fee-for-service and how many 
practitioners are operating in that mode? And how many 
practitioners would be moving into the not-for-fee-for-service 
— the doctor, the salary type of mode? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — About 20 per cent of physicians in the 
province work in an alternative payment kind of schedule. That 
may mean that they are physicians that work in a hospital. They 
may be working through a primary health care site, they may be 
radiologists, certain specialists that are on alternative payment, 
they may be physicians in the College of Medicine. But 80 per 
cent of our specialists and general practitioners are 
fee-for-service physicians. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, you talked a 
bit about the whole concept of point of entry and that issue, and 
suggested that there may be an expanded role for registered 
nurses, particularly those that have the appropriate training so 
that their scope of practice embodies more of the assessment 
and diagnostic skills that may be appropriate. 
 
Madam Minister, are there any projects . . . and I’ve heard the 
concept at least discussed where there may be an arrangement 
in a community with an entity. And I don’t want to get hung up 
on what the entity is, but the entity may include nurses, 
advanced clinical nurses, chiropractors, dentists, optometrists, 
medical practitioners, doctors, and sort of a 
team-interdisciplinary approach, that the point of entry becomes 
perhaps that appropriately trained nurse and then referrals go 
into the system and we would minimize potentially, or at least 
work collaboratively with, other disciplines. And it might also 
mean that the fact that a medical doctor is only part of a team, 
and so that isolation factor gets diminished. 
 
Has there been any consideration of this type of a concept and 
indeed has it gone any further? Could you update us on where 
that type of concept is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Thanks for the question, too, 
because I’m quite anxious to talk about primary health care 
services. We do have, I think, it’s 13 sites in the province now 
and continually are working with communities to develop that 
option if that’s what they would need. 
 
We have sites in Hudson Bay, Beechy, Wilkie, Kyle, North 



June 21, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

Battleford has one — so they’re not only urban centres, they’re 
also in . . . or rural centres, they’re also in urban centres. We 
have one being developed in Saskatoon, two actually in 
Saskatoon. One in Regina, La Ronge, Hafford. 
 
So there’s several sites up and running that do have exactly the 
complement of multi-disciplinary people that you were 
mentioning, including chiropractors. We have the options for 
visiting, itinerant services. So there’s some of them have set up 
a dental chair, those sorts of things. 
 
So it’s not a cookie-cutter model. There are different needs in 
different communities. So the primary health care services are 
being developed, or the options are being developed, with a lot 
of community involvement, physician involvement, the 
multi-disciplinary team involvement so that the community gets 
what it actually needs in the centre that’s developed for that 
community. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I’m 
encouraged to hear that there are actually projects underway. 
 
And in the interest of time, would there be a report or an update 
in terms of a written report that summarizes and details some of 
these projects and what disciplines are involved and sort of the 
methodology that might be available, Minister, to share with 
us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’ve done some — actually last year I 
believe it was — technical briefings with the media. And we 
certainly have that available for you and it could be in an 
updated version. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
And as well, is there work of this nature — I’m a great believer 
that there’s no point in reinventing the wheel, that good work 
and good ideas coming from other jurisdictions and other areas 
are certainly worthwhile — is there some general work that 
you’re using for models and some direction or guidelines in 
terms of saying, here were some good ideas that we’ve seen 
operate in this country or offshore? And would that information 
be available as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much for that question 
too, because we’ve modelled our primary health services 
basically on the Quebec model which is the CLSCs (Centre 
local de services communautaires). And I have visited actually 
one, and they do have demonstrated success with their model. 
 
So we have adapted ours to theirs and definitely have shared 
our experiences with other jurisdictions also, including at a 
conference in ’99 called Pulse ’99 where I actually spoke on 
primary health services and detailed some of the initiatives that 
we’ve taken in those communities that I just mentioned. 
 
I’ve also just came back from Argentina where I spoke to the 
Minister of Health nationally in Argentina, as well as the 
Minister of Health from Brazil and the provincial ministers — 
or however they call their territories there — the ministers of 
Health from the whole of Argentina. We talked about primary 
health care and I actually visited their sites. And we shared our 
experiences. 
 

So we are looking across Canada and internationally to share 
experiences. The international conference on primary health 
care or community health services that I attended, that’s where I 
did visit a community health centre in Quebec and that’s 
probably the closest model to what we are actually using here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 
do appreciate it. Minister, turning to another area, and I 
understand that this is appropriate, Mr. Chair, is to talk about 
the Transition Fund. It’s under the general category of Health 
but it’s in a separate section of the Estimates book. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s $150 million allocated in the transition 
fund. Could I have an update on what monies out of this fund 
have been already allocated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There’s been $3 million allocated to 
the cancer agency for linac at the two centres. Regina has 
received $8.36 million for operating costs; capital costs of 2.5 
million. Saskatoon has received 9.64 million for operating and 
2.5 million for capital. This total is $26 million — has been 
expended from the $150 million Health Transition Fund, and no 
decisions have been made on the remainder of the fund. 
 
(1815) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, there has been some discussion at least that this fund, 
the primary purpose of this fund is to bridge from the current 
budgeting reality to a future reality that would be sustainable. 
 
Madam Minister, how long is this fund intended to . . . or 
what’s the life expectancy of the fund? I’m certainly expecting 
it’s not all in this single budget year. Do you have projections as 
to how much time it will take to have this allocated? And what 
are the criterions for allocating it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is one-time funding. Obviously it 
doesn’t all have to be spent in this year. Some of it could be set 
aside while we wait for the recommendations of the Fyke 
commission. 
 
The money could be available to help health districts deal with 
changes. It could be one-time money to assist districts in 
becoming financially sustainable. It could be one-time money to 
be used for capital or equipment investments that could result in 
long-term operational savings. It could be used for replacing 
certain services in buildings. It could be used for a number of 
things, but we have not yet determined how the remainder of 
the fund will be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Madam Minister, it seems to me if 
you have no idea how you’re going to spend the money, how 
did you decide how much the fund should be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do have ideas on how we’d like to 
spend it, just so you know, but I mean we have to go through a 
process. We have the Fyke commission, we want to talk to 
health districts, and there are a number of people that we’d like 
to have a discussion with. And we want to wait for the Fyke 
report. 
 
How did we arrive at this sum. There was equalization money 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2000 

that came from the federal government. It came during our 
budgeting process. We had some money that was put aside for 
the centurian funds that are available as we make our way to 
Saskatchewan’s 100 birthday, and some of the money was 
available through equalization for a Health Transition Fund. 
And we knew that we were going to launch a review of the 
health system and we thought that this could assist us. 
 
We also know that this is one-time money. We don’t expect to 
build this money into our base budget. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. But as 
minister undoubtedly knows, we’re a quarter way through this 
budget year for all intents and purposes. The Fyke commission 
was just launched, and I understand that the very first 
expectation of a written report or detail is going to be this fall. 
 
How in the world out of all of these issues where you’ve only 
allocated $26 million dollars, and there’s $124 million not 
allocated, are you going to be able to do this in a thoughtful, 
planned way when the Fyke commission, for example, is only 
going to start giving recommendations in the fall when virtually 
75 per cent of the budget year is completed. 
 
Is there going to be a big hurry up spending spree in the last 
three months of the budget year, because it doesn’t sound as if 
you’ve got a clear plan for this money if you’re not intending 
potentially to carry some of these one-time monies over so that 
it can be spent in a very thoughtful, planned way. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say to the member is that 
the Fyke commission will report in the fall and then early 
winter. And I also indicated that all of this money does not need 
to be expended in this fiscal year. It is one-time money, and I 
fully expect that we will be thoughtful in how we expend the 
remaining $124 million in the Health Transition Fund. 
 
And we know that there are lots of ideas about how we could 
spend the money. One of the ideas is to continue to support our 
health information systems. This is a continuing issue as health 
people across the country try and administer health systems. 
 
In order to be cost effective and efficient, health information is 
important. It could be used for health information systems. It 
could be used for health districts to assist with their debt and it 
could be used for equipment replacement because we know that 
some of our infrastructure is aging. And it could be used as we 
make transformations from one service to another. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I certainly 
look forward to further detail as the year unfolds in terms of 
how this is going to be spent. And I trust that we will be 
updated on that information. 
 
Madam Minister, for today’s session, those are all the questions 
I have. I would like to thank both of the ministers and their 
officials for answering our questions today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’d like to thank the officials for being 
present and I’d also like to thank the member for his very 
thoughtful questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:23 p.m. 
 
 
 


