





























































Hansard: June 23, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2105 
 June 23, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present a petition 
regarding hospital closures. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present this morning is signed by 
people from the community of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the future of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Plunkett, Saskatoon, Nokomis, 
and Lanigan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people that would like to have cellular 
telephone service in their area. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Weyburn, Beaubier, Lake 
Alma, Oungre, and Tribune. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition regarding 
hospital closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this petition is signed by people in the Young area. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Simpson and Watrous. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petition of 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from the communities of Lanigan and 
Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition by citizens 
concerned with community access roads. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the citizens of Christopher 
Lake and Paddockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present collected on behalf of the youth of Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition which has 
been sponsored by the youth of Saskatchewan, and they are 
looking at tobacco control and they specifically asked that the 
government ban smoking in all public places in Saskatchewan. 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition this morning in regards to enforced municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Paddockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of the citizens of Cupar who are concerned 
about medical services in their community. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Centre remains open and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here today calling for the legislature to enact comprehensive 
tobacco control legislation. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition comes from constituents of mine as well as other 
residents from around Regina. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition to retain 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Lanigan, Drake, 
and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition on behalf 

of the youth of the province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this comes from citizens of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with possible hospital closures. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Allan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition expressing concern about the harmful 
health effects of tobacco, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 
including several residents of my own constituency. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the concerned citizens of 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

These are petitions of residents of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Cellular service in Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea; 
 
Keeping the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals open; 
 
Banning smoking in public places and workplaces; and 
 
The restoration of the Paddockwood access road. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature two visitors from Denmark. Up in your gallery, we 
have Arne and Gurli Soerenson who are from Augustenborg, a 
town in the southern part of Denmark. 
 
Seven years ago, Andrea Still, who is also seated in the gallery, 
lived with these people as her family on an exchange, and they 
have now come to Saskatchewan and are staying in the 
Humboldt area with Andrea’s parents, Doug and Donelda. They 
plan to stay in Saskatchewan for about three weeks visiting 
many of the interesting things that they’ve heard about, about 
our province. 
 
And I think all of us should welcome them to the gallery. 
 
And to the Soerensons, Hjertelig Velkommen til Saskatchewan. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.) 
 
So let’s all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Royal Bank Economic Forecast 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is Friday, 
and as we all know Friday is always good news Friday in this 
House. I’d be remiss if I was not bringing more good news 
about the Saskatchewan economy and for Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 
Today’s good news is brought to you by the good people at the 
Royal Bank, Mr. Speaker, who have released their outlook for 
the year 2000-2001. The Royal Bank says that Saskatchewan 
consumers can look forward to low inflation, tax cuts, and 
reduced unemployment. 
 
As you know, we have already passed legislation to introduce 
the largest income tax cut in Saskatchewan history. As a result 
of this and other measures, Mr. Speaker, the economy is 
expected to grow and unemployment rates are expected to 
decline in all provinces. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is 
forecast to be the second lowest in the nation at 4.8 per cent and 
virtually tied with Alberta. It also notes . . . the Royal Bank 
notes that Saskatchewan’s and Manitoba’s economies have the 

quote, “greatest potential” according to the forecast. 
 
This is very good news for Saskatchewan people, very good 
news for Saskatchewan consumers, and great news for our 
province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wood River By-election 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The period of time 
we have been sitting in this first session of the twenty-fourth 
legislature, for those of us who are rookies, has been an 
excellent opportunity to witness an NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government in full retreat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the abuse this NDP government is able to push 
onto those citizens who have chosen to support candidates other 
than those who are an NDP or New Democratic Party 
candidate, is a wonder to behold. 
 
We began this session with a Throne Speech full of airy fairy 
promises that soon fell far short of its potential with the 
introduction of this New Democratic government’s budget; a 
budget, Mr. Speaker, with little content and oodles of political 
payoffs. 
 
The most interesting learning experience though was just how 
arrogant and self-righteous a socialist can be. Time after time, 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard from this NDP government that 
taxpayers in our province have no right to know how their 
hard-earned tax dollars are spent. In fact, this New Democratic 
Party government has informed us on several occasions that 
monies earned by Saskatchewan citizenry is actually property 
of this New Democratic Party government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a new day is dawning in Saskatchewan. On 
June 26 another Saskatchewan Party MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) will be elected, as this side of the House 
continues to grow until the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
takes his rightful seat as Premier. When that day arrives we will 
truly get to see an open and accountable government. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fund Raising by the Saskatchewan Party 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues this 
morning on this side of this House have more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, I have the reverse — bad news for 
Saskatchewan and even worse news for this Assembly, and for 
the political process in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am referring, Mr. Speaker, to a letter sent out this week by the 
member for Redberry; a letter that shamefully attempts to 
divide the people of Saskatchewan into two camps — worker 
and non-worker, Mr. Speaker. Even more shamefully, the letter 
is a blatant attempt by the Saskatchewan Party to profit from the 
division it strives to create. 
 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

I will table this letter at the end of my statement, Mr. Speaker. It 
says, quote: 
 

We need your help to stop the destruction of the non-union 
construction industry . . . Your generous donation to the 
Saskatchewan Party will have a direct and measurable 
impact . . . 

 
They have asked for donations between 1,000 and $10,000 to 
help them continue their attack on working men and women 
and their families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, historically most political parties have opposed or 
supported legislation in light of their views on public policy. 
Here we have something new, Mr. Speaker — an undeniably 
cheap fundraising by division. 
 
If the members opposite don’t want to be called Devine Tories, 
they should stop acting like them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a strong economy, such as we have in 
Saskatchewan, is built on co-operation between workers and 
business. Workers know that, and employers know that, Mr. 
Speaker. The only party that does not know it is the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker — a sad day for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

David Howe Golf Tournament 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to draw the member’s attention to a golf tournament being 
held on July 16. What makes this tournament so significant is 
that it’s celebrating the 40th Anniversary of the David Howe 
Golf Tournament. 
 
Mr. David Howe organized the first tournament in 1960. It has 
been an annual event for the past . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He has been the 
driving force behind the tournament and had a great deal to do 
with organization of the Martin’s Lake golf course where the 
tournament takes place. 
 
Aside from his involvement with golf, Mr. Howe spent his 
entire life serving his community of Marcelin. He runs the Star 
Café that was started by his parents 78 years ago. He served as 
mayor of Marcelin from 1982 to ’85. He has been chosen 
citizen of the year in Marcelin, has received plaques for his 
unselfish contribution to the community and district for his high 
level of hospitality provided to the travelling public from 
Saskatchewan Tourism. He was awarded the J.D. Claire 
Thacker Award for outstanding contribution to the independent 
insurance brokerage system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Mr. Howe on his 
dedication and contributions to the community of Marcelin as 
well on the 40th anniversary of the David Howe golf 
tournament. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there are any outdoor events that need 
planning, Mr. Howe might be the person to ask to help with 
organizing it. In the last 39 years the tournament has only been 
rained out only once. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TRLabs and SIAST Training Partnership 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to inform the Assembly of some great news for skills 
training in our province. TRLabs and the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology have teamed up to 
train an information and communications technology workforce 
of Saskatchewan. This collaboration will create new 
opportunities to prepare students for challenging careers. 
 
The partnership will ensure that the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) curriculum meets 
present and future demands for Saskatchewan’s information and 
communications technology workforce. SIAST students will 
benefit from industry’s input on their training and local 
businesses will benefit from a workforce that meets their needs. 
 
SIAST provides career-related training that leads to 
employment. The institute has an exceptional track record, Mr. 
Speaker. Over 90 per cent of its graduates who look for 
employment find jobs within six months of graduation. 
 
TRLabs is Canada’s leading information and communications 
technology research consortium. Through collaborations such 
as this, Mr. Speaker, TRLabs creates innovative technologies 
and trains students to enhance Saskatchewan’s expertise and 
improve competitiveness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us all applaud this very important partnership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wood River By-election 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
people throughout Saskatchewan are sitting on the edge of their 
seats awaiting the results of the Wood River by-election 
Monday night. Pundits throughout the province are giving their 
predictions about the results. And while I would never be so 
bold to predict a Sask Party victory in the by-election, that’s not 
true for the former member of Wood River. 
 
As everyone in the House knows, no one has more respect for 
Glen McPherson’s opinion than I. So I would like to read some 
comments he made in the media this morning. And now 
remembering, Mr. Speaker, Mr. McPherson is a former Liberal 
MLA. In fact for that matter, he’s a former NDP MLA. 
 
I quote Mr. McPherson, Mr. Speaker: 
 

What I’m hearing is exactly what I’ve been hearing since 
they formed the coalition. It’s not flying. The writing may 
be on the wall. If you’re Mr. Romanow and Mr. 
Melenchuk, you’re sitting back and not really caring about 
what happens in this rural seat. I think this is going to be a 
bit of a lesson to them. 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

Mr. McPherson went on to accuse the Premier and the Liberal 
leader of being too busy striking deals in the dead of the night, 
that they forgot the real issues in Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, far be it from me to argue with the opinions of this 
distinguished, former member of this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

E-business in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Yet more good news for Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, yet more good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the political techniques the opposition has learned from 
their Alliance buddies is this — if something is not true, say it 
is true, often and loudly; someone may believe you. Like 
suggesting that the spirit of entrepreneurship has been driven 
west out of Saskatchewan. Of course that is absolutely not true 
as the lead story in yesterday’s national paper, The Globe and 
Mail, illustrates. In a story about the 25 hottest e-businesses in 
Canada, a Saskatoon firm was listed as number one. 
 
The company is Point2.com and it can be found at 
www.point2.com. Point2.com is a company which auctions 
heavy equipment on-line. It finds specialized mining and other 
heavy industry equipment, puts it on the net, and sells it. 
 
The principals in the company are Wendell and Barry Willick, 
both of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Point2.com is one more example of the innovation 
and the entrepreneurship that is alive and well and growing in 
Saskatchewan. All of Canada knows about it, only the 
opposition is in the dark. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Border Health Centre in Climax 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, today we have one more slap in 
the face of southwest Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
Southwest Health District has announced that due to a nursing 
shortage, the Border Health Centre in Climax will no longer be 
open on weekends. 
 
That means there will be no emergency services on weekends 
for people of Climax and area. And it also means that every 
Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, palliative care patients, people 
in the last days of their lives, will be loaded onto ambulances 
and shipped off to Shaunavon. Then on Monday morning, 
they’ll be loaded back onto ambulances and once again shipped 
back to Climax. 
 

Mr. Premier, this is a new low, even for your government. What 
is wrong with this picture? Why are you allowing dying people 
to be treated this way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to make a few comments but I’d like to as 
well, propose a slight change to the proceedings today in light 
of the fact that the member for Redberry Lake and his caucus 
colleagues are bent on driving a wedge between working people 
in the business community in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. Minister, we are into oral 
questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.I do want to 
assure the member opposite that during the last year there were 
two palliative care patients in the Border Climax facility. The 
district has been looking at all kinds of arrangements to deal 
with the issue of the staff shortages, and most of the staff 
shortages are occurring on the weekend. 
 
They’ve worked long and hard with their staff and have come to 
the arrangement that the services will be offered Monday to 
Friday. The weekend services, because of the staff shortages, 
they are unable to offer, and they want to make sure the people 
in that area clearly understand what’s going on. 
 
So they have made this announcement. They’ve made the 
community aware. And they are doing the best they can to deal 
with the shortages of staff and still deliver adequate services in 
that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I have a 
letter from the Southline Palliative Care Committee based in 
Climax. And they say that every week palliative care patients 
will have to be transferred over that 55 kilometres of rather 
poorly maintained, dangerous highway, notorious No. 37 south. 
And the say in their letter, I quote: 
 

The purpose of this unit is to allow local people to obtain 
the care they need in their own home area and to allow 
family and friends to be with them, day or night, during the 
last days of their lives. Removing them from this 
environment is physically cruel and psychologically 
inhuman. 
 

Mr. Premier, this is despicable. Tearing dying people away 
from family and friends and shipping them around like cattle is 
just unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Southline Palliative Care Committee calls this 
decision cruel and inhuman. What do you call it? And why are 
you doing this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think if we’re going to demonstrate 
despicable, the question would be the demonstration of what’s 
despicable. 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I said in my first answer to the 
member, there have been two palliative care admissions in the 
Border Health Centre — one in June of last year and one in 
January. 
 
So the letter that has been prepared from the palliative care 
committee is talking about a potential. And the district has 
worked very carefully to meet all the needs of the members or 
the citizens in that area. 
 
The person who is part of the letter was also part of the solution 
that the district has arrived at. That person was part of the 
discussions. And the district has done the best they can to 
deliver services within their means and in light of the staff 
shortages that they have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the notice given to the people of 
the area from the Southwest Health District letter says, that the 
Border Health Centre will be closed on weekends from July 15, 
this year, to March 27, next year. I hope the minister can assure 
us that there will be no more palliative patients between now 
and then. I would appreciate hearing about that. 
 
This is disgusting and it’s inappropriate and we are very 
disappointed by this. First of all, these people have no services 
on the weekend. Then if they do have a patient problem, they 
have to travel on gravel highways and now we’re loading 
terminally ill patients on ambulances. This is the most 
incredibly insensitive thing I’ve ever heard of. 
 
Mr. Premier, these are real people with real families. And I’m 
sure you can understand the frustration and the anger these 
people are feeling. Do you think this is a proper way to deal 
with dying people now or people who may be in that situation 
sometime in the next 11 months? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t go into 
the palliative care issue again since I’ve answered that twice. 
But I will talk to you about what the Border Health Centre will 
remain doing 24 hours a day, Monday through Friday. 
 
The usual services that they will offer include X-ray services in 
support of the local physician; out-patient treatments as 
required; and a registered nurse will be on duty 24 hours a day, 
supplemented with a second RN (registered nurse) on call 
Monday to Friday. 
 
Other services that are provided at the health centre are home 
care service coordination, visiting dietician, and a public health 
nurse. 
 
The change here, as I said, due to the shortage of nurses, is that 
the health centre will no longer be able to be open on the 
weekend. The district has made arrangements for the weekend 
in the most responsible way that they can in consultation with 
their staff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for District Health Boards 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Health as well. Madam 
Minister, district health board budgets have been in your hands 
for some time now, and it’s reported that you’re continuing to 
look at these budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that many districts are 
including cutbacks in their budgets to either reduce or eliminate 
their deficits, major cutbacks in some cases, including hospital 
closures. 
 
But following the announcement of the health care review, the 
Premier indicated that no hospitals would close, and that’s a 
strong promise. However it is one thing to suggest a hospital 
will not close, and another thing to turn around and convert it to 
a wellness centre. 
 
Madam Minister, can you assure the public that you are not 
going to convert any more hospitals to wellness centres as a 
result of this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve been 
saying for the last few weeks, all the districts have submitted 
their health plans. They are being reviewed by the department 
and by myself and the Minister of Health. And we’re looking at 
them in a provincial context, to look at what services should be 
delivered, for the provincial overview for the best delivery of 
health services to all the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’re also looking at is the commission now that has been 
charged to overlook the health service in the province. We will 
be watching for . . . we’ll be anxious to see the report of that 
commission. But in the meantime, we are doing the review of 
the health plans and they will be released in the very near 
future. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
official opposition is very concerned that the commitment of the 
Premier is only very specific and very limited, and there’s all 
kinds of wiggle room in order to avoid conversions or 
shutdowns in other areas. 
 
If you won’t make the commitment about conversions, will you 
make the commitment that there won’t be any closures in 
long-term care homes? Will you make the commitment that 
there will not be any conversions? 
 
Madam Minister, what’s going on in this budget? Are you 
going to make the commitment that goes beyond the very 
specific commitment of the Premier not to close hospitals, or is 
there just so much wiggle room that you need in order to 
change it and make conversions or closures of long-term care 
homes and/or beds, Madam Minister? Will you make that 
commitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will not take the time 
of the House to repeat the answer that the Minister of Health 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

just gave, and that I gave a week or so ago in response to, I 
believe, the Health critic of the official opposition. So I will 
simply repeat what I said. 
 
But the member did get up and talk about wiggle room. And he 
alleges the government has, quote, “wiggle room”. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
report of February 3, 2000, where the reporter, one Mr. Jones, 
says the following, quote: 
 

All along the opposition has been saying the health care 
system should be studied before there are any more 
hospitals closed. And even though the Saskatchewan Party 
. . . 
 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, but get this, Mr. Speaker 
 

. . . And even though the Saskatchewan Party is blasting 
the government for not guaranteeing the future of rural 
hospitals it’s not prepared to do so itself. 

 
Gantefoer. Gantefoer, the quotation, quote: 
 

I will guarantee (that) no hospitals closed until this study is 
done so that we know what we are doing. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lanigan Hospital 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Living Sky Health District is one of the districts that’s 
considering hospital closures in order to reduce the operating 
deficit. 
 
The hospital in Lanigan is slated for closure in their budget 
proposal. Lanigan is a large agriculture and mining community. 
Pound-Maker feedlot and ethanol plant are located close by, 
and they all depend heavily on access to acute and emergency 
health care services. 
 
The Premier has said that no hospitals will close while the 
health review is underway. However, we have a letter dated 
June 14 from the mayor of the town of Lanigan to the Minister 
of Health. In this letter, Mayor Vigoren says, and I quote: 
 

We can appreciate your views regarding the establishment 
of a health centre in our community. 

 
So, Madam Minister, is that what’s going to happen to 
Lanigan? Is the hospital not actually going to close but instead 
be converted into a health centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we’re on the same line 
of questioning; and one of these days, sooner than the 
Saskatchewan Party opposite expects, they will have to fess up 
and tell the people of Saskatchewan; and one of these days, 
sooner than perhaps the journalists expect, they’re going to 
have to fess up and tell where the Saskatchewan Party stands. 

Leader-Post of March 3, 1999, under the headline, “More 
hospitals changing,” quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson couldn’t 
guarantee his party would keep the doors open at all 36 
hospitals with low average daily bed usage rates. An 
evaluation . . . (will) be done first to decide how to best 
serve the communities, he added. 

 
I’ve already given a quotation about the health critic. Quote, he 
said: 
 

I will guarantee there’d be no hospitals closed until this 
study is done so that we know what we are doing. 
 

That’s exactly what our commitment has been. The hon. 
member knows it. 
 
You tell us where you stand, because I say under your 
privatization, two-tier approach to health care you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately the 
budgets are being reviewed now, and the Saskatchewan Party is 
not making the decisions, the NDP government is. And my 
question was, is this going to be converted into a health centre? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mayor Vigoren says the community definitely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . definitely does not want the hospital to 
close or the emergency services eliminated. The mayor 
correctly states the X-ray lab and 24-hour emergency services 
are necessary for that area. In The Leader-Post yesterday, the 
Minister of Health says that she doesn’t think the public has any 
concerns any more. Well she’s wrong. 
 
The people of this province have seen promise after promise 
broken by the NDP government and they don’t believe her any 
more. Mayor Vigoren says if the proposed closure goes ahead, 
the town will consider legal action and they will ask for an 
investigation. 
 
Madam Minister, is that what the town of Lanigan is going to 
have to do to get the health district and your department to 
listen to the people and their concerns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there is one aspect of the 
hon. member’s question with which I totally concur. She got up 
and she said in a preface to the question, something to the effect 
that we . . . it is fortunate that we have to make the decision. 
That is right. Check the record. 
 
And I want to say to her, Mr. Speaker, it is very fortunate 
indeed that this coalition government has to make the decisions. 
It would be very unfortunate and very tragic if we adopted the 
Saskatchewan Party approach on health care which is, 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

according to their campaign platform, value for money audit; 
five year zap you’re frozen on health care expenditures; the 
privatization policies of the member of Weyburn and the other 
members; the support for Bill 11 in the province of Alberta; in 
effect the destruction of medicare. 
 
You’re right, Madam Member, it is very fortunate that the 
coalition government is in charge of medicare. You cannot be 
trusted because you do not support medicare . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboine Valley Health District Ambulance Services 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions are also for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, the Assiniboine Valley Health District is 
another district facing a very large operating deficit for the 
upcoming year. In preliminary budgets proposed on March 14, 
they estimated a deficit of $600,000. One month later that 
deficit estimate has doubled to $1.2 million. 
 
This district is now considering major changes to operations. 
The owners, operators, and staff of Canora Ambulance Care 
and Duck Mountain ambulance service are extremely concerned 
that the health district wants to take over their services. They 
have been told by the district CEO (chief executive officer) 
Gary Johnson that if owners refuse to sell, he will not renew 
their contracts with the health district. 
 
Madam Minister, will this health district be allowed to force 
these ambulance services to sell? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the members of this 
House and those who are involved in health care administration 
in Saskatchewan know full well that the budgets are being 
advanced now for the Department of Health and are being 
considered by the Department of Health — of which this 
question is a part and parcel of the issue. 
 
So we know where the situation is in that regard, and in due 
course decisions will be made, as I say, by the coalition 
government partnership that supports medicare — and not by 
the party that wants to freeze funding for five years. 
 
I repeat, Mr. Speaker, about what I can only describe is the 
attempt by the official opposition, which purports to seek 
government and therefore has a responsibility to come clean in 
its position, how it tries desperately to square the circle of 
freezing funding for five years — not an extra penny for health 
care; two-tier systems; they’re in favour of privatization; the 
member’s question talked about health ambulance services 
privatization; in favour of Alberta’s Bill 11 — how it is that 
they can square all of that under some sort of a rubric of 
defending medicare? Mr. Speaker, it is as phony as a $3 bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, these ambulance services have 
been working with the health district board and have even 

agreed to raise their rates to help meet their budget needs for the 
coming year. As at the end of March they had no indication the 
health district was even considering taking over ambulance 
services, but by April it appeared to be a major component of 
their attempts to deal with their deficit. 
 
These service owners have spent many years building their 
businesses and contributing to the communities they serve. 
They do not want to sell their businesses. They have even 
talked to other districts in Saskatchewan Health, and they 
believe the district will not save money by taking over 
ambulance services. They believe ambulance service will be 
reduced to the residents of this district. 
 
Madam Minister, before you finalize these budgets, are you 
considering whether the options proposed by the districts are 
actually feasible and will they save costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
member’s question, I repeat again. He asks whether or not the 
arguments advanced by these people will be considered by the 
Department of Health. The answer is yes. We’re doing a review 
of emergency services and looking at the budget plans right 
now. So there’s no problem in that regard. 
 
But the difference between us and the questions which come 
from that right-wing extreme party, which wants to demolish 
medicare, is this: that our reviews contemplate continued 
delivery of more dollars — 6 per cent in this year’s budget for 
health care; a renewed and revamped medicare which will be 
here for not only today but for tomorrow, based on the principle 
of single-tier, public administration. 
 
Theirs is predicated on some Americanized two-tier system 
approach, Alberta style, the destruction of it, medicare fees. 
Who knows, maybe even new utilization fees — they advocate 
that. And that is the big difference. 
 
We’re for medicare and they’re against medicare. Let’s be clear 
about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier knows full well that the questions I am 
asking this morning are on behalf of two ambulance businesses 
who’ve been around for years. They’re on behalf of the people 
of Canora-Pelly who have an ambulance service that they want 
to protect, because they know full well that if this government 
allows those ambulance services to become public, the people 
of the Canora-Pelly constituency will lose a service, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s reality. 
 
The owners of these ambulance services are very distressed 
about the actions of the CEO of the health district. He indicated 
to them this week that he intends to use transitional funding 
from the province to purchase the ambulance services. He also 
says in this letter that if transitional funding is denied, the 
district would borrow money to push the takeover. 
 
Madam Minister, Mr. Premier, is this the type of budgeting you 
endorse, and is this what transitional funding you have set aside 
is for, so that they can take over locally provided health 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the questions, apart from 
being highly speculative and based on the speculation then 
leading to some illogical conclusion, as the Deputy Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party indicates, is simply that. They’re 
intended to be campaigns of disinformation by a political party 
which is not committed to medicare. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and to the Canora people, we want 
to work with everybody in Canora and in every part of the 
province of Saskatchewan to provide the best health care 
system that we can within the budgets that are being provided. 
Rising at 6 per cent and sometimes higher a year. That’s what 
we’re prepared to do. 
 
But here’s the difference. We’re prepared to do it within the 
five principles of the Canada Health Act, something which 
those people want to do away with. We do not want two-tier 
privatized health care. They want it. This debate is important 
about the specifics but the larger issue is who’s for medicare, 
who’s against it, and we’re for medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you know, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to inform the Premier about the following facts. 
 
In his letter to ambulance businesses, Mr. Johnson goes even 
further to say that if the ambulance owners refuse to agree to a 
sale price, he will build new ambulance base sites and let the 
current owners sit with their assets and he will have no 
obligation to hire the current staff. 
 
Mr. Premier, this man is threatening the owners of the Canora 
and Duck Mountain ambulance services by suggesting their 
contracts won’t be renewed if they don’t sell. And they must 
sell at his price or the staff would lose their jobs. The owners of 
the ambulance services have the support of their town councils, 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, and residents 
of the health districts. 
 
Now they want your assurance that this is not the intention of 
your government — to threaten and intimidate private health 
service out of business. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you review the actions of Mr. Johnson and 
assure the Duck Mountain and Canora ambulance services they 
will not be forced to sell their businesses to the health district? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan — ever since medicare was 
implemented in 1962 and every year thereafter, in government 
and in opposition, provincially and nationally — is for the best 
publicly funded medicare system that this country and this 
province can afford. 
 
That means working with occasionally private service 

providers, everybody involved in emergency, and this particular 
issue that the member raises — I have repeated in the answers 
over and over again, as the Minister of Health has said, that 
those arguments will be very carefully advanced. 
 
But I will tell you something that we are not for on a broad and 
philosophic basis. We are not for the June 20, 2000 Hansard 
statement made in this House by one of the members — I 
believe it was the member from Weyburn — quote: 
 

I think it should be an option. 
 

And what is the it? 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan and keeping the money here if that’s what 
we’re going to do. 

 
Well she’s for privatization, and we’re not. We’ll work out a 
solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my questions are for 
the Minister of Health . . . or for the Minister of Agriculture, 
pardon me. I’d prefer the Minister of Agriculture to answer 
them, rather than the Premier wanting to talk about health care 
in 1962. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, The Western 
Producer is reporting this week that the AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) program is running out of money. 
According to reports out of Ottawa, the AIDA program could 
experience a shortfall, as much as $300 million this year. 
 
Some AIDA officials are indicating farmers will receive interim 
payments of 50 per cent with the unpaid . . . or the paid balance 
if there’s enough money left in the fund at that point. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you expect to have a shortfall in the AIDA 
program in ’99 . . . in the ’99 program year? Will farmers be 
receiving only 50 per cent of the expected payment this 
summer? 
 
And will you assure Saskatchewan farm families that they will 
indeed receive the full payments expected out of the AIDA 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the preamble to the 
question, the member from Kindersley mentioned he didn’t 
want the Premier talking about medicare any more. And after 
this question period, I understand why, with the licking they 
took. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And his attempt to take the heat off 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

the privatization of health by asking a question about 
agriculture at the very end of question period, tells you how 
important the question is. 
 
But for the record, Mr. Speaker, in 1999 under the AIDA 
program, there were 28,000 applications and $142 million paid 
out. This year under the 1999 program to be paid out this year, 
there will be $300 million paid out in Saskatchewan, double last 
year. And so far we have about 4,000 applications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of this Assembly, two very 
accomplished young people seated in your gallery, my middle 
child and youngest daughter, Alison, and her great friend Randy 
Morse. 
 
Both Alison and Randy have recently completed bachelors 
degrees in Business from the College of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, University of Cornell, Ithaca, New York. 
 
Alison has competed on behalf of Saskatchewan at that national 
level in field hockey, ice hockey, and lacrosse. She’s also 
played the last four years with the Cornell women’s varsity 
women’s hockey team, the last two years as captain. 
 
She played for Team Canada in the winter of 1998-99 where the 
Canadian women won the Christmas Cup in Germany 
undefeated in the round robin and playoff rounds. 
 
Randy, a native of Geneva, New York played football for 
Cornell University and is a brother of the venerable Alpha 
Gamma Rho men’s fraternity, an institution that I came to 
appreciate very much on my visits to Cornell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members of this Hon. Assembly 
will recognize Alison and Randy and I ask them to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests 
before I do my statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you in 
the gallery and through you to the other members of the House, 
three members of the Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. 
They’re seated up in the gallery across there. 
 
They’re Frank Bellamy, Lynda Blach, and Bob Torkelson. If 
you could just stand up. I’d like to welcome them all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Senior Friendly Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Thank you very much. Earlier 
this month, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege as the Minister 
responsible for Seniors, to announce the creation of the 
Provincial Advisory Committee of Older Persons. 
 
Today it is again my pleasure to tell you about more good news 
for seniors in Saskatchewan. Seniors are the fastest growing age 
group in Canada right now. In Saskatchewan we have the 
second-highest proportion of seniors. They make up 15.3 per 
cent of our population, and more than half of the people living 
in rural Saskatchewan and small communities are seniors. 
 
Yesterday I had the great pleasure of joining the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Mechanism and the Saskatchewan Tourism Education 
Council to launch a new program called, Senior Friendly. And 
you’ll see all of us have our Senior Friendly badges on. 
 
This program is designed to make our communities senior 
friendly. What that means is that physical space, technology, 
printed material, and services are all designed so that seniors’ 
needs are met. In the Senior Friendly tool kit, there’s a checkup 
or an assessment questionnaire that you can use to ensure that 
your facilities and services keep seniors in mind. 
 
Some things that can be done to make facilities more senior 
friendly are: to provide a bench in the middle of the grocery 
store so that you can have a break between getting your meat 
and getting your bread; providing larger, more distinguishable 
signage for bathrooms; and ensuring your doors and entrances 
are easier to find and easier to open. These are just a few of the 
things that can be done to make everyone’s life easier. 
 
Thus the program is important for communities. — things like 
parks, facilities, streets, lighting, policing, etc.; as well as 
businesses, organizations, and services. 
 
Two key organizations have worked together to bring this 
program to life in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism is the group that brings together our province’s 
seniors’ organizations. The Seniors Mechanism promotes a 
unified voice for seniors, it promotes research and action on 
issues affecting seniors, and it promotes both awareness and 
coordination of resources and services for seniors. 
 
The Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism is working to make 
seniors, businesses, and everyone in our province aware of this 
new program and the importance of being senior friendly. 
 
The Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council is administering 
the training end of this program. STEC (Saskatchewan Tourism 
Education Council) will work with training facilitators and 
interested businesses to get senior-friendly training programs 
for service providers off the ground across Saskatchewan. By 
working together, these two organizations are helping to create 
a better society and better communities for all of us. 
 
An added benefit of this initiative is that the level of service and 
the treatment we receive in communities and at businesses that 
have taken the time to make sure they meet the needs of the 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

particular groups, such as seniors, will make it better for all of 
us. Additionally, for those of us who aren’t considered a senior 
citizen yet, guess what? All of us will be. 
 
I encourage all members in the Assembly to use the evaluation 
tool to ensure that their offices are senior friendly. I think the 
program is a great step forward for seniors, for businesses, for 
communities, and for our province. Let’s all be senior friendly. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition would like to respond to the ministerial statement if 
we may. And when we wish to do that, all eyes turn to me for 
some reason. I’m not sure why. 
 
But I have to admit that the seniors, as the minister so rightly 
stated, it is a growing portion of our society. It's an important 
part and of course it is growing. 
 
When we all think about our own selves growing older, it’s 
something like comparing what we experienced with the 
coming Millennium 2000. We knew it was coming sometime in 
the future and then all of a sudden it’s actually here. So we’re 
very pleased to learn about these new initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have been a very integral part of the 
development, certainly of our province, of our culture and our 
society. They’ve developed our province substantively in the 
past and they continue to contribute very greatly. They have set 
the standards. They have set the expectations for us and in fact 
have put the reputation of our province before us, and we 
commend them for that. 
 
And we owe them a great deal. So we can’t just categorize 
seniors right out of our attention because they are continuing to 
be an integral part of our province. So we can’t categorize them 
as just aged or seniors or older people because, in fact, they as 
well as us, continue to pay taxes, they purchase utilities, and 
they pay fees and they utilize the facilities such as extended 
care and health services. 
 
So we cannot forget that, while these new initiatives are very 
constructive and commendable, we are also making it 
continually more difficult on the other hand for seniors in the 
day-to-day living and coping with these increases in taxes — 
great hikes — along with the shrinking services; and especially 
for those seniors that are on fixed retirement incomes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we agree with these programs that are referred 
to by the minister, and they are in fact a step in the right 
direction for both the seniors as well as our communities. And 
we look forward to the unfolding of these programs called 
Senior Friendly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
seek leave under rule 46 to move an emergency motion 
regarding transportation. 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before I do that, hon. members, and I will 
recognize the minister, I have the duty to table in the House, 
before orders of the day, the Annual Report on Operations For 
the Year Ended March 31, 2000 submitted by the Provincial 
Auditor, and I so table. 
 
I would ask the hon. minister to indicate to this House briefly 
the urgency of the motion he is proposing without notice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In light of the announcement yesterday 
regarding accelerated elevator closures, we think it’s imperative 
that we impress on the federal government, first of all, the 
impact that this will have on our roads here in Saskatchewan; 
and that we desperately need the federal government at the table 
with us in trying to resolve this issue. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of Accelerated Elevator Closures 
on Saskatchewan Rural Roads 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
be very brief. First of all, I wish to introduce a motion: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 
immediately provide more funding to relieve increased 
pressure on Saskatchewan rural road system due to 
yesterday’s announced accelerated elevator consolidation 
in the grain handling industry. 

 
Farmers in rural communities are facing unprecedented 
challenges due to rapid changes in grain handling and 
transportation and our transportation system. We have seen the 
elimination of the Crow benefit and a decline in federal support 
for agriculture. Farmers have consistently borne the brunt of 
these changes in the federal grain policy. And of course the 
province has consistently borne the brunt of these changes on 
our rural road system. 
 
Rationalization of Saskatchewan’s grain collection system is 
estimated to increase road impact costs by up to $85 million 
annually, Mr. Speaker. Right now those costs are at about 50 
million per year. Increased grain handling . . . or grain trucking 
to high throughput elevators and other changes in the grain 
collection system has caused serious problems in the rural road 
system. 
 
The number of grain delivery points in Saskatchewan has 
declined dramatically in the 1990s. The average haul distance 
increase from farm to elevator has doubled since the early 
1980s. The closure of rail lines and elevators has increased the 
amount of heavy truck traffic causing our road network . . . 
using our road network I should say, by about 860 per cent 
since 1984. By 2005, total grain haul is expected to increase by 
an additional 42 per cent. 
 
(1100) 
 
The federal government continues to underestimate the actual 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

haul and transportation needs being experienced in Western 
Canada, and especially here in Saskatchewan. The federal 
government must respond to our concerns now, Mr. Speaker. 
The federal government, with our input, needs to create a 
long-term program to help fund the road impacts in 
Saskatchewan caused by elevator consolidation because a good 
deal of the change is yet to take place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It has been a long, difficult spring. Today we are asking for 
immediate funding from the federal government, but 
Saskatchewan believes we need more transitional funding. We 
need a sustainable road network, and the federal government 
must help us now. 
 
The cost of the Crow benefit was $320 million per year and it 
was a major shift in federal transportation policy, which 
resulted in huge impacts on our provincial highway system, 
especially the elevator consolidation and rail-line abandonment. 
 
In the last four years the Department of Highways and 
Transportation’s budget has increased by almost 50 per cent. 
The 2000-2001 budget of 250 million is the largest expenditure 
in Saskatchewan’s history. But, Mr. Speaker, obviously that is 
still not enough, given the huge changes in transportation. 
 
Despite that big transportation budget, we simply don’t have 
enough money to fix all of the roads, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan and Alberta . . . Saskatchewan has more I should 
say . . . Saskatchewan has more roads, Mr. Speaker, than 
Alberta and Manitoba combined. And as I said earlier, total 
grain haul onto Saskatchewan roads has seen an increase of 860 
per cent since 1984. 
 
Changes in federal transportation policy have had a far greater 
impact on Saskatchewan than any other western province. Over 
40 per cent of all grains grown in Canada are grown here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan is doing its part. We need the 
federal government to step up to the plate and do their part. I 
want to thank all members for giving me leave to make this 
statement, and I would therefore, Mr. Speaker, move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 
immediately provide more funding to relieve increased 
pressures on Saskatchewan’s rural road system due to 
accelerated consolidation of the grain handling and 
transportation system. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to speak to this motion as seconder, but before I do I 
would ask leave of the House to introduce guests please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 
have two friends that I would like to introduce to you and to this 
Chamber — Rodger Linka, who was very helpful in my 

campaign, and son Dan, who has also helped out in my 
campaign for the election, and have remained steadfast in 
support and help. 
 
I would ask all to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of Accelerated Elevator Closures 
on Saskatchewan Rural Roads 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a 
very important motion for us. There is a tremendous need for 
more funding from the federal government to support our 
highway system, our road system in this province. We know 
that the increased traffic of grain haul is devastating our 
light-surface roads in the province. 
 
I share the frustration of many of the people who have to travel 
those roads time and time again in their vehicles. The difficulty 
that there is in getting by without increased damage to those 
vehicles is really . . . I mean it’s just not right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the big part of the problem is the lack of money 
that the federal government has been putting into this program. 
They take a lot of money out of this province every year in 
taxation for gas, and it does not come back into the province. 
 
We know that we have more roadway than both Manitoba and 
Alberta. We put more per capita into these roads than any . . . 
than the other provinces every year. In the past year we put 
$229 per capita into the road in Saskatchewan, compared with 
$191 in Manitoba and only 189 in the opposition’s beloved 
Alberta. 
 
So per capita, per capita, Mr. Speaker, we are putting far more 
into our roadways already. And if you look at the total budget 
that we’re dealing with, Mr. Speaker, it is almost . . . it is so 
difficult when we are trying to be good stewards of all our 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t hear myself think because of that nattering 
coming from the other side of the road. There’s . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the amount of money that the federal government 
takes out of this province is by far too much compared to the 
amount of money that they’re putting back in to sustain our 
roadways. 
 
We cannot . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, there will be ample 
opportunity for individual hon. members to debate this motion, 
and I would ask that you allow the speakers to be heard. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial highway system, particularly the thin membrane 
system in our province, has been traumatically impacted by the 
shift in grain transportation from rail to roadways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family and friends who are farming have found 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

that they no longer can deliver to their local communities. They 
have to drive miles and miles over this thin membrane highway. 
And especially when those roads are shifting because of frost, 
when they’re just . . . when it’s wet, those roads break down 
incredibly. 
 
We spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on each of those 
roads, trying to get them patched up; it rains, the trucks go over, 
and in no time those roads are destroyed again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Safety becomes an issue and we — doing our utmost to provide 
a good stewardship of this province’s resources — put money 
into repairing those highways; the trucks go over them and they 
are broken up again in short order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the increasing commodity haul, these TMS 
(thin membrane surface) highways cannot be cost effect . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. These side debates are 
interfering with the hon. member’s right to be heard in this Hon. 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the increasing 
commodity haul, some TMS highways cannot be 
cost-effectively maintained as a dust-free surface. In these 
instances the department may have to convert sections of the 
TMS to a gravel surface. 
 
We would prefer to be able to keep the highways in better 
shape, to be able to convert them to a heavier pavement. But 
given all of the demands in this province for our limited 
resources, Mr. Speaker, it is an impossible task. We would like 
to do it; we are unable to because we have education costs, we 
have health care costs that continue to skyrocket. 
 
We have put more money provincially into our Highways and 
Transportation budget than has been put in ever before. We 
have committed to $2.5 billion over 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are reaching that commitment. Mr. Speaker, 
each year we are pumping whatever resources we can into 
maintaining this massive system and in trying to provide good 
access, good transportation possibilities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with the change from rail to road, we are 
unable to do that adequately without funding from the federal 
government. The federal government, as our minister has said, 
took a whole lot of money — $360 million — with the change 
to the Crow benefit. 
 
They take $225 million plus out of the province in taxes for 
gasoline and what do they put back in? Next to nothing — a 
couple of million. That doesn’t help us, Mr. Speaker. We need a 
lot more put into this highway system if we’re going to 
maintain it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department is taking every effort — every 
effort — to minimize the conversions, but expects that we will 
still have to convert up to 400 kilometres by this fall. This is not 
what we would prefer to do. As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we 
would prefer to be able to upgrade these highways. But without 
the support of this nation — we’re a small province, we grow 
most of the grain — without the support of the rest of this 

nation we cannot provide the kind of quality transportation that 
our citizens need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we present this motion because we know that the 
federal government has to get on board; they have to carry their 
share of the load, which they are not now presently doing. Mr. 
Speaker, I am convinced that if they put the proportional share 
into our highways, we would be able to repair those roads. 
 
Now the other thing that’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is safety 
becomes one of the key issues for us. We saw in the accident 
down in the southeast corner of the province how devastating 
that problem can be not to have twinned highways. So together 
with our members opposite we put together a motion to the 
federal government calling for support in twinning those 
highways. That’s helpful. 
 
But it does not — does not — address the problem that we’re 
facing in our rural areas. We need to have the federal 
government support to build those roads up to standard. 
 
And so we make this motion, and I second this motion calling 
on the federal government to put more money — out of the 
money they take from this province — to put more money back 
into maintaining and sustaining our roadways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I second this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under 
ordinary circumstances, I would be prepared to support a 
motion like this. But there’s one small flaw with it, and that is 
that it doesn’t in any respect indicate the provincial 
government’s responsibility at all. 
 
Now the interesting thing about this, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
know by matter of law that highways in this province and all 
the provinces for that matter . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Hon. members will have an 
opportunity to debate. I’d ask members on both sides to kindly 
allow the member speaking to be heard. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reality is that the 
provincial government has the responsibility by law for the 
highway system in this province. That’s true of every province 
in this Confederation. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that the provincial government, 
while it may have financial constraints and wants the support of 
the federal government, needs to take responsibility for the 
decisions it has made in the past. 
 
We have looked at some of the figures for highway funding 
over the past nine years. And I’ve heard many figures quoted 
here today, some of which I won’t even try to dispute — I think 
they’re accurate. But there are some other figures that need to 
be brought to the attention of this House. 
 
Over the last nine years of this government’s role of 
responsibility as the agency responsible for apportioning the 
money on an annual basis, the Highways department has 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

received an average of $199 million. 
 
Now while we talk about a $250 million Highways budget 
currently, the fact of the matter is that that department has been 
dramatically and consistently underfunded by this 
administration. From the time it took power in 1991, the 
Department of Highways budget was gutted, and we have now 
seen the end result of that decision. 
 
The previous administration spent an average, as I understand 
it, of about $219 million per year. That money would be 
considerably greater if you took the inflation factor into 
consideration there. So what we’ve had is a consistent 
underfunding of the budget for the Department of Highways. 
 
In view of the difficulties with the current budget and the 
amount of money necessary to meet the needs of our highways, 
I had a discussion with the deputy minister last fall and asked 
him for his view of what would be required to bring funding for 
highways to an adequate level. His response to me was $400 
million a year. That might allow the department to catch up to 
the requirements of the rural highways system. 
 
We’re not likely to see $400 million a year in highway funding 
from this administration. And I don’t know that we’ll ever hope 
to get that kind of help out of the federal government, especially 
when it was this government’s decision to minimize the budget 
in the first instance. 
 
This particular situation that has developed, while crucial, 
should not come as a surprise to anyone. When you underfund 
the budget for maintenance consistently in many years in a row, 
for many years in a row, you’re going to have the kind of 
failures that we’ve got now. Maintenance was necessary in 
1991, ’92, ’93, ’94, ’95. We’re just now seeing the end results 
of that failure to maintain the roads in those early years of this 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the abandonment of rail lines, the consolidation of 
elevators, the closures that have necessarily come as a result of 
those decisions, are not things that have just happened in the 
last year or two. We’ve been talking about rail line 
abandonment. We’ve known it was coming for at least 10 to 15 
years. We’ve seen it accelerated over the last decade. 
 
And I need to ask this government what in fact it did. What did 
this government do to forestall, to try to dissuade the rail 
companies from abandoning these routes? What did this 
government do? What active role did this government play in 
trying to prevent the abandonment of rail lines? What is their 
record in that regard? 
 
The other thing I want to ask is why did this government not 
know that elevator consolidation would eventually take place? 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is the largest elevator company 
operating in this province and they have had a closer working 
relationship with this government than any other elevator or 
grain handling company. Surely this government ought to have 
known what one of its chief allies and supporters was intending 
to do in terms of elevator abandonment or of closure. 
 
And if they didn’t, they ought to have known. I think that what 
some of this boils down to is mismanagement and neglect on 

the part of this government. It’s a situation that they ought to 
have been aware. And if they weren’t, there’s an element of 
incompetency that has to be levelled against them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard about the reverting of roads back to 
gravel. We’ve talked about that a lot. We’ve heard a lot of 
comments. We’ve seen the angst that has arisen among the 
people whose communities are going to be faced with this. 
 
We’ve been told that this is being done for safety reasons. It’s 
ironic, Mr. Speaker, that safety is being given as the primary 
justification for this move, when 50 years ago thin membrane 
surfaces were being applied to roads across the province for 
exactly the same reason. Gravel was deemed to be unsafe. We 
needed this kind of pavement to provide safe travelling 
environments for the people of this province. 
 
We’ve heard also about the cost per capita that the people of 
Saskatchewan are asked to contribute the roads of this province. 
And I might say that while that figure could be accurate, the 
underlying explanation is always ignored by the government. 
The fact of the matter is we pay more per capita for our roads 
because simply we have more roads but we have fewer people. 
 
And I’d like to ask, who’s going to take the responsibility for 
that fact? Why is it that we have a small population? Why has 
our population not grown beyond the 1 million point in the last 
60 years? Why is that? Does that not coincide with the 50 years 
of NDP socialist philosophy? Has that not played a part in this 
whole discussion? Maybe we owe more money per capita for 
that reason alone. I think that that’s something that needs to be 
considered in these discussions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all we have the government saying that we 
need more money for the highways, but secondarily they’ve 
encouraged the people of rural Saskatchewan to do their own 
highway repairs. I’m just wondering how that jives in terms of 
contradiction and juxtaposition in view of this whole discussion 
here. 
 
Is it in fact the case that if we don’t get more money from the 
federal government we’re going to have to ask the citizens of 
rural Saskatchewan to fix more of their own potholes? I’d like 
to know if that’s going to be the natural outcome of this. 
 
We have a by-election coming up in the extreme southwest, Mr. 
Speaker, in just a few days from now. And believe it or not, 
highways have become the number issue in the Wood River 
constituency. And having driven some of those roads, having 
met some of the people down there, having toured that area 
because of some other business issues that I’ve had to pursue 
personally, I can actually say, Mr. Speaker, that if it wasn’t the 
number one issue, I’d have been very surprised. 
 
Highways in the Wood River constituency have become a 
disaster, and I think that the people of that area are going to 
clearly indicate by the vote outcome who they believe is really 
responsible for highways in this province. 
 
I don’t believe a single person in Wood River will go to the 
polls believing that the highways are in deteriorating shape and 
in serious need of repair because the federal government hasn’t 
contributed their share. I think they are going to place the blame 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

where the blame rightly belongs and that is with this 
government. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, while I will wrap up my comments 
very briefly, I want to indicate that the federal government 
seems almost totally reluctant to participate in this area of need. 
 
I recall when we did a unanimous resolution asking for 
twinning funds for the No. 1 Highway East and West, and for 
the No. 16 Highway, we worked jointly in this House; we 
passed the resolution unanimously. 
 
We sent a letter to the Minister of Transportation, federally, and 
it took him a considerable amount of time to respond, and when 
he did, he was less than forthcoming. He talked about the 
amount of money that the federal government spends on 
infrastructure and what their projected expenditures will be in 
the next several years. But in reality, the federal government 
doesn’t anticipate spending any money of any serious nature on 
infrastructure until the year 2003. And when they do, out of the 
$550 million they are proposing for projects all across the 
country, only 150 million will go for strategic highway 
infrastructure. 
 
I assume that $150 million will have to be apportioned out, 
based on population statistics, and that’s going to leave 
Saskatchewan with very little money to do anything in terms of 
highway infrastructure. 
 
Just recently the minister responsible for the Wheat Board, the 
Hon. Ralph Goodale, spoke with some conviction about the 
government recognizing the need for highway funding in 
Saskatchewan. And yet when push came to shove and we got a 
little money out of the federal government for transportation 
issues, it boiled down to $105 million roughly for the province 
of Saskatchewan over five years — an average of $21 million a 
year for five years. 
 
Now, what’s ironic about that is that isn’t money over and 
above the CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure 
Program) program that had been in existence; it’s money that 
will replace the CAIP program and is totally inadequate to 
accomplish anything. 
 
As I understand it, $21 million would probably only build us 
about 42 kilometres of good highway. And when you spread 42 
kilometres of decent highway throughout the province, it’s next 
to nothing at all. 
 
So the federal government doesn’t seem in the least concerned 
about our needs out here. And maybe the reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they don’t see the provincial government as 
taking their responsibility in this area seriously at all. I think 
that the federal government might be much more inclined to 
participate if they saw this government take this issue and run 
with it, work with it, and employ the resources that they’ve got 
specifically to the needs of these highways in the rural area. 
 
What they have seen is the Department of Highways spend 
money in many other areas — not on the roads itself. And I 
think that’s part of the reason why the federal government is so 
reticent to get involved in this financing issue. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we in this province generate $347 million plus a 
little in fuel taxes alone. We generate another $112 million in 
motor vehicle fees. That gives us a total of $460 million. The 
Highways budget as a whole is 250 million, but when you break 
out the actual highway maintenance and highway construction 
portion of that budget, it’s $170.8 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we generate $460 million in revenue and 
only spend $170 million of our own money on highways, how 
seriously are we taking the problem? What is the extent of our 
concern here? Percentage-wise it’s not very high — 36 per cent 
of our own revenue goes into that area of highway maintenance 
and repair. 
 
And I think the federal government can look at that and can say 
with some legitimacy that we’re not doing our own province 
any great turn by underfunding it, why should they participate? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion as read. I 
would like to move an amendment to the motion which reads as 
follows; following the last word of the amendment I would like 
to add the words: 
 

but recognizes as well that the provincial government is 
responsible for the state of Saskatchewan’s highways. 

 
This motion is moved by myself, and seconded by the member 
from Cannington . . . amendment. I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have to agree with the amendment as put forward by the 
member from Cypress. Because I do believe, Mr. Speaker, as 
do all of the people in Saskatchewan, that highways are the 
responsibility of this provincial government. 
 
Now we have seen a long history of this government trying to 
abdicate their responsibilities. They simply refuse to ever accept 
responsibility for any of their actions. That has been one of the 
hallmarks of this government for the last nine years. 
 
What we see here today with the motion as presented by the 
Minister of Highways is simply a crass attempt to save a little 
bit of face in the Wood River by-election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If they were listening to the CBC reports this morning, they 
would certainly have felt the mood of the people of the Wood 
River constituency. And that mood, Mr. Speaker, is echoed 
across this province — that the NDP government, aided and 
abetted by the Liberals under Mr. Melenchuk, are responsible 
for every . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member would recognize that 
proper names are not to be used. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for 
that. The Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, aids and abets 
this government . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I apologize to the member for 
interrupting his flow of thought. It might be difficult to get 
back. But seriously I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no I’m sure 
it isn’t, I was being facetious. 
 
I would like all members to join with me in welcoming Phil 
Entz one of the Mennonite Brethren who is good enough to join 
with us today from the Abbey colony. I’m sure that Phil will 
find the debate going on in agriculture of interest, because of 
course being a large grain producer in that part of the province, 
using the roads of the province and the highways is an 
important part of doing business. 
 
So welcome here today, Phil. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of Accelerated Elevator Closures 
on Saskatchewan Rural Roads 

(continued) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the thought I had was not difficult to keep track of because it’s 
the same thought everybody in Saskatchewan who drives the 
highways has — that this government is failing, Mr. Speaker, in 
their responsibility to maintain an adequate and safe highway 
system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government, as I have said, is 
abdicating its responsibility to maintain the roads and highways 
of this province. They have even, Mr. Speaker, reduced the 
amount of money that they’ve put into construction from last 
year’s budget. They’ve reduced it down to $61 million, Mr. 
Speaker, for construction. 
 
They’re calling on the federal government, Mr. Speaker, to put 
more money in. The federal government just announced last 
week that they’re putting $60 million into construction of roads 
and highways around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re matching the amount of money that this 
government is putting into place for highway construction, and 
yet you look at the taxes that are collected. This government, in 
fuel taxes, collects $347 million. In licensing fees on vehicles 
— not insurance, Mr. Speaker, licence fees only — they are 
collecting $112 million, for a total, Mr. Speaker, of almost $460 
million. 
 
How much do they put back that actually reaches the road: $61 
million in construction and another $120 million, Mr. Speaker 
— I believe it’s 120 — in maintenance; 109 my colleague says, 
$109 million in maintenance. Mr. Speaker, that amounts to 37 
per cent of the money they collect from drivers in this province 
that should go to road maintenance. 
 
The federal government in turn, Mr. Speaker, collects about 
$240 million, again a significant amount of money. But they 
have responsibility, Mr. Speaker, not just for highways. They 
have responsibility for the entire transportation system. 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is money coming from 
the federal government, but the majority of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, should be coming from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have here a coalition government, a coalition 
government of NDP and Liberals. I have no idea why the 
Premier simply can’t turn to his colleague, the Minister of 
Education, and say, Mr. Minister of Education, can’t you phone 
up your buddies in Ottawa, tell Jean Chrétien, Ralph Goodale, 
who’s supposed to be the minister responsible for Saskatchewan, 
and do something about this? Get some of that tax money. 
 
The Minister of Education is always bragging about how 
successful he is in influencing this government. Does he have no 
influence then with the federal government? Do they simply 
ignore him? Does Ralph Goodale even know what his name is? 
Obviously not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite brags all the time about 
how much money they’re actually putting into highways. Well 
even, Mr. Speaker, if you include all of their massive 
bureaucracy in the highway spending, it’s still only amounts to 
54 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 54 per cent of the dollars they collect. 
 
Now the Minister of Highways stood up today and said, oh my 
gosh, they’re accelerating the closure of elevators. That should 
be no surprise, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
announced it a year ago. But I guess with the current 
government’s methods of communications, their disregard for 
our transportation system, our communication system, it may 
have taken a year for that information to actually reach the 
Minister of Highways. 
 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool announced its list of 
closures of elevators. That was the only change, Mr. Speaker. 
We knew it was coming it was just a matter of which particular 
elevator it was going to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it extremely surprising that the members 
opposite who have a very close relationship with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, you might say, Mr. Speaker, that 
they work hand in glove, would not have had this information 
prior to the announcement yesterday. 
 
But perhaps they didn’t. Perhaps that relationship is no longer 
as close as it once was. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply a 
matter that the government opposite really doesn’t care what 
happens in rural Saskatchewan. Because that certainly seems to 
be the direction that they have been going. 
 
The member from Regina Northwest, I believe it is . . . Regina 
Qu’Appelle, the farmer from downtown Regina, talked about 
the per capita costs of highway construction in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, the amount of highways in this province hasn’t 
changed in likely 30 or 40 years. The number of people in this 
province certainly hasn’t changed in the last 60-some years. In 
fact it is reduced by 1,600 people last year. So the per capita 
costs for highways hasn’t changed. 
 
The governments in previous years, Mr. Speaker, all faced — 
all faced — those kind of costs. The difference is though, Mr. 
Speaker, is the priorities of this current government, which is 
not to fix highways and the acceptance, Mr. Speaker, of the 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

responsibilities of government. This government does not 
accept responsibility for any — any — of its actions. Doesn’t 
accept responsibility for highways, doesn’t accept responsibility 
for health care, doesn’t accept responsibility for taxation levels, 
doesn’t accept responsibility for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government likes to use the terms for itself of 
— NDP. Mr. Speaker, in reality today in Saskatchewan, that 
means no darn pavement. That’s what it means. No pavement in 
Saskatchewan. That’s the direction that they are going, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment put forward 
by my colleague. 
 
Do the federal government hold any responsibility in this, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, they certainly collect lots of taxes from our 
drivers for using the roads, and they do bear some 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. They do, indeed, and it’s their 
responsibility to put the money in. 
 
However, it’s the responsibility of the provincial government to 
do likewise, and they have been failing miserably, Mr. Speaker, 
in meeting their commitments to the highway structures. 
 
Two hundred and nineteen million . . . no, $199 million is the 
nine-year average for this government putting money into 
highways, $199 million. The previous administration, Mr. 
Speaker, averaged $219 million and that’s not even taking into 
account inflation in the last ten years. So you can see in 
comparison, Mr. Speaker, that this government is failing in their 
responsibility. It’s a matter of priorities. 
 
Today this motion has been brought forward, not, Mr. Speaker, 
I repeat, not to help the highways in Saskatchewan, but to help 
their failing campaign in the Wood River constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment as put forward 
by my colleague. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take a few minutes to enter into this debate on a very 
important issue in my constituency, the constituency of 
Canora-Pelly, and in fact in that entire east-central side of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that transportation of products and 
transportation of grains especially from farm families is going 
to be very, very important as we move through changes in not 
only Saskatchewan, but right across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the announcements yesterday by Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, as indicated by my colleague, should not be a 
surprise. We knew that there were 260 approximate closures 
that were going to take place and they were going to take place 
over a period of time. 
 
The part that has come as a shock to many communities who 
have continued to lobby over the last number of months to try 
to impress upon Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that there should 
still be a type of service provided to many communities went 

unnoticed yesterday. 
 
And in fact the announcements of the actual places where these 
elevators will close — and they will be closing in the months of 
November and December — came as a great surprise to many 
of those communities and those individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker. we on this side of the House strongly, strongly — 
I say that very emphatically, Mr. Speaker — suggest that there 
must be a collective, co-operative approach to transportation in 
this country and in this province. And we look at what farmers 
have been saying over the last little while and what companies, 
grain companies like Saskatchewan Wheat Pool have been 
saying and what they’re doing, and we know that we have to 
restructure. 
 
Because I want to inform the House, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
constituency of Canora-Pelly there were, prior to about three or 
four years ago, there were 16 communities that had 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevators in them — 16, Mr. 
Speaker. Over the last few years the communities of Rama, 
Mikado, Sheho, Insinger, Amsterdam, Stenen, and Gorlitz have 
had their Pool elevators closed, and they are either sitting 
vacant right now or in fact they have been destroyed and buried. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
announced that further closures will take place in the 
communities of Hyas, Pelly, Sturgis, Preeceville, Theodore, 
Buchanan, and Invermay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know that that now brings to a total of 14 
communities that will no longer be served by Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool elevator? 
 
What’s left in the Canora-Pelly constituency? Two communities 
being served by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, that being the 
community of Canora and the community of Foam Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s announcement is going to be a shock 
to many because now all of that grain, that every one of these 
communities that I identified, that was being handled at a local 
level with a short distance of transportation, now has to be put 
on larger trucks and it has to hit the pavement, Mr. Speaker. 
And I don’t say that figuratively. Every one of these trucks now 
has to travel larger distances to go to one of the other centres 
that has an operating elevator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has not been a lot of competition in this 
constituency from many of the other grain companies like 
Pioneer or UGG (United Grain Growers) or Cargill or Parrish & 
Heimbecker — they’re not present. So the farmers really don’t 
have a choice — they have to put their grain on the vehicles and 
start moving them. 
 
So it’s very, very important, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation . . . And I say 
transportation because we have a good railway system in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency. It serves the entire constituency 
right now. And if we look at what has happened yesterday and 
if we don’t take action — and I say, collectively, we, meaning 
the provincial government, the federal government, and local 
municipalities — if we don’t take action now to ensure that 
there will be a railway system that can be used by other grain 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

companies, by farmers who might ship their grain through 
producer car systems, these kinds of changes need to be looked 
at now. Because you know, Mr. Speaker, full well that if a rail 
line is ripped up, the chances of that rail line being put back 
four or five years later is probably nil. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, this motion is very, very 
important. It is important to indicate to the provincial 
government and to the federal government that they do have a 
responsibility, that there are communities and individuals that 
are looking at this. And these are not just rural communities, 
Mr. Speaker. Urban communities, urban communities like 
Yorkton and Melville that are served by farmers, need to know 
that indeed there is a transportation system that meets the needs 
of everyone not just the agricultural producers. 
 
And my colleagues have spoken quite adequately on the 
condition of highways, Mr. Speaker. But I want to emphasize to 
the Minister of Transportation that there is a need to broaden 
that. There’s a need to look at the entire transportation system 
in this province, to look at it quickly, because these closures are 
effective November or December of this year, Mr. Speaker. 
They have been accelerated. 
 
So we need to look at that because the communities that will 
lose these elevators also know that they will lose other 
businesses as the grain is transported to other areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment because I 
think it addresses that whole need to look at it from a provincial 
point of view, for the province to take responsibility for 
highways and transportation in this entire province. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:44 a.m. until 11:54 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 

Elhard Heppner Krawetz 
Draude Boyd Gantefoer 
Toth Eagles Wall 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
McMorris Weekes Brkich 
Harpauer Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 
 

Nays — 28 
 

Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   

The division bells rang from 11:56 a.m. until 11:57 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 50 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley Elhard Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Stewart Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Deputy Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit the copies in verbatim of transcripts of the rule 46 
motion and debate with respect to the increased pressure 
on Saskatchewan rural road systems due to the accelerated 
consolidation of the grain handling and transportation, to 
the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal minister of 
Highways and Transport, and the federal minister 
responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are extremely happy to table the 
response to question no. 197. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple answer so the members opposite 
can understand it. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 197 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

Bill No. 1 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Seated to my right, Susie Miller, 
the assistant deputy minister, who is acting . . . no, not acting, 
assistant deputy minister; and seated to her right is our acting 
director of agriculture research — and I always have trouble 
pronouncing — Mr. Grajczyk; and seated to my left Merv Ross, 
inspection and regulatory management. 
 
Clause 1 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
you and to your officials. With respect to The Farm Financial 
Stability Act, I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what implications 
or what kind of impact do you think this piece of legislation 
will have on the stability of the farm community in 
Saskatchewan these days. 
 
Obviously there are farms that are under a great deal of 
financial stress right now. They’re going through a period of 
time where there is very, very low commodity prices. I certainly 
recognize that this will have an impact and have a — we all 
hope — a positive impact. 
 
Have you any way of gauging what kind of impact it will have 
on farm producers in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could, I would quote from a 
note here I have from the department which basically says: 
 

The amendments to the Act are required to strengthen the 
procedures where the associations are winding down. 

 
That’s one element. Or where a guarantee has been paid. 
 
So in essence by strengthening the procedures, the risk to the 
association, the lender and the government will be reduced. 
 
So the amendments will also facilitate the joint purchase of 
commodities, a common business practice in the custom 
operating of feeding and . . . in the feedlot operations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m sure 
your office is getting calls, and certainly our office is getting 
calls as well, with respect to the situation in agriculture. 
 
I was over to the Farm Progress Show and I’m going over again 
later this afternoon, and I think you’ve had opportunity to attend 
the show as well. And there are many farmers, obviously, in 
looking at the latest innovations and the latest equipment but 
they are also certainly troubled about the situation in 
agriculture. And it’s — as you and I both know — it’s a kind of 
a double-edged sword. On one hand, we recognize that there is 
a limited amount that governments of all type can address and 
help in agriculture. On the other hand, they really see no other 
way to turn. They are doing everything. 
 
And you go to the Farm Progress Show over there, and you’ll 
see very clearly a lot of the latest technology and a lot of the 
innovations. And a lot of the sort of direction that agriculture is 

going is to move in the direction of trying to plant a whole new 
range of crops, trying to diversify into speciality crops, trying to 
diversify into various livestock opportunities. I believe that our 
producers are doing the absolute most and best they possibly 
can to help their own situation along. 
 
But I wonder if you might, as Minister of Agriculture, care to 
comment on what kind of timeframes your department feels 
we’ll be looking at in terms of this continued down cycle. Are 
there any opportunities in terms of price escalation as we move 
through the summer months? 
 
I follow the commodities market as many other . . . as all other 
farmers do very closely. We are not seeing much of changes in 
prices these days. The drought situation in the United States, 
which was predicted earlier on, really isn’t materializing. A lot 
of the Midwest is receiving adequate rainfall. And as a result of 
that, corn prices and soybean prices really haven’t moved all 
that much — a little bit; not much. 
 
There’s still some potential for a run-up but it appears to be 
diminishing almost daily. So that means we are going to be . . . 
we will continue to be in this low commodity price cycle for it 
appears some time. 
 
And I wonder what your department’s analysis of that is? Is that 
accurate? Are we looking and will continue to look for low 
commodity prices for some time, or is there any optimism in 
terms of price escalation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the member from Kindersley 
has fairly described the situation in the grains and oil seeds. 
And I think we really have to remember there are a number of 
different components to the agricultural scene in Saskatchewan 
which dictate whether or not our farm families are making a 
decent living. 
 
If you look at cattle for example, those who grow . . . I think, at 
the present time our cow herd is about 1.1 million. Those 
people who are well established in cattle are actually having a 
very, very excellent year; not only are the prices strong but the 
grass conditions in the spring were excellent for calving. So the 
cattle producers are doing as well or better than normal. 
 
Hog prices have gone up very dramatically from some of their 
low prices, although they’ve come off a little bit in the last few 
weeks. But the hog producers are doing well, those who are 
established. 
 
Now within any of these components of course, in cattle and 
hogs, even though the prices are stable, you would find some 
producers who struggle, as you would understand is always the 
case. 
 
But in the general area of livestock, even in some of the new, 
more, let’s say, exotic areas of elk and bison, the whole area of 
deer, they seem to be doing extremely well. And this weekend 
we’re going to be going to Weyburn where the bison 
association is having an event, and I expect there to be lot of 
optimism in that particular sector. 
 
If you go to northern Saskatchewan wild rice, our wild rice 
producers have moved very dramatically into organic. And 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

simply by labelling their product, which is obviously organic 
but it just hadn’t been used as a sales mechanism, by labelling 
all of the wild rice from northern Saskatchewan as organic, they 
are getting some nice premiums as they sell it into other parts of 
Canada and the United States. 
 
But if you go to the grains and oilseeds which is what your 
question is about, you are absolutely right there is a continuing 
issue of prices and support in other countries. 
 
And far from removal of subsidies, I was seeing some reports 
on subsidy in the United States, and when you and I were 
Ottawa last fall we were using the number of 56 cents in a 
dollar in the US (United States), that has gone up by 2 points to 
58 cents on a dollar . . . no it’s gone from 36 to 38. But in 
Europe the increase has been even more dramatic. 
 
Now our subsidies have also gone up in Canada, from 9 per 
cent to 11, but the issue of subsidies is not going away and 
continues. 
 
Now in terms of the commodity market in Chicago which sets 
the price for a lot of the world grains and oilseeds, I think 
you’re right again where there was an expected drought. 
 
In fact today, if you look at much of the Midwest, you’ll find 
that what is driving the market, vibrating up a tiny bit, is 
actually too much rain where some of the diseases are now 
settling in to the corn — and mildew and that kind of thing — 
which almost 180 degrees, where it was a big concern of 
drought and now it’s too much moisture in several of the areas. 
 
And this has also affected bean prices which were expected to 
stay well above $5 — in the 5.50 to $6 — and they have 
dropped off and I think some of the futures are now below $5 
and are trading around 4.85. The people who trade in 
commodities, and I keep in close contact with them, expect 
bean prices in the States, which then influences canola, to drop 
to probably around 450 during harvest time. 
 
But there is also a growing group of traders who are saying it 
will bottom out in October or November, and there is the 
potential of some pretty significant increases as you end the 
year and go into next year. But to put any faith in those kind of 
long-term, turnaround predictions is a very, very difficult way 
for farmers to make decisions. 
 
So to make a long story short on the commodity prices, I think 
there is some ray of hope but there is nothing on the immediate 
horizon that would say the need for subsidies will go away 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that underscores 
the need for some degree of government intervention. As you 
know, I’m not a very strong proponent of intervention into the 
economy, certainly by government’s of any stripe, but we have 
a situations . . . and I’m speaking not only to you, but the larger 
question and larger audience, I suppose, when we say from this 
side of the House we certainly have concerns in that area. 
 
We feel we would like to see the marketplace work as much as 
possible. But when the marketplace is so influenced by forces 
that are not related to the marketplace, government intervention 

from not just the United States but the European common 
market and other countries as well, it distorts it to the point 
where commodity prices have virtually collapsed in many areas 
and many commodity areas. 
 
And at that point, you know, you have to start questioning, I 
suppose, whether or not government has a role to play. And I 
have, and you know I think we all wrestle with this question; 
how much is appropriate, where is the right balance and those 
kinds of things? 
 
I know the Premier has made statements earlier in this whole ag 
debate over the last number of months that he felt the 
appropriate level was a level similar to or meeting with the 
expectations in other countries like the United States. 
 
And I’m wondering from your department if you could outline 
for us what kind of intervention that would be. I think you 
would find, Mr. Minister, that we’re not talking about tens of 
millions, we’re not perhaps even talking about hundreds of 
millions. We’re into very, very large numbers very fast. 
 
And that, I think, is the kind of demonstrable differences and 
hurt that there is in Canadian agriculture as opposed to the 
American agriculture situation, or even more on the 
international scene with the ECC.  
 
So we certainly are at a huge disadvantage. We understand that 
there are limits and that there is a certain amount of taxpayer 
resistance to continued putting money into agriculture. 
 
On the other hand, if you look at it . . . if there were any other 
area that we were so impacted on, governments would be 
acting. No question about it in my mind. 
 
For example, if the automobile industry in Ontario was affected 
in this fashion, I think you would see Ottawa acting, and I think 
you would see Ottawa acting extremely decisively and quickly. 
 
If you saw the American automobile industry, as an example, 
deciding that they were going to corner . . . or they were going 
to try and gain more market share on the international scene, 
they decided to subsidize their automobile manufacturers to the 
tune of 40 per cent and put our producers of automobiles at a 
disadvantage of about 40 per cent, how quickly would that 
industry dry up? Or how quickly, more appropriately, would 
governments act in that regard? And I think you would see that 
they’d be acting very, very quickly. 
 
But when it comes to agriculture unfortunately, and as a 
producer I think we all share some responsibility in this area, 
it’s been an ongoing, continued problem for a long, long time 
— for years and years and years. And we understand and I 
understand that people grow weary of this debate that we 
continue to have and how we do . . . how we continue down that 
road. 
 
And I know members on your side of the House, and I’ve had 
lots of opportunity to speak to them — and this is not meant as 
any kind of a slam against them — I think that there is 
resistance. And there is a resistance on this side of the House at 
times as well. There’s certainly resistance in the communities 
that we represent all across Saskatchewan. 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

I think we have to do a better job collectively, all of us — this 
side of the House, your side of the House — of explaining this 
situation, to try and gain some sort of support for the plight that 
farmers are faced with. 
 
And frankly, I think that when we have situations where 
assistance comes forward, I think we can do better in terms of 
communicating how that assistance is arrived at or why it’s 
being put forward and all of those kinds of things. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when we look at The Farm Financial Stability 
Act here, I think this is an area where we can put forward our 
best foot in terms of pointing out the differences, pointing out 
the significant disadvantage that producers are faced with here 
in Saskatchewan and in indeed all of Canada when it comes to 
agriculture. And I would appeal to you, and you can count on 
members on this side of the House being prepared to assist in 
those efforts. 
 
We think that the industry is worth working with. We think the 
industry is worth attempting to intervene to a point, and a point 
that is necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, at this point, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair, we 
would conclude our questions with respect to this piece of 
legislation. 
 
The Chair: — Oh, committee members, and Minister, I 
apologize that . . . there’s a House amendment to clause 1. And 
before I call clause 1, I have to recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture to introduce the amendment to the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, it’s my understanding that in 
the short title of the Act, rather than being cited as The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999, the amendment 
would read, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
And I would so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d also 
like to welcome your officials, incidentally, and thank them for 
attending today. 
 
I understand that this animal identification referred to will be 
accomplished by the use of conventional large, plastic ear tags. 
Do you know if that’s true, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think you’re referring to the 
national identification program, which really has nothing to do 

with . . . it’s not related to this Bill. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well that really answers my question. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, if I could, I would 
move the amendment to clause 1, just while we’re on clause 1. 
 
And it’s the same as in the previous Bill — and I apologize for 
this — but rather than the title being The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999, I would make a motion that we amend 
that to be Animal Identification Act Amendment, 2000. I so 
move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we’ve been 
hearing from some folks in the livestock industry, not 
necessarily the representatives of the industry, but people, 
producers within the industry, some degree of resistance or 
hesitancy with respect to this tagging program. 
 
Have you been receiving concerns and complaints with respect 
to this? And what is the . . . Could you explain to the Assembly 
the nature of their concerns and how your department intends to 
handle the concerns that they may have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think there — and I don’t say this 
in any negative way — but I think there’s some confusion about 
this Bill. 
 
We have had no concerns about changes to this Bill from either 
organizations or producers. I think what the concern is, under 
the national identification program, that there are concerns 
about some of the potentials within the national identification 
program. 
 
But under this Bill, the changes that are being made here are not 
related to that. And I think this is, because of the title of the 
Bill, I think there’s an assumption that this has something to do 
with the national identification program, and I assure the 
members of the committee that it doesn’t. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill 24 — The Department of Agriculture 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, just . . . I believe just one short 
question with respect to this piece of legislation. In section 7.1, 
which is a new section under this Act, it states that, in part (a), 
that: 
 

. . . the minister may, on behalf of the Government . . . 
acquire, by purchase or otherwise, personal property, 
including securities. 
 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

What does that mean? What exactly is meant with the word 
“otherwise”? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the example that best would 
explain why this section is needed is, from time to time through 
department and department agencies, we may get involved in 
research and development. Let’s use the example at Innovation 
Place where we use taxpayers’ dollars to be working within a 
patent right or in terms of the research and development, and 
then that goes on to be patented and there actually becomes a 
profit stream. It allows for the ability, not necessarily, but the 
ability for a revenue stream to come back to the taxpayers as a 
result of money that would have been put in at the front-end, in 
terms of research and development. 
 
And I might say, it’s a relatively common way that 
governments are now trying to get some return on the 
investment that’s made within research and development. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. So we can 
be assured then, that by purchase or otherwise, doesn’t mean 
expropriation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that that 
will not be the issue, that there is no attempt or means within 
the legislation for us to want to, or even conceive of that kind of 
an option. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
move the committee report the Bill without amendment; and if I 
could by leave, to ask the committee to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — I’ll conduct the vote first. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1230) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, with 
us today, a group of Mennonite brethren from Elma, Manitoba 
who are here to take in Farm Progress. And I think it’s an 
example of how Farm Progress and the people who have 
managed this operation for 23 years, have come together from 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, to put on a world-class 
agricultural show and I just urge anyone who hasn’t had a 
chance to go there to go out and look around. 
 
But seated in the Speaker’s gallery and I just ask them to stand 
when they’re introduced; Sharon Giesbrecht, Shauna 
Giesbrecht, Cynthia Giesbrecht, Johanna Giesbrecht, Matthew 
Giesbrecht, Donelda Goohsen, Raquell Goohsen, Kendall 
Goohsen, and Vincent Penner. 
 
And I would like all members present to join with me in 
welcoming our friends from Manitoba here today, and I’m sure 

that they will enjoy their stay in Regina and in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We have a few 
questions that we might want to ask on this Bill, Mr. Chair. 
 
But I would also beg the indulgence of the Assembly to 
welcome the guests in the . . . with leave of the Assembly as 
well, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On behalf of the official 
opposition, we too would want to welcome our visitors from 
Manitoba to Regina and certainly to the province. The Farm 
Progress Show attracts people from indeed around the world 
and all the Prairie provinces. 
 
I’m sure that the members of the colony will be very interested 
in the innovations that there are at the Farm Progress Show. I 
hope you have had a good trip to Regina, and a good stay, and 
we would wish you a safe journey home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, with respect 
to this piece of legislation of dealing with the sale of, and the 
proceeds from collection of the levy that is being placed on the 
sale of cattle, livestock, certainly we feel on this side of the 
Assembly that it’s important that producers have a role in the 
research and development in their industry. 
 
We do see from time to time, though, there is some degree of 
resistance in terms of how far that goes. I, as a producer, not a 
livestock producer but many of our members are, I think it’s 
generally felt that producers do have a responsibility to help and 
assist in terms of levies for research and development within 
their industry. 
 
But I think they also feel that the general taxpayer benefits from 
the industry as well, and that there was a responsibility in that 
area. And I know that there’s a balance there and I think no 
one’s . . . we’re not suggesting that there is an improper balance 
here. What we are suggesting is, is that we have to continue to 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

ensure that that balance is maintained; that producers don’t bear 
an unreasonable share of the responsibility in terms of research 
and development into the future. 
 
Certainly in the cattle industry we recognize and understand 
that government can only go up to the line, shall we say, and 
not wanting to cross the line and find themselves in a position 
of trade retaliation particularly from our neighbours to the south 
when it comes to assisting in their industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that basically outlines our thoughts in that 
whole area and we want to be very much on the record of 
supporting the fact that there needs to be research and 
development into the industry, and that producers have a role in 
that assistance type of program. 
 
But we also want to be on the record of saying that we believe 
that the taxpayers in general have a role to play as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, at this time I think that would conclude the 
areas of concern in this piece of legislation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — First of all, I’d like to thank my 
officials and members of the opposition, and move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just before 
your officials leave I would want to, on behalf of the opposition 
I want to thank them for their assistance and thank the 
department for a very good job — an ongoing job that they’ve 
been doing for agriculture in this province — and thank the 
Minister of Agriculture for his answers. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll recognize the hon. 
minister responsible to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left 
is Micheal McDougall, general counsel; and to my right is Bill 
Vavra, senior technician, irrigation administration. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I want to welcome the minister 
here and his officials. I just have a few questions on this Bill. 
 
I’d like to ask about, I believe it’s section 78. We’ve had some 
concerns brought to us that this section could prevent 
individuals bringing lawsuits against Sask Water or divisions of 
Sask Water such as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). Could you clarify that, if that’s true or 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the short answer to your question 
is no. This section applies only to irrigation. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does that mean that 
for the irrigation end, no lawsuits can brought forth if . . . let’s 
say if a pipe leaks and the soil is deteriorating, maybe being 
turned into alkali. Does that mean then an irrigator can’t bring a 
law suit against Sask Water if he believes that Sask Water 
initially is doing damage to his land or crops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If at any time it’s shown that Sask 
Water or the corporation has been negligent they absolutely 
have the right to sue. The intent of this legislation though is as 
follows: is that once the soil has been tested and approved for 
irrigation and a certificate has been issued, unless it’s shown 
that as I said that Sask Water has proven to be negligent in 
granting that certificate, then there’s not an ability to sue. But 
this is not unlike any other pieces of legislation with respect to 
liability. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that’s some 
assurance given to the people out there because they always 
want some protection, not that anybody’s looking to sue 
unnecessarily, it’s just if damage is done and caused by Sask 
Water they would like an avenue to recourse to get some money 
or have the problem rectified. 
 
In section 24 it states: 
 

“Where the Corporation establishes the irrigation district 
pursuant to section 6.1, the Corporation shall name the 
initial members of the district board”. 

 
My question to the minister is, why should a new water district 
give the control of the initial membership to the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The intent of this amendment is that — 
working with the province and the community — is to create or 
establish a transition board so that the irrigation works can 
actually get up and function until such time as a duly elected 
board can then operate the district. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give a time 
frame how that would work? And would you be consulting with 
people in the area how they can get on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Absolutely. Consultation would take 
place with the communities, as does occur now. In terms of 
time frame, it would be impossible to put a time frame on that. 
It would largely be up to the communities as to how long it 
would take. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On that end of it, I 
just hope it would be very quickly because usually people in the 
irrigation area would like to take control or have the board of 
that. 
 
On section 29, another section there, I think it deals with a little 
bit on future water district . . . I believe it deals with liability. It 
seems like the water district would assume . . . it seems like 
would assume 100 per cent the liability if there was any damage 
done basically of the water quality, which the district doesn’t 
have any control of I don’t believe. 
 
Could you clarify that a bit more? 
 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I just wanted to say to the 
member that there are already 18 districts currently that 
function under this structure, and they have no problem at all. 
 
But clearly the intent as well is that the districts will be 
resuming responsibility for water quality. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’m just looking . . . I believe it reads, “accepts 
sole responsibility for the quality of the water supplied for 
irrigation services.” How about if the water . . . like say the 
water, they really don’t have control over the quality of water 
though. Coming maybe out of a lake, the quality could change 
maybe due to something that Sask Water has done —maybe 
building a dam, bringing another channel in — it could affect 
the quality of water. 
 
Why should the district assume a hundred per cent 
responsibility? Would you be looking at taking some 
responsibility, especially if the body of water that it was being 
irrigated from, if there was more water being moved into it 
from another area that might affect the quality of that certain 
body of water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, the same way as the 
province would be responsible if it was shown to be negligent, 
the district board as well — in the circumstances, the scenario 
that you describe — they too would not be liable unless it was 
clearly shown that they’d been negligent or derelict in their 
duties. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more 
comment and maybe a quick question on this Bill. 
 
I know that you had consulted with some irrigation 
associations. And they, when I talked to them, said that they 
were fairly happy with some of the amendments you brought in. 
One of the things though they had mentioned to you was they 
would like to see in the future a mediation process maybe 
brought in — an independent mediation process because there 
is, over the province, different disputes with Sask Water — 
maybe not at the high irrigation level but at lower levels and 
possibly with some district boards. 
 
I think they conveyed that to you and I will maybe mention that 
again, that they would like an independent mediation, maybe 
board, that look at problems if there is problems between Sask 
Water and an irrigation board, that there would be an 
independent board that could look at that problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the member makes a fair point 
and we recognize the concern. What we’re doing right now is to 
work with SIPA (Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects Association) 
to see what sort of a mechanism or resolution we can find to 
their concern and hopefully that will address the issue that you 
raise. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I believe on this 
Bill I don’t have any more questions. I want to thank the 
officials and thank the minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just before I do 
that I want to thank the hon. member for the questions and I 
want to thank my officials for their assistance here today as 
well. Mr. Chair, I would therefore move we report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1  The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Animal Identification 
Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the 
amendments now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move the Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Department of Agriculture 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
24 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
42 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the hon. 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water Corporation to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
immediately to my left is our president, Clare Kirkland; to my 
left and just behind Clare is Dave Schiman, manager of 
financial services; seated directly behind me is Wayne Phillips, 
vice president of utility and engineering operations; and seated 
immediately to my right is Wayne Dybvig, vice president, water 
resource and infrastructure management. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to address a 
few questions. First I’d like to welcome the minister and his 
officials here today. 
 
I’d like to talk about . . . ask questions about the pipelines around 
the Lucky Lake, Riverhurst area. There’s been complaints about 
leakage on them. That the early breakdown of the metal of the 
pipe not lasting as long as they were guaranteed to. 
 
Who is going to be responsible for replacing the pipes and also for 
the damage that’s done to the water that’s been leaking from 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. Before I answer that 
question, I’ll just have a page take this over to you. These are 
the questions that you asked the last time we appeared in 
Committee of Finance and they’re there for you. 
 
With respect to the leakage that you refer to, we’re currently 
investigating each situation. We’ve been fixing them and 
repairing them as they occur. 
 
And we’re doing some engineering studies right now to 
determine why there are problems, why the problems are 
occurring. And once we’ve determined that, I think then that 
would determine who is liable for the breakdown. But until we 
determine that, it would be a bit difficult for me to answer the 
question. 
 
(1300) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I’ll just read you one little piece 
here. Like, the farmers who draw irrigation from the pipelines, 
they pay into a fund for operating costs and repairs and eventual 
replacement. They’re just worried that they want no part of 
paying for problems arising from the line’s construction. I’ll 
just make that statement and hope you’ll take that in note. If 
there is a problem with constructionally . . . if it shows that 

there is a problem with construction. 
 
Another concern that has been brought to us is about supply 
camp channels that run across people’s land. I believe you’re 
trying to sign agreements with them. And there was one 
particular one, there was kind of a . . . I think it was signed six 
years ago. Before that you used to pay crop damage every year 
and you decided to pay a lump sum. You’ve been, I believe, 
kind of pushing towards that with all the producers that canals 
run through their land, which most of them have signed on. 
 
They signed the agreement, but the agreement states that Sask 
Water is to keep water at a minimum level. But however, on 
this particular case — I can pass it over there if you like it — 
however, for the past few years the levels have been high, up to 
seven feet at times. And this particular person feels that . . . he’s 
worried about who really monitors it, and what you call 
minimum level and what he calls minimum level. 
 
Do you have any guidelines along that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If the member is agreeable, we would 
request that you submit the specific concern to us; and we’ll 
look into it and then deal with you directly on it, if that’s okay 
with you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I will with this 
particular case. 
 
But there’s also a few others that I really think that maybe made 
formal complaints. But they — talking to areas or people in 
certain areas — they were worried that some water, some years, 
would run a little more than usual; some years a little less. So 
something you can take into consideration on that. 
 
Do you have any new money coming up to the C&Ds 
(conservation and development authorities) for drainage 
projects for this upcoming budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’ll be new projects funded this 
year but the level of funding is relatively the same as last year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another question on 
the C&D boards — were you . . . is there any indication or do 
you have any feelings of moving them under RM (rural 
municipality) administration? Or do you intend to keep them as 
they are or giving them maybe a little more power? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ve been working with the C&Ds on 
this sort of an issue . . . or on this issue and other issues. If there 
are specific changes that the C&Ds would want, we would want 
those to come from them. But we have a committee going, 
reviewing this and a whole host of issues. But the change, if it 
were to occur, would probably come from the C&Ds directly. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think they’ll be 
happy to hear that. 
 
I want to ask about . . . there’s a dam I believe at Avonlea 
that has caused some concerns for some people there. 
They’re worried that there is some damage has been done to 
it over a number of years. But they would like some work did 
to it — possibly raised. And I believe on the surface, some 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

work done to it, because they’re afraid one day it just may 
break. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Burst. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Or burst, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — A very good question. We’re 
undertaking design work this year, and reconstruction and 
repairs should begin — should begin — next year. It will 
probably take several years to do it, but it will begin next 
year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, and the residents there will be 
happy to hear that. 
 
Another question I would like to ask you. Do you have any 
operations outside of Saskatchewan, or do you send any 
consultants outside of Saskatchewan or outside of Canada on 
any projects involved with . . . that Sask Water is involved 
in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member. With respect to 
projects, we have no projects outside of the province; with 
respect to staff involved in projects nationally or 
internationally, yes we do, but they are on a cost-recovery 
basis and at no cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you looking at 
. . . have you had any requests for new C & D districts 
throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — None of the officials here are aware of 
any new requests for the creation of any new C&Ds. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. I don’t 
know, I can’t remember if I asked this question before, but I 
know there was two areas that were brought to my attention 
since the last time I believed we talked. 
 
I think one was called a Sherwood C&D, they were looking at a 
drainage area just outside of Regina. And I think there was 
another area around Tuxford, Marquis area, that have been 
looking to try and get either an irrigation project set up through 
there, because there is extensive water through there that 
probably can be used for irrigation instead of trying to channel 
it somewhere else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For the member’s interest, you were 
wondering whether you had asked this question before. I don’t 
think you have, but don’t apologize for that — I’ve probably 
given you the same answer on a number of occasions on other 
issues as well. 
 
With respect to the Sherwood conservation district, there’s 
design work taking place right now, and depending on how that 
comes out, we may be providing funding for that. But that’s not 
yet determined. You may not have this confused but we think 
maybe you do. 
 
The other question that you refer to is not C&D, it’s an 
irrigation district. And that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay 
you did have it correct. That’s in the Marquis-Tuxford area and 

there’s very, very preliminary meetings taking place right now. 
But there’s not much more that we could add to that other than 
what I’ve just said. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I guess I should 
have clarified a little more. I think they just wanted to make 
sure there are meetings, that you are looking at it, because they 
feel that it is a very good area to develop irrigation. The land 
there is very good; water close by that can be . . . channels can 
be run there. So I hope you take that area into consideration. 
 
Moving to administration, what was the total amount of annual 
salaries for the last fiscal year for Sask Water? And this year is 
there going to be an increase or decrease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay to December 31, the salary in 
administration was 11,686,255, and there will be a decrease this 
year, in the year 2000. 
 
(1315) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think most taxpayers 
would be happy to hear that. 
 
Moving on to . . . I believe you have a . . . going through here, 
do you have a program called the rural water quality advisory 
program? I know there has been numerous concerns with hog 
operations going up and just the pesticides, the spraying. I know 
I’ve had a few calls. I don’t know if this falls under your 
department or if it falls under Health, but I know that there has 
been numerous calls — not numerous but a number of calls to 
my office worried about water quality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The member correctly identifies, we do 
have the rural quality water advisory program. It was started in 
1997. The cost per test is $100, which is subsidized by the 
corporation. 
 
The way it works is that we would go out and do the testing. 
We would actually do the testing ourselves to ensure that a 
proper sample was taken. And once it’s tested that we would 
then go back out and meet with the individual to go through the 
process as to tell . . . so as we can describe for them what was 
found in the tests and recommendations about what they could 
do to improve their water quality if it is so required. And so far 
we’ve done about 700 tests. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, on that one, just on — another 
question here, I guess I wasn’t quite listening — on 
administration, could you give me that total figure again for last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, of course — now, you did ask that 
question twice — 11,686,255. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I just have to double-check that. On 11 million 
just for administration, how much of that is salaries? I take it 
when you do that you’re also working all your buildings, rent, 
ownership, and that, I hope, in the 11 million? That wouldn’t be 
just salaries, I hope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, that is just salaries. 
 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

Mr. Brkich: — Eleven million dollars? To me that sounds fairly 
high. How many people do you have working for Sask Water, 
spread out through the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have about 240 employees working 
for the corporation. By the way it’s listed as one of the larger 
corporations in the province, and I think last year was in the top 
20 in terms of sizes of corporations in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Was there any profit showing on this 
corporation then, since it’s fairly huge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If you’re asking any specific year, 
obviously over the years there has been profit from the 
corporation since it was incorporated in 1984. But last year, I 
think the member will know based on questions he’s asked me 
before in this House, that last year to December 31, 1999, there 
was an operating loss of 9.688 million. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How about this year, 
do you forecast, I guess, any decrease in that 9 million loss? Or 
do you increase some revenue this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well those are really questions . . . well 
that’s really a question for next year’s estimates. We would 
anticipate . . . let me respond this way, by saying we would 
anticipate a substantial improvement in the bottom line for the 
year 2000. Some of that will be contingent on the transition of 
moving the division for responsibility with respect to potatoes 
to the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it then 
SPUDCO is probably the main reason you’ve lost that much 
money. 
 
Without SPUDCO . . . do you separate them losses? How much 
would Sask Water make without that division, or would it lose 
without that division? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — On page 30 of the annual report that 
was tabled in the legislature, if you exclude SPUDCO, there 
was a small operating loss under non-utility of 226,000 and 
under utility of 594,000. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. Do 
you have a channel clearing program? I know I’ve also had 
some calls from all over the province that over the years debris 
starts getting into channels and the water isn’t flowing as good 
as it should be; it’s starting to back up further back the line. 
They were wondering about . . . especially I guess in areas 
where there is probably no C&D. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, we do have a channel clearing 
program that is cost shared with local governments, with the 
RMs. The cost-sharing arrangement is 50/50. Last year the cost 
to Sask Water was $227,307. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Were you going to increase that in this year’s 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It would be very close this coming year 
as it was . . . to the amount that we spent last year. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I have a couple of questions, very specific with the 
upper Assiniboine River basin. 
 
Could you tell me and tell the people of Saskatchewan where 
that study is at the moment — whether it has been completed? 
And the moratorium that was placed on ditching in that entire 
region, is the report completed and has it been released to the 
public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In agreement with Manitoba, the 
province of Manitoba, and the Government of Canada, it’s been 
. . . the study’s been extended to December 31 of this year. But 
there will be consultation meetings taking place between now 
and the end of the year with the public. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And I 
would then trust that the moratorium is still in place until that 
study says something differently. 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been a number of concerns that have 
been brought to your attention because of some of the 
difficulties with drainage, with land clearing, with the whole 
process of water moving from one area to another area through 
the different individuals’ farmlands. 
 
And you are very aware that a number of difficulties — I’ll use 
that word — a number of difficulties have developed between 
Sask Water and many agricultural producers in my area. And 
not only in Canora-Pelly, but throughout that whole east-central 
side of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have copies of the letters that I have from 
farmers that have indicated that Sask Water has sent registered 
letters to farmers indicating that because of a complaint issued 
by someone, they now must fill ditches, numerous ditches, 17, 
26 — more than that in some of the other letters that we have 
— and return the land to the position that it had in 1949. 
 
Could you explain the logic behind that, Mr. Minister? Because 
many farmers have difficulty understanding why they, who just 
maybe became owners of land two or three years ago, are now 
having to reverse the process of development, of land clearing, 
and all the things that have happened, back to 1949 positions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I want to make clear to the 
member that this isn’t something that would be initiated by 
Sask Water. 
 
All drainage requires the approval, first of all, of the 
corporation of Sask Water. Complaints are then investigated. 
And where . . . only where agreement can’t be reached between 
landowners, then the corporation would determine whether or 
not a ditch block and reversion back to the original status would 
be required. 
 
But this is a process again, to be clear, that is accepted generally 
across North America. So this is not unique to Saskatchewan in 
any way, shape, or form. 
 
(1330) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well it may not be 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

unique to other parts of the world. But, Mr. Minister, the point 
I’m trying to make here is that you have . . . your corporation 
has dealt with complaints. They may deal with a farmer on one 
side of the road because there has been a complaint issued about 
that particular piece of land. 
 
On the other side of the road, no complaint. No one has issued a 
complaint and Sask Water does not investigate. Sask Water 
turns a blind eye to the fact that there is “landscaping” going on 
to the tune of five-, six-, seven-foot ditches. Yet Sask Water 
officials do nothing about it. 
 
On the other side, I have copies of a letter from Sask Water 
demanding that ditch blocks be put in place, or they will do it at 
the expense of the farmer and the farmer will be billed, on land 
that this person has done absolutely nothing to. 
 
It has been purchased in the last three years. All of those things 
occurred in the 1960s, ’70s, long before there were drainage 
restrictions. Now Sask Water is saying you must put in ditch 
blocks. Same time, water is flowing through other parts of the 
land. 
 
It just seems that we don’t have an organized plan to deal with 
the water that’s going to move. Water is not going to sit and 
flood the entire province. It’s going to move into the river 
systems that we have. 
 
I think Sask Water has to take a good, hard look at its position 
that it’s taking. And I recognize that if there is damage 
occurring and complaints are issued, they have to be dealt with. 
I think that’s why we develop C&Ds — to ensure that there is 
conservation and development. 
 
On one side Sask Water seems to turn an eye, blind eye; on the 
other side they’re issuing registered letters demanding ditch 
blocks be put in place. Is that not a contradiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member. While there may seem 
to be inconsistencies, Sask Water only responds to complaints. 
So where drainage occurs on one side of the road as you 
describe it, and Sask Water receives no complaints, we assume 
therefore that the landowner downstream has no problem with 
that drainage. That’s what we would have to assume. 
 
But having said all that, I think you have raised legitimate 
concerns, and under the Water Management Framework 
agreement that we released — I guess it was last year — this 
was one of the action items that we definitely feel we need to 
respond to in the coming . . . I think it’s next year there will be 
some response to that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I encourage 
you to look at this because this is becoming a big problem. 
There is tremendous animosity between Sask Water officials 
. . . Sask Water workers out there in the field and farmers. And I 
think it’s got to be dealt with very, very quickly because there is 
grave concern there. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, one of my constituents raised this concern 
with you. And so did I, through my office, where now because 
Sask Water officials have issued that registered letter to an 
individual to indeed put in place dozens of ditch blocks on a 

large parcel of land . . . The farmer in question wants to sell his 
land; has a potential buyer. 
 
The potential buyer has now gone to a financial institution to 
secure a mortgage. The financial institution has determined — 
because of this registered letter that SaskWater has issued that 
there be put in place ditch blocks — they’re refusing to finance 
that particular sale. 
 
Now you have a farmer who wants to sell, and now because of 
Sask Water’s regulations that just deal with portions of land, not 
with every farmer in that entire area, the farmer’s sale is on hold 
and probably has been lost. 
 
I know he has raised this concern with you, Mr. Minister, and 
he’s unsure as to what the position will be that Sask Water has 
taken because he needs to have this resolved very quickly with 
the financial institution to indeed try to still have a potential 
buyer. 
 
Could you explain what’s happening? Not only with this 
specific case, but with all of those other cases whereby there 
may be a potential sale and now financial institutions are not 
going to provide mortgages because of what Sask Water has 
done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well let me just say to the member, you 
absolutely can’t have it both ways. I mean I appreciate the 
concerns you raise — and I won’t name the individual — but 
we’ve been dealing with it. If we did nothing and allowed the 
drainage just to occur, we would probably have just as many 
people upset for no action. 
 
So Sask Water and the officials . . . while I appreciate a number 
of the public will be upset with them, it’s impossible for Sask 
Water officials out in the field to make everybody happy. 
 
Again, I go back to the point that in the Water Management 
Framework agreement that we released last year, this is one of 
the items that we’ve identified that needs to have work done on 
it. At the end of the day I think it will still be difficult. While 
there’s room for improvement, it will still be difficult to find a 
resolution that’s going to make both sides of the issue of 
drainage — both the individual where water is being drained 
onto and those that are doing the drainage — where there is 
disagreement it will be very difficult for my officials to make 
both parties happy because these are very emotional issues. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I have to ask you for what 
would be your interpretation of what is taking place. 
 
When we see Sask Water officials issuing registered letters, and 
I quote from a letter here that says: 
 

I received a registered letter from Sask Water that I and 
approximately 14 other landowners would have to fill in 
certain ditches. On December 30, 1999, it has ruled that all 
farmers in question must fill in their ditches as originally 
ruled back in October of 1996 when this particular 
situation developed. 

 
Is that going to solve the problem? What we have is Sask Water 
saying to certain farmers where there have been complaints 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

issued: fill the ditches, put in ditch blocks, return the land to 
1949 status. 
 
We have other areas — ditching continues. This is not going to 
solve the problem. The water is still flowing. There are going to 
be . . . If farmers put in place ditch blocks, you know very well 
that the water will back up next spring. Didn’t happen this 
spring because we didn’t have the snowfall. But can you 
imagine on the year that we have a heavy runoff in the 
springtime and now ditch blocks have been put in place where 
water is flowing down through this particular farmer’s land? 
 
How many people . . . and the comments made by members of 
the Sask Water field representatives is: if you have a problem 
with the farmer, you have to issue the complaints up the stream. 
That’s the response to the farmer. We’re not going to help you 
solve the problem. We’re going to help you by dealing with the 
complaint. If you want to issue a complaint about the 10 other 
farmers upstream, then we’ll issue the letters that will require 
them to put in ditch blocks. 
 
Where’s it going to end, Mr. Minister? This is not the system 
that we need for the province of Saskatchewan. It’s not a 
system that’s going to help ensure that there is a degree of 
co-operation between neighbours, between farmers 
downstream, between the lakes and the different provinces — 
because you’re very well aware that the water from the upper 
Assiniboine ends up in Manitoba to a great degree — we need 
to develop co-operation. 
 
And what we’re doing is we’re singling out farmers because of 
complaints. We’re not developing a policy that is good for 
everyone. How do you respond to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I appreciate the concerns that the 
member raises and that obviously is part of the reason that we 
engaged in the study with Manitoba and Canada with the 
Assiniboine study that you referred to earlier. We think that 
good watershed planning needs to take place. And again that’s 
part of what we were talking about in the Water Management 
Framework agreement. 
 
I think I would say generally though, that first of all the 
corporation is operating under the legislation that currently 
exists and it’s a complaint-based policy that we have in place 
right now and it might not be perfect. 
 
And maybe better watershed planning needs to occur, and I 
think I would acknowledge that it probably does. But at the end 
of the day if we, as a government or a corporation or as a 
legislature, determine that for the good of the community 
certain drainage projects need to take place, understand clearly 
— and I think the member will know — that we’re not going to 
have everybody happy. Because those affected downstream or 
upstream — as a result of a good drainage project — it will 
affect them and they will argue adversely and we will still have 
people upset. 
 
But having said that, I recognize the concerns you raise and we 
certainly are doing what we can to address those concerns. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to raise one 
final point, Mr. Minister. Your entire policy that you are 

working with right now within the corporation, I don’t think 
that it’s also realistic. When we have letters that are issued that 
instruct farmers to reverse the process and bring it back to the 
1949 level . . . I don’t know what the land looked like in 1949. I 
wasn’t born yet, Mr. Minister, but my dad tells me that the 
landscape was treed in our area; there was very little developed 
land. The situation was very natural, if you like. 
 
Now if you’re instructing farmers to go back to the 1949 
landscape levels, what you’re telling them is to basically 
undevelop everything that has happened for 50 years. I don’t 
think that that’s realistic. So while you say that your current 
policy suggests that you’re only going to deal if there’s a 
complaint, if the legislation requires changes, if the studies need 
to develop a new direction, I would encourage to look at this 
problem. 
 
This is a serious problem and we must recognize, of course, that 
there are people that will be affected by water that is going to 
move through their particular parcels of land. And we have to 
ensure that there is adequate drainage; that there is a degree of 
safety involved so that in case of those floods in the spring, we 
have to deal with that. 
 
But a 1949 base, I believe, is unrealistic. The farmers that have 
received these registered letters are saying, this is ludicrous, it is 
not realistic. And I would ask for your comments. 
 
(1345) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I can appreciate the member’s 
frustration, and understand that we’re equally frustrated in 
trying to deal with these concerns. 
 
We’re only at this point though — I want to be clear — we’re 
only in this position because we can’t get landowners to agree 
on the issue of drainage right now. And maybe we need to 
change the legislation. And we actually think that we should 
change the legislation some to try and improve the situation that 
currently exists in the area that you’re describing. 
 
But again I just want to say that at the end of the day there will 
be no perfect legislation that’s going to make everybody happy. 
But I acknowledge the concerns you raise. And we’ll continue 
to do the best we can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, and your 
officials. I appreciated your comments, although I know that 
with the legal drainage areas, C&Ds, it does overcome a lot of 
the problems that a lot of farmers have when there is drainage 
projects that are . . . in one case they seem to be violating 
another person’s rights. Because I know the C&D seems to 
make a big difference in a lot of people’s area and a lot of 
people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that this situation that I’m going to talk to 
you about is one that we’ve discussed before. But I’m 
wondering where the government is right now regarding the 
Water Appeal Board’s inability to enforce decisions relating to 
flooding. 
 
Right now the Water Appeal Board nor The Water Corporation 
Act provides any authority for Sask Water to enforce decisions 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

rendered by the Water Appeal Board. Sask Water enforces its 
own decisions as well as the Water Appeal Board’s decisions. 
But on the other hand when Sask Water’s decision is changed 
by the appeal board, it becomes a new decision and it takes 
precedent over Sask Water’s, and now the corporation has no 
authority to enforce it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve said that you’re going to be dealing with 
changes to this legislation probably next year. But in the 
meantime, we have people that have to go to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench to actually enforce a Water Appeal Board’s 
decision. 
 
This is something that I know is a concern in this area. Are you 
working on it? Do you have a number of issues like this around 
the province? And what do you intend to do to deal with the 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I just want to say — I think 
the member probably knows this — the Water Appeal Board 
falls under the jurisdiction of the Department of Environment 
not under our corporation. I just say that parenthetically. 
 
But we agree with the concerns that you raise, and that’s why it 
is under review. In fact, you may know as well that the 
Provincial Ombudsman is also involved in assisting us in this 
review. Myself and the Minister of Environment, who is 
responsible, have already met with her to discuss some possible 
options. 
 
One of the things I just wanted to make you aware of is that 
there are actually a relatively small number of appeals that 
actually go to the board, about 10 to 15 per year. And about 70 
per cent of the time, the Water Appeal Board upholds the 
recommendation as made by the corporation. 
 
But the essence of your concern is valid and that’s why we have 
it under review right now. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am actually . . . I 
think there’s a bit of a red flag being waved here when we know 
that the Water Appeal Board reports directly to SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). Is the 
interests of the farmers and the agricultural industry as a whole 
being addressed when the final decision is being left with 
SERM? I’m wondering how, if you’ve had discussions with the 
Department of Agriculture as well, how we can be assured that 
we’re not just looking at one aspect of the concern and not 
looking at the agricultural aspect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — While the Water Appeal Board falls 
under the jurisdiction and responsibility of the Minister of 
Environment, they are a quasi-judicial board that deals with the 
appeals independent of SERM. 
 
And I mean, to show their independence — this is public 
information — they actually, recently — now they weren’t 
successful — but the board actually took the province to the . . . 
Sask Water, the corporation to court not so long ago. I guess it 
was about six months or so ago. But they do . . . they are very 
independent of the Department of Environment. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Final question, Mr. Minister. So can we expect 

changes to this legislation in the next calendar year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, most likely in the 2001-2002 fiscal 
year. I’m not about to predict whether we have a fall session or 
not here in estimates. But in the next . . . in our next legislative 
calendar, let me put it that way, we would anticipate changes 
coming forward. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was busily 
engaged in other things when the previous Bill was being 
discussed, so I want to raise some issues now that may have 
actually fallen under earlier discussions here, and questioning. 
 
I want to refer again, though, to the 1949 standard that has been 
discussed. The issue is kind of important in my part of the 
constituency . . . or the province, I should say, because so much 
of what has transpired in terms of installation of dugouts and 
dams has happened in the last 30 or 40 years. 
 
And I’m wondering if the return to 1949 standards is envisioned 
in any way as having implications for the area in which I live 
and other parts of the dry areas of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, you actually make my 
point very well for me. The member earlier was talking about 
the corporation, where agreements could not be reached 
between landowners, they would have to be restored, and water 
and some of the ditches either cleared or dammed back up. 
 
So it’s not an issue there of too much water in your corner of 
the province. It’s an issue of not enough water, most often, and 
they want the water kept there. So you can see that it’s a very 
difficult position for the corporation to be in. 
 
But again, having said that, I think what is most important is 
that we have good watershed management and good watershed 
planning and to . . . in that regard, you’re really talking about 
the future. 
 
And as a result of that, of the watershed framework agreement 
or I should say the . . . yes, the watershed framework agreement 
that we talked about earlier, we really want to address some of 
the very concerns that yourselves and some of your colleagues 
raised, so that we can hopefully have the majority of the 
landowners onside and accepting the changes that are taking 
place, so the majority of them are happy; and at the same time, 
protecting the environment and hopefully creating economic 
development in different parts of our province where it makes 
sense. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. As you 
can appreciate, the viability of a lot of the farms in the area 
would be severely undermined if there was any effort to compel 
them to go back to 1949 standards. It would probably lay a 
large part of the Southwest waste, frankly, and would make any 
cattle or farming operations very difficult to maintain. 
 
I’d like to move over to the issue of water quality. I understand 
that that was a major part of the previous discussions on the Act 
that was dealt with earlier. 
 
For my own sake though, for my own edification, is the issue of 
water quality a standard feature of all contractual arrangements 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

now between Sask Water and irrigation projects and water 
users? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — All 18 districts that have signed on right 
now have a clause that says they are responsible for water 
quality, if that was your question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Only districts that have signed on so far, is that 
what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So will that be a feature of each new contract as 
it’s negotiated with the various irrigation projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes it will. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — How many of the irrigation projects to date 
have signed these new contracts? And supplemental to that, 
how many yet are to be negotiated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Eighteen have signed and another ten 
have yet to sign — another ten. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, there is a small irrigation project 
south of Govenlock, in the extreme southwest of the province, 
and I understand that water quality has been a major stumbling 
block in their negotiations with Sask Water. Can you clarify for 
us where that negotiation is at, at this point? Or have they 
actually signed an agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The current status is that we’re still in 
discussion with them and we haven’t signed anything yet. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Could you tell me whether negotiations are 
going well or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think it’s safe to say that there still is 
disagreement between us, if you’re asking the status. Now 
unless we can get an agreement around water quality, the other 
option . . . and if Sask Water is required to retain liability and 
responsibility around water quality, then we would have to do a 
soil test on each individual landowner to determine whether or 
not it’s compatible for irrigation. 
 
And in some cases it might well prove then that irrigation is not 
appropriate in those specific cases and could well require a 
shutdown of some irrigation projects. And that’s why we would 
far rather have an arrangement with the irrigation district that 
would leave them have responsibility with respect to this. 
 
And again, you may not have been here when I answered the 
question, but it would have to be shown that the irrigation 
district was intentionally or deliberately . . . did something 
intentionally wrong before they would be liable with respect to 
water quality. 
 
(1400) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would you say that the situation is such that . . . 
could you characterize it as such I guess, that you’ve just not 
been able to assure the people of that particular project that their 
interests aren’t at risk here. Is that part of the problem, or is 

there a larger issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, I think it’s correct to say we’ve not 
been able to assure them of that yet, and that’s why we’re 
continuing to be in discussions with them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I understand that the issue of water quality has 
been the subject of some legal action that has been taken against 
Sask Water in the past. And I’m also told — although I have 
not verified it — that Sask Water has not been successful in 
winning those legal actions. Is that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, we have been sued — 
you are correct — and they were successful in that suit. And 
that’s part of the reason in some ways why this legislation is 
here is to deal with that, those sorts of . . . I guess those sorts of 
situations. 
 
What I want to say though is we’ve been talking about water 
quality, and to be clear and I think probably you understand 
this, but it’s really not an issue of water quality — it’s really an 
issue of water-soil compatibility is what it really is. It’s not an 
issue of water quality. 
 
But the cases you described — yes, they did sue, and they were 
successful. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I have no further questions at this time. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. I have a copy 
of the globals that you had provided us with, and I have a 
question in relationship to them. Your list of consultants used 
by Sask Water in the past year, I see a Ford, Danielle Charpier 
listed here, and freelance stories. Was this the explanation for 
SPUDCO’s failure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer is no. It has to do with the 
PAWBED (partnership agreement on water-based economic 
development) program. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And what is the PAWBED program, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s federal, but it’s the provincial 
agreement on water-based economic development. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So why would 
you have to hire storytellers to participate in this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Based on storytellers, maybe we should 
have hired you. No, I say that facetiously. To the member, it 
was only $1,200 and it was simply communications around 
announcing specific projects as I understand it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
wonder if you could give me a status on the Rafferty and 
Alameda projects? How much water is there? How much water 
is being stored there at the present time? How much water has 
been released in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member. Both the Rafferty and 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

the Alameda are both about 95 per cent full. They currently 
have — I don’t know whether this is combined . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Combined would be about 500,000 cubic 
decametres in them right now. 
 
There was no releases of water last year. There is a small 
release anticipated from both . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
There’s a small release probably taking place from the Alameda 
next week to fulfill the agreement that we have with North 
Dakota. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
the Deputy Premier has yet made his announcement as to the 
date that he will be walking across the water on those dams. 
And I’m informed by the member from Regina Albert South 
that he feels that there are a couple of other members over there 
that can accomplish the same thing at the time that the Deputy 
Premier does that. So has there been a date announced for the 
walking on water by the Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Not yet, but we’ll let you know. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We await with 
bated breath the announcement of that because I know that the 
media is very interested in that happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, there was serious flooding in the 
Southeast last spring. And a number of the RMs down there, 
particularly RMs no. 1 and 2, 31, 32, 61, and 91 were very 
severely affected. Has there been an presentations from those 
areas to Sask Water for any drainage programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are of the understanding that there 
have been a number of enquiries but nothing formal yet at all. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one last 
item that pertains somewhat to your portfolio as well as to 
SERM. And that is dealing with the proposed recreational 
facilities on the Alameda dam in conjunction with the Souris 
Moose Mountain wildlife federation. They have been in 
negotiations with SERM for a property; also in dealing with 
Sask Water for water rights to those. I wonder what 
participation has your department had in those discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have provided a lease so that they 
could build facilities on that land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, did you say you are part 
of the lease agreement or you turned the lease . . . any leasing 
arrangements over to SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, we provided the lease. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a letter from 
the Souris Moose Mountain wildlife federation stating that they 
have turned down the terms of that lease then, if it’s with your 
organization, because the lease was non-negotiable. It sounds to 
me like it was an either take-it-or-leave-it situation, and that the 
department was not prepared to negotiate with it. 
 
I thought SERM was those involved in this particular lease. I 
wasn’t sure what your involvement with it was. If it is your 
department, why are you not prepared to negotiate with the 

Souris Moose . . . the Souris Creek wildlife association to put in 
a recreational facility in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My officials here weren’t aware of a 
problem that existed. We would ask that you provide us with 
the information and meet with the officials and we’ll try to . . . 
attempt to deal with it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you very much. The Deputy 
Premier is worried about his stomach on this. I also have that 
problem on occasion. 
 
The letter that I have here is to a Mr. Harvey Janke with SERM 
and it states: 
 

Based on a meeting of January 25 this year, Souris Moose 
Creek does not agree with the terms of the lease, therefore 
we are not interested in signing due to the fact that the 
lease is non-negotiable. We feel we cannot accept the lease 
as written. Should these terms become negotiable, we are 
willing to renegotiate. 

 
Souris Moose Creek Wildlife Association. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, if you have any other information, you know, 
I would appreciate what you have; and I will try to ascertain 
from my side exactly what the problems were. And those are 
the questions that I have today. 
 
Subvote (SW01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (SW02), (SW03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Vote 140 

 
Subvote (SW01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 140 agreed to. 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just before the officials leave, I want to 
take the opportunity to thank again the members for their 
thoughtful questions. And I want to thank my officials for 
assisting us here today. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I want to thank the 
minister and I want to thank the officials for coming here today. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you all very much. We’ll give an 
opportunity for the officials to step out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I move that the committee rise and report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 



June 23, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 39 grade 4 
students and their teachers and bus driver, to the legislature. It’s 
just too bad that we’re in the process of adjourning, but at least 
they got to see the floor of the legislature. 
 
Would everyone welcome them here today, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I want to wish you a very 
pleasant weekend and please come back safely when the House 
resumes 1:30 p.m. on Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:17 p.m. 
 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2000 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 2043 of Hansard No. 65A, Wednesday, June 21, 2000 
please correct the following: “The fact is that in the last 12 
months, 16,000 people have left Saskatchewan . . .” to read: 
“The fact is that in the last 12 months, 1,600 people have left 
Saskatchewan . . .” 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
 


