





























































Hansard: May 03, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 975 
 May 3, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition signed exclusively by citizens of the community of 
Eastend which I represent. And it deals with the issue of forced 
consolidation of municipalities. The prayer reads: 
 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the idea or concept of forced consolidation 
of municipalities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the quality of cellular coverage. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular service in the districts of Prud’homme, 
Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno and 
from Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Melfort and Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to high cost of fuel, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by people from Senlac, Kerrobert, 
and Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

also to present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, costs shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people in Swift Current, Kelvington, and 
Maple Creek. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of people in 
Swift Current and area concerned about the Swift Current 
hospital. And the prayer can be summarized as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by people from 
Success, Swift Current, Neville and McMahon, as well as 
Cabri. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
from citizens who are against forced municipal amalgamation. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And it’s signed by citizens from Melfort and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
regarding forced amalgamation of municipalities. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly reject the forced consolidation of municipalities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions are signed from people in the Eastend area. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
read a petition opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the good people from Melfort. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

They’re from Davidson, Macklin, Saskatoon, Regina, and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the price of fuel. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly 
pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Humboldt and Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have a petition by the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from the Rural 
Municipality of Paddockwood No. 520. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to present 
today on behalf of citizens concerned about the high tax on fuel. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Lestock, 
Cupar, Dysart, and Edenwold. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
bring forth a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners are from Leoville, Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, 
and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with municipal 
amalgamation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the Melfort 
community. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good folks of White Fox, Carrot 
River, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, if I may. Earlier today, as you 
are aware, at Government House tribute was paid to 
Saskatchewan recipients of national and provincial honours. 
These recipients are seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon and we want to recognize them here in the Legislative 
Chamber today. 
 
I will be inviting the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and 
the Leader of the Liberal caucus to make a few brief remarks, 
following which the members of the Legislative Assembly will 
then have an opportunity to introduce their constituent, or 
constituents, as the case may be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and members of the House. I will not be referring to any of the 
recipients and award winners by name because they will be 
introduced to you. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my — I hope relatively short — remarks are 
to the point to say not only for me but I think for all of us who 
attended what a great, special pleasure it was and privilege for 
us today to attend the event recognizing some of our very 
distinguished Saskatchewan citizens who have received some of 
the highest honours of the province and the nation that can be 
bestowed upon them. 
 
This morning I offered the view of how fitting it was — not 
fitting, it’s more than fitting actually if I think of it, it really is a 
special moment, maybe once in a lifetime moment — to have 
the Governor General, Her Excellency Adrienne Clarkson, 
present at this morning’s ceremony. Indeed this will be a 
memorable occasion for the recipients, and it was I think for 
those of us who took part as witnesses in the ceremony. 
 
Before we ask . . . I say it’s appropriate for the Crown’s 
representative to be there because we obviously ask the Crown 
to give these honours and awards, and it’s a special indication 
of our gratitude and respect for these citizens and for their many 
contributions, seated in your gallery. 
 
This morning, and I suppose in brief capsule summary, shortly 
we’re going to hear, but for sure we heard this morning, MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) introduce these very 
special people and briefly describe their achievements. And 
these are stories, the achievements of dedication, of 
commitment, and of heroism. It is truly amazing to hear the 
stories of accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of us said this morning that these men 
and women are heroes. Whether they had that one shining 
moment of extreme bravery or whether their heroism was in 
their perseverance and dedication to their work, they are heroes. 

And for that reason it’s entirely good and right that we 
recognize them here in the Assembly. 
 
We’ve thanked each of them with the honours and the awards 
they’ve received, and we now honour them here in this House. 
 
A very prominent Saskatchewan lawyer and legal scholar and 
thinker, Dr. Morris Shumiatcher, once said this, quote: 
 

No nation can long survive without being nourished by the 
innovative, the inventive, and the energetic, tempered by 
the sensitive, the conscientious, and the compassionate. 

 
Dr. Shumiatcher went on to write, quote: 
 

No individual will find the pole star by which to guide his 
or her steps except in the standards of excellence that men 
and women of high purpose adopt and according to which 
they perform their public duties and live their private lives. 

 
Well I think that’s a very eloquent way of summarizing these 
innovative, inventive, energetic people whom we proudly 
honour today. Sensitive, conscientious, and compassionate — 
they’ve set those standards as well. And in doing so, they 
provide all of us with that, in the words of Dr. Shumiatcher, 
pole star by which we may guide our steps, confident that we’re 
moving in the right direction as individuals and as a 
community. 
 
And on behalf of the New Democratic Party members of the 
coalition government, I hope on behalf of everybody, I can say 
congratulations to everybody in the Speaker’s gallery for a job 
very well done. We’re very, very, very proud of you and 
inspired by you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am 
pleased to rise and pay tribute to the people who have contributed 
so much to Saskatchewan and to Canada, and who’ve been 
recognized for these contributions with the highest honours our 
province and our nation have to give. 
 
As Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, it’s an immense 
pleasure to take part in a day such as this because it’s a fitting 
reminder of the major accomplishments many of our citizens have 
made. 
 
The men and women present today truly do represent our 
province’s very best. While they all have very different 
backgrounds, they also share some important qualities. They are 
all extraordinarily talented in their fields and they have shared 
their gifts with others. 
 
It’s no secret that Saskatchewan is renowned for giving to Canada 
— and to the rest of the world — people that make a difference, 
and that’s certainly true of this past year’s honour recipients. 
 
Those we honour today are a reminder that each and every one of 
us have qualities which we can use to make a contribution to our 
community and society. The special people in our Assembly today 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

have chosen to make that contribution, and for that we thank 
them. And we can take pride in the fact that these women and 
men of such distinction are our colleagues, our neighbours, our 
friends. 
 
Today is only one small way in which we can sincerely say 
thank you to all of our honourees. And so on behalf of the 
official opposition, and I believe on behalf of all of the people 
of Saskatchewan, we do say thank you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Honours 
recipients, guests, and fellow members of the Assembly, I am 
very pleased to rise on behalf of the Liberal caucus to give 
thanks for the magnificent contributions made to our country 
and our province by these wonderful people being honoured 
here today. 
 
The character of our country and our province, the very nature 
of who we are can be defined by the efforts of these noble 
individuals. Mr. Speaker, these men and women have dedicated 
themselves and in some cases placed their lives on the line for 
their fellow Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the qualities that define us as a nation are 
courage, strength of character, and of course hard work and 
determination. It is that courage and strength which enables us 
to overcome those obstacles placed before us; and it is through 
hard work and determination that we not only overcome these 
obstacles but prevail beyond them. 
 
These honoured individuals not only deserve our appreciation, 
Mr. Speaker, they command our respect. It is through their 
contributions that we are privileged enough to live in a country 
that is the envy of many. 
 
On behalf of the Liberal caucus, I want to salute and thank each 
and every one of you for giving the best of yourselves in order 
to make Saskatchewan and Canada the best place in the world 
to live. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will ask the honoured recipients if they 
would stand while being introduced by their MLAs and remain 
standing for the applause that you are so deserving of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to the Assembly Boyd Anderson, 
Member of the Order of Canada, Member of the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly Douglas Knott, Member of the 
Order of Canada. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly 
Kenneth Mitchell, who’s a Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature Dr. 
Geoffrey Pawson, who is a Member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I 
get to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
members of the Assembly Mr. Gordon MacMurchy, Member of 
the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce a second constituent to you and members of the 
Assembly, the Hon. Dr. Stephen Worobetz, Officer of the Order 
of Canada, Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and 
Recipient of the Military Cross. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: —Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly three individuals, Clinton Carter, 
Roy Littlewolfe, and Cecil Wolfe, recipients of the Medal of 
Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce Mr. Kieth Heck, recipient of the Medal of 
Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce an honouree who is joined today in the gallery by 
his two daughters, wonderful daughters, Shelby and Kiesha, 
with whom I had lunch, and who are here today just feeling 
especially proud of the most famous person in the world — 
their dad. 
 
And I’d like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce firefighter Brock Knipfel, recipient of the Medal of 
Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is also my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to the Assembly, Mr. Donald McMillan, 
firefighter, recipient also of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Donald Therens, recipient of the 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Merci, M. le Président. Il me fait un grand 
plaisir de vous introduire le gendarme Hervé Millette, 
récipiendaire de la Médaille de Service Méritoire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce Hervé Millette, 
recipient of the Meritorious Service Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly, Thérèse LeClaire, recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to this Assembly, Mr. Clark Lewis, 
recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to introduce to you and to other 
members of the Assembly, Ms. Muriel Jarvis, the recipient of 
the Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Sam McAdam, recipient of 
the Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker is it my 
pleasure to introduce to you and members of the Assembly the 
grade 4 students from Haig School in Weyburn. They’re seated 
in the east gallery with their teachers, Michele Craigen and 
Karen Leitch. 
 
I’d like you to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a lady 
sitting in the east gallery, Ms. Christine Whitaker, a long-time 
teacher, since retired, but now has found another cause, and she 
is a counsellor with the South Qu’Appelle RM (rural 
municipality). 
 
And I’m proud to see her wearing that bright yellow button 
saying no to forced amalgamation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly, Holly Ann Knott who is sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. She’s a constituent of mine and a 
well-known lawyer in Saskatoon, and she’s accompanying her 
father, Mr. Knott, who is one of the awards recipients today. 
 
So welcome Holly Ann to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Contribution to Prince Albert Centre for Visual and 
Performing Arts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am pleased today to tell my colleagues of a generous 
contribution by two Prince Albert citizens to the proposed art 
centre. 
 
Malcolm and Melba Jenkins, owners of the Prince Albert 
Canadian Tire store, have pledged $500,000 towards the 
fundraising campaign for this facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this generous donation kicks off the official 
fundraising campaign for the new Community Centre for the 
Visual and Performing Arts. The Jenkins truly value the 
contribution that arts make to our society. They are active 
patrons, boosters, performers, and are the mainstays of the 
Prince Albert artistic community. What’s more, this 
contribution reflects, Mr. Speaker, their confidence in Prince 
Albert’s future. 
 
Recently the Jenkins announced a massive, multimillion dollar 
expansion to the Prince Albert Canadian Tire. A vote of 
confidence for Prince Albert and Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
This contribution is just another vote of confidence in the 
direction Prince Albert is moving. Their donation will ensure 
that future generations will be able to access and enjoy the arts. 
And I want to commend Melba and Malcolm for their 
commitment to our province, their community, and for their 
dedication to the arts. 
 
This donation will really enrich the lives of many people for 
years to come. Please help me recognize their generous 
donation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pay Phones in Rural Areas 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to inform the hon. members that a 
small victory has been scored for rural Saskatchewan and that 
we owe a thank you to SaskTel. 
 
Last year SaskTel began removing pay phones from many of 
the smaller communities in the province. The crown said that 
these pay phones were not really viable, given the explosion of 
technology in many other communication areas. Plus they had 
to make sure the phones were always serviced and in working 
condition. 
 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

Use of the pay phones had certainly dropped considerably in 
recent years. But what SaskTel found out was the people in 
small communities like and, to a degree, relied on their pay 
phones. Not everyone has a cell phone nor carries a phone card. 
There’s not much doubt . . . there’s not much that a quarter buys 
these days, but it still buys you a phone call. 
 
People in these communities also felt that no matter who 
wanted to use it, whether it be a resident or a traveller, access to 
a phone or other services as needed, or in emergency situations, 
was crucial. 
 
Well, after reviewing their policy and listening to the people, 
SaskTel has decided they will keep one public pay phone in 
each of the rural communities. These communities that had a 
pay phone removed will see it reinstalled and those 
communities that were worried about losing their pay phone can 
be rest assured. 
 
We would like to thank SaskTel and president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) Don Ching for hearing the voice of rural 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that all 
members of this Assembly realize that I’ve made every effort 
not to foment their envy of the Battlefords. I’ve done everything 
in my power to try and minimize my excitement level and to 
limit my enthusiasm, but last night it boiled over. It became 
increasingly difficult with the announcement of the Battlefords 
Business Excellence Awards for the year 2000. 
 
And I want to tell you that I think the real winners were the 
people of the Battlefords. However, the actual awards were 
presented to Peak Manufacturing for community involvement; 
Dr. Peter Holtzhausen for property appearance; D & L Novus 
Auto Glass Repair & Replacement for best new business; Table 
Mountain Regional Park for best customer service; Tanya Kalin 
at Salon Rose for young entrepreneur. The Heritage Award 
went to Fisher’s Drug Store; and business of the year was Gold 
Eagle Casino. 
 
Each recipient was presented with a beautiful desk model made 
by master craftsman Stanley Wychopen. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating the organizers, volunteers, nominees, and of 
course the winners of the annual BBEX (Battleford Business 
Excellence) Awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seeding Progress 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to bring you 
more good news. And you know what the good news is about, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s about farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with good weather, some of the year 2000 crop 
has already been planted. The farmers in Saskatchewan are on 

their way to seeding a projected 33 million acres, which is 2 per 
cent above the 10-year average of 32.3 million acres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers have confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Moisture conditions are rated fair to good for 
hay and pasture topsoil, fair to good for cropland soil. But 
farmers could still use moisture in all areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to say again that prices are up. 
Effective May 2, 2000, initial payments for no. l Canada 
western red spring wheat, and Canada no. 2 western red spring 
wheat will increase from $5 to $8 per tonne. Initial payments 
for no. 5 Canada western amber durum will increase $5 per 
tonne. Feed barley initial payments are up $10 per tonne and 
barley payments are up $5 to $7 per tonne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good combination of market values up, 
strong commitment from our farmers for a good crop for 
Saskatchewan coming this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reserve Force Uniform Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to salute 
members of the Canadian Forces who serve with the reserve 
force. There are about 800 reservists in Saskatchewan from all 
walks of life. They are members of reserve units in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton. 
 
Saskatchewan reservists have served on peacekeeping missions 
around the world. Today many are serving on active duty in 
places like Bosnia and on other operational missions overseas. 
Reservists have been instrumental in disaster relief operations 
across Canada. 
 
Although they usually only become visible when they put on 
their uniforms, reservists bring the moral and ethical values of 
the Canadian Forces, as well as valuable work skills that they 
learn in the military, to their civilian workplaces. 
 
Today is Reserve Force Uniform Day. Reservists wear their 
uniform to work or to school today to display the pride they 
have in serving their country. Reserve Uniform Day allows 
employers, educators, and the public a chance to show their 
support for reservists. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that all members will want to join with 
me in thanking Canada’s reservists who serve our country with 
distinction, dedication, and pride. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mental Health Week 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a key 
ingredient of healthy living is good mental health. Many 
Canadians, however, have not acknowledged the importance of 
good mental health. We tend to be more aware of the 
importance of our physical health and ignore the emotional 
causes of many of our illnesses. 
 
Every year, more than 100,000 Saskatchewan people see a 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

health professional for mental health reasons. Mr. Speaker, we 
need greater public awareness, and that is the purpose of Mental 
Health Week which began on Monday, May 1. 
 
This year’s theme, “Workplace Stress Can Throw You Off 
Balance” is very relevant these days. The focus is on improving 
our mental health by reducing work-related stress which many 
of us feel in our daily lives. 
 
Our government recognizes the importance of promoting good 
mental health by providing more than $70 million to our 
province’s health districts to provide mental health services. 
This year, Saskatchewan Health will add $2 million to enhance 
mental health resources, including those in the area of child and 
youth services. 
 
Mental Health Week is a national event sponsored by the 
Canadian Mental Health Association with activities taking place 
across the country. In Saskatchewan, there are mayors’ 
luncheons in various communities, and many other activities are 
taking place in towns and cities. The Canadian Mental Health 
Association is a non-profit organization that promotes issues 
related to mental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to wish everyone a stress-free day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, we have received information from 
the Saskatchewan Arts Board on the Queer City Film Festival 
that I’d like to table in this House. I’ve delivered copies to all 
hon. members. 
 
The information details the objective of the panel discussion 
called “Community porn, what’s up with that?” It also presents 
the biographies of the panellists and mentions some of the 
movies that will be screened. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you are so proud of your government’s support 
of this event, will you please read the names of these movies 
into the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, I stood in my place and I said to the member opposite, 
and I want to say to the member opposite again that I’m reading 
here from a briefing that was provided for me by the 
Saskatchewan arts council, and I think it’s important . . . I want 
to say this, Mr. Speaker. I agree that this is a cross-section of 
six North American artists and filmmakers who are in 
Saskatchewan today. They are filmmakers and curators. 
 
And among them, Mr. Speaker, they’re here . . . they’ve come 
here to talk about the issues as they relate to race relations, 
Aboriginal art, and they talk about AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome ) research. These are the men and women 
who are here. They’re also talking about, Mr. Speaker . . . The 
festival talks about how they can build on self-awareness in the 
community and build on the individual topics. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member opposite, they said 
that this is not a pornographic film festival. They have said also 
that none of the films depict children or violence pertaining to 
individuals or children, Mr. Speaker. That’s the information 
that’s come to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the names of the films are so 
explicit that the Premier cannot read them out loud in the 
legislature. Mr. Premier, the language is offensive and 
taxpayers are finding the idea that they are funding this display 
of pornography offensive. The information proves that this 
festival will include screenings of hard core pornography. In 
fact, the description of one of these films being shown says, and 
I quote, “This is very hard core. People do everything in it.” 
 
In fact in the interview over the release of this particular film, 
the filmmaker herself says, and I quote, “Please don’t print my 
real name; my mother will kill me.” Well, Mr. Premier, this 
filmmaker is one of the panellists coming to Regina under her 
real name and she describes herself as a sex activist with a 
mission. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support the use of taxpayers’ dollars to 
fund this screening of pornographic films in this festival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that a 
couple of days ago, when I was on my feet, I said to the 
member opposite that in Saskatchewan today, we have an arts 
council. Now the arts council’s responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is 
to establish a jury of men and women who will then make a 
decision about the kinds of funding that they would provide 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite and to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that if the member opposite has a problem with these 
names, if she has a problem with these names, if she has a 
problem with Mrs. Colleen Bailey from Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan, who sit on the Arts Board, if the member 
opposite has a problem with Mrs. Faye Anderson from 
Shaunavon, Saskatchewan, a rural member of the Arts Board, if 
this member opposite has a problem with Lon Borgerson, from 
MacDowall, Saskatchewan, which is a rural member, if this 
member has a problem with Maggie Siggins, who’s on the arts 
council in this province — I say to the member opposite, you 
should go to them and say to them that you want to provide 
censorship in this province and that they’re not capable of 
providing those kinds of decisions for the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My problem is with 
this government funding pornography. The information 
promoting this festival describes what the panel on pornography 
will discuss and I quote:  
 

Community porn, what’s up with that? It’s an attempt to 
illuminate . . . 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. Members on both 
sides — please — allow the question to be heard. And I would 
ask you to please allow the answer to be heard as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: —  
 

. . . is an attempt to illuminate and celebrate this queer 
sensibility. The informational discussion will provide the 
public and six visiting artists with an opportunity to 
investigate positions of comfortability, pleasure, and value 
as we take a look at the way both body and soul are 
negotiated and explored in queer culture. 
 
What is community? What is porn? Can pornography be a 
celebration of our identity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) yesterday stood up in this House 
and said, and I quote “we do not condone pornography in any 
way”. Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is not only 
condoning pornography, it is funding pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, you can’t say that you don’t condone pornography 
on one hand, and on the other hand use taxpayers’ dollars to 
support it. Mr. Premier, which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite and I’m reading here from an 
article that was printed in April of . . . April 4 of 1996, because 
the member says this is about pornography and I want to read 
what the response here was, Mr. Speaker, by the previous 
member of . . . or the previous minister of Municipal Affairs 
and this is what she says: 
 

I think the lack of censorship and freedom of expression is 
at the very root of our democratic system and those who 
try to impose their preference on art, music, and medium, 
should think again about the quality of country that we live 
in today. 

 
That was her response, Mr. Speaker. And her response was to a 
question that came from the member from Rosthern. And the 
member from Rosthern asked the question about why in fact the 
Arts Board is funding the film festival in Regina, this very same 
festival that we’re talking about today. The member from that 
. . . the member from Rosthern asked that question in 1996. 
 
This is not about pornography, this is about that group of men 
and women not supporting this festival. And it’s the same . . . 
that’s the old Tory over there that asked the question and the 
new Tory over . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The people of this province do not care what a 
defeated member of the NDP government said in 1996. They 
want to hear you read those names and those titles into the 
record if you’re so proud of them. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that this government will not stand up and 
take responsibility for this issue is absolutely appalling. 
SaskTel, SaskFilm, and the Arts Board are funded by the 
taxpayers of this province, and the government is responsible 
for those agencies. Taxpayers don’t want their money funding 
screenings of pornography, they don’t want to use their money 
to celebrate pornography, and they definitely don’t want to use 
their money to promote pornography. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly what is being done in this festival. 
 
The executive director of the Arts Board said that the . . . on the 
radio this morning that only 25 per cent of the total applications 
they receive are actually funded . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would ask the hon. 
member to kindly go directly to her question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Premier, will you do the right thing today, 
stand up in the House and say you’re removing support for all 
funding for this festival? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to go back to my previous point 
because I want to say to the member opposite that this has very 
little to do with this particular festival and the kinds of . . . and 
the kind of discussion that they’re having in the festival. This 
has to do, Mr. Speaker, with your belief as a party and what you 
believe in, in terms of this kind of . . . this kind of event, 
because in 1996 exactly the same questions that you’re asking 
today were asked by the old Tory member, exactly the same 
question. 
 
And today you say you’re a new party and you provide a 
different image. Same old Tories — same old Tories in the 
same old story. You don’t believe in . . . what you don’t believe 
in . . . you believed in censorship . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. I’m having a great deal 
of difficulty hearing the minister’s response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I was just finishing my 
comments by saying to the member opposite and to the House, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is exactly the same kind of event that we 
had in 1996 in which your member over there talked about how 
in fact he wanted to provide censorship, lack of expression. And 
this is exactly the same thing that you are doing with the very 
same event. 
 
And today in this province you say you’re a different party, that 
you provide a different kind of presence to Saskatchewan 
people; and that’s false because in fact what you are, you are 
exactly the same kind of party that you were in 1996 — the 
same old Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Transmission Capacity 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, we’ll change 
the direction a little bit which will allow the members over there 
to climb out from behind their tables. 
 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

Mr. Speaker, I have some more questions for the Minister of 
SaskEnergy. Yesterday that minister was completely incapable 
of answering the questions so he had to go ahead and call one of 
his lifelines and phone a friend. 
 
Well you’d better get Ron Clark on the line again because some 
of his answers didn’t make too much sense. Yesterday Ron 
Clark said the reason demand has fallen is because the bottom 
fell out of the gas price. That’s the same Ron Clark, Mr. 
Minister, that just jacked up SaskEnergy prices because he said 
gas prices had gone through the roof. 
 
Mr. Minister, gas prices may have fallen in ’96 and ’97 but 
today they’re at historic heights and you’re still transmitting 
less gas than you did before you built that $114 million 
pipeline. How do you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to provide the 
lowest gas prices in Canada in a very fair and efficient manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — SaskEnergy is an efficient company that’s 
providing good service to our people. The member opposite has 
asked a question about a pipeline that is 350 kilometres long. 
The SaskEnergy system has 13,500 kilometres of pipeline and it 
provides very complete coverage for the whole province. 
 
We will continue to work with this company to provide the best 
service that we can in the natural gas area and continue to have 
the lowest prices possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
doesn’t seem to know anymore about his pipeline than he did 
yesterday. 
 
Mr. Minister, Ron Clark said you had firm commitments — 
firm commitments — in place from gas companies before you 
decided to spend that $114 million on that pipeline. You had the 
commitments before that. 
 
But in the next breath he said the gas price fell, and some 
customers de-contracted — some customers de-contracted. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had firm contracts in place and if the gas 
prices have now rebounded, why are you still shipping less gas 
than you did half a decade ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We do continue to provide the lowest 
natural gas prices in Western Canada. And we continue to know 
that when that pipeline was built there was a huge amount of 
pressure on drilling in Saskatchewan. The numbers of oil and 
gas wells were huge. The customers were saying we need to 
have access to the markets, we want you to build a pipeline. 
 
The pipeline was built. What everybody should know is that in 
those years — from 1994, ’96 — there was about a half a 
billion dollars in land sales in the oil and gas area. This was a 
huge expansion there. This was part of that. 
 
What’s happened is that this pipeline is built on a 30-year-plus 

timeline. It’s making money now, it’s going to make money in 
the future, and it’s made money in the past. We’re going to 
continue to provide the lowest gas prices in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the reasons 
it’s making any money — and it’s not and we’ll get to that — is 
because the other pipelines are now working at half capacity. 
 
Mr. Minister keeps saying this pipeline’s making some money. 
How is that possible when your transmission revenues are down 
$18 million? There may be gas flowing through those particular 
pipelines but that’s only . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Hon. members, the 
member . . . members from the side of the House from where 
the question is being asked is making it difficult for the question 
to be heard. I ask the co-operation of all members, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You’ve diverted, you’ve diverted gas from 
your other existing lines into this one. If you had never built this 
pipeline you would still have all the capacity you need. But 
there’s the rub — you wouldn’t have blown $114 million, you 
wouldn’t have the interest expense, you wouldn’t have 
depreciation expense, you wouldn’t have maintenance expense. 
 
Mr. Minister, you overestimated demand seriously. You built a 
pipeline you didn’t need. You spent $114 million you didn’t 
need. Why did you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy will continue to 
provide the lowest natural gas prices for our customers in 
Canada, and we will continue to build a system that’s going to 
provide for what we need now and for what we need in the 
future. 
 
This particular pipeline was built on a 30-year plus timeline, 
and it’s made money in the past. It’s going to continue to make 
money. The whole system is designed to provide as great a 
coverage as possible for natural gas in this province. We’re 
going to continue to do that. 
 
This is a well-run company, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue 
to support it so that it provides good, efficient service for all the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister keeps 
saying how this is all going to work out someday in the future. 
Well, that’s not how you run a business, Mr. Minister. You 
don’t go out and buy a piece of equipment you might need 10 
years from now, or as you said, 30 years from now, and have it 
sitting there for 10 or 30 years while you pay interest, while you 
pay the maintenance, while you pay the depreciation. 
 
If anyone else ran a business like that, they’d be out of business. 
But not SaskEnergy — not them. If they blow $114 million, 
they just reach into the pocket of Saskatchewan taxpayers to 
pay for their incompetence. 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

Mr. Minister, how can you defend blowing $114 million on a 
pipeline you haven’t needed for the past five years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that I stand 
on this side of the House, and that we were part of the party and 
people who protected this asset for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Because we have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have clearly shown over the last 
decade that this company provides good service for our 
residential customers, provides good service for industrial 
customers, and it provides a base for building the economy of 
the province. The money that’s spent in building the 
infrastructure for this province in natural gas . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Hon. Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation, complete your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, all I would like to say is that we are 
proud to be the owners of this particular asset, on behalf of all 
of the taxpayers of the province, that provides good, efficient 
service for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also for 
the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last December the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government promised to establish a fully independent 
committee to study SGI’s (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) no-fault insurance system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they finally got around to establishing the 
review, the Saskatchewan Party applauded their choice for 
Chair of this committee — Mr. Justice Thomas Wakeling. But 
not even a person of Justice Wakeling’s stature could be 
successful given the NDP’s interference in the work of this 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NDP political interference of the no-fault review 
has chased away the legal community from the process, it’s 
chased away victims’ groups from the process, and now it’s 
chased away the committee’s chairman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it time you just scrapped the whole 
committee and started over with a truly independent review of 
no-fault insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this committee was set up 
pursuant to the legislation which was . . . had a very clear 
five-year review of the personal injury protection plan. And this 
review needs to be done in a way that includes all members of 
the community, not just the lawyers, not just the victims’ 
groups, and all the different people. 
 

What we’ve done is brought people forward to do this particular 
work. Unfortunately there have been some questions around the 
initial mandate. It’s very clear that you can’t do a review of this 
particular legislation unless you look at what we had before, 
what we have now, and what other jurisdictions are doing. 
 
That particular issue is going to be dealt with, and I’ll be very 
pleased to be making an announcement about the continued 
independent review of this personal injury protection plan in a 
very short while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question to the 
minister. And if you listen to his answer, you believe that it’s 
his perception that everything’s completely fine with this 
so-called independent review of no-fault insurance. It’s little 
wonder why people are wondering what the weather is like in 
the world that that minister is living in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You said that the committee would be given a budget of 
$700,000 to get the job done, and on Monday the media 
reported that Justice Wakeling has been paid $13,000 for his 
work. Unfortunately, thanks to NDP interference in the review 
process, we don’t have anything to show for it yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is this. How much money has the 
NDP government spent so far to achieve absolutely nothing 
except to alienate the legal community, the victims’ groups, and 
the committee’s Chair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there is a budget of 
$750,000 for this review, and a portion of that money has been 
spent, but practically it’s over quite a number of months this 
year, and the whole amount clearly hasn’t been spent. Mr. 
Justice Wakeling was paid for the services that he provided, and 
that’s only appropriate. 
 
What we are going to do is have a full review of the personal 
injury protection plan, and that is going to continue. We will be 
bringing forward new people to handle some of the roles in the 
five-person review committee, and we’ll give those 
announcements soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan have been waiting for that government to hold 
true to its promise that it made in the Throne Speech and during 
the election for an independent review of no fault. And that’s 
what we’re asking today. From day one, this review process has 
been torpedoed by the government because of the strong-arm 
tactics you’ve used. 
 
First you send a letter to the committee basically dictating what 
their terms of reference are going to be; then you take steps to 
ensure the review will do nothing to embarrass your 
government. Now you’re left with a committee that doesn’t 
have a chairman, doesn’t have any credibility, and doesn’t have 
any independence. 
 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

Mr. Minister, how much have you spent ruining the no-fault 
review, and when will you finally admit that what you’ve done 
so far has been a mistake? When will you start over with an 
independent review of no fault, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to stand 
up and answer questions from that member about a matter that’s 
important for this government. Because we’ve had some 
previous questions that relate to little things flying around in 
this province. So I would just say that. 
 
Now what we’re doing when . . . when one does a review of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a committee of five 
people who have been working since last December. Some of 
what they do is in the public. It’s the public review. Other 
things that they do include research and preparation and some 
other things. All those things have been going on. 
 
We’re looking forward to getting a full comprehensive report 
from this committee, and we hope that we will have that in the 
fall as planned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ombudsman’s Report 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, about three weeks 
ago the Children’s Advocate issued a report condemning your 
government’s management of children in foster care. 
 
Today the annual report of the Provincial Ombudsman doesn’t 
reflect well on your department as well. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
according to the Ombudsman’s report, your department is by 
far and away the most complaint-ridden area in the entire 
government, and things don’t seem to be getting any better. 
Last year your department also came in at the bottom of 
customer satisfaction. 
 
All right, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, are you not concerned 
about the more than 600 official complaints received by the 
Provincial Ombudsman against the Department of Social 
Services in each of the past two years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. 
 
I would not be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if the Department of 
Social Services is the source of a great deal of concern for the 
Ombudsman, given that we deal with real people and real 
people with real problems, Mr. Speaker — many people who 
don’t necessarily have the wherewithal or the means to have 
others advocate for them. And therefore they’re in a position to 
turn to people like the Ombudsman, which I think is a great 
institution, Mr. Speaker, to help those who don’t necessarily 
have the means to turn to others for assistance. 

Mr. Speaker, we will carefully review the Ombudsman’s report, 
the specific concerns that may be raised, to try to improve the 
services we provide for the people of Saskatchewan, and in this 
way, Mr. Speaker, ensure that those who need our services will 
always receive those services in an effective and respectful way, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my second 
question is to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Social Services minister is not the only NDP 
cabinet minister getting poor performance reviews. It appears 
that complaints about the maintenance enforcement office are 
up by more than 40 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, members on this side of the House are well 
aware of how hard the staff at maintenance enforcement work 
each day. But clearly, Mr. Minister, such a massive increase in 
the number of complaints received by the Ombudsman would 
suggest the maintenance enforcement office needs better 
support from the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister: what actions are you taking to 
increase the resources available to the maintenance enforcement 
office to reduce the number of people who are lodging 
complaints with the Provincial Ombudsman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to thank the member for the question because it gives 
me the opportunity to indicate the great work — as he indicated 
— the maintenance enforcement officer does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he will know that before the introduction of this 
program 85 per cent of maintenance orders were in default and 
that this program collects over $2 million per month for 
custodial parents and children, Mr. Speaker. That’s a good job 
and that’s something that we all should be proud of, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now from time to time, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with 
matters of some urgency and some personal conflict with 
people, problems arise, Mr. Speaker. The Ombudsman, as she 
quite rightly should, intervenes and attempts to find solutions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the report of the Ombudsman is replete with 
kudos for the Justice department, the officials in the Justice 
department, for the good job they do in response to the queries 
that she raises and the complaints that are raised within the 
Justice department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce 
guests if I might. 
 
Leave granted. 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on second thought, I’m 
on my feet but perhaps maybe this should . . . honour should 
fall to the Leader of the Opposition. But with his permission — 
I’m sure he’ll be speaking to this — thank you very much. 
 
It gives me pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 
the members of the Assembly, some very special visitors. The 
family . . . some of the family and friends of Sandra . . . the late 
Sandra Schmirler. 
 
Joining us today in your gallery are Shannon England, Sandra’s 
husband and the father of their two small children. I believe 
Sandra’s mother, Mrs. Shirley Schmirler, is here — yes — as 
well two teammates from the world and Olympic champion 
rink, Jan Betker and Marcia Gudereit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these important people in Sandra’s life are joining 
us today because, as you know and everybody in the House 
knows, we’re planning an all-party amendment to the 
province’s honours legislation which will allow this grateful 
province to award Sandra the Order of Merit — our highest 
expression of gratitude for achievements. 
 
I invite all hon. members to join in welcoming Shannon 
England, Mrs. Shirley Schmirler, and their families, and their 
curling teammates for being with us on this very, very 
auspicious and important moment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my distinct 
privilege to join with the Premier in welcoming our guests in 
your gallery this afternoon. I too would like to extend a 
welcome to the husband of the late Sandra Schmirler, Mr. 
Shannon England. 
 
Also to Sandra’s mother, Shirley Schmirler, who is my 
constituent in the riding of Rosetown-Biggar. Very happy to see 
Shirley with us today. 
 
Also Marcia Gudereit and Jan Betker, teammates on the 
Schmirler team, who I understand are going to form another 
team and go after another gold medal. So we’re quite excited 
about that as well. 
 
A very warm welcome to each one of you to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, 

The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2000 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
members of this House. 
 
Today it is the privilege of myself, and I am sure of all of my 
colleagues, to join in passing this important amendment. And it 
comes on an important day in our province as we earlier today 
observed Honours Day and introduced the recipients of honours 
and awards both from Canada and from Saskatchewan. And this 
year, for the first time, it was of course done in the presence of 
our Governor General. 
 
Today I trust we speak as one voice as Saskatchewanians, and 
we are privileged to be able to unite in the service of the 
province we love. We have the opportunity now to change a 
small part of Saskatchewan history. And we do this in honour 
of a loving and much loved member of this community whose 
untimely death cheated her, her family, her friends, and all of 
the people of this province. 
 
Today we are giving first, second, and I hope third reading to an 
Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act, so 
that a person may be invested with the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit posthumously if he or she is nominated within one year of 
date of death. 
 
This legislative amendment comes before the House today, with 
the support and sanction of every member, to expand the 
eligibility requirement of Saskatchewan’s most prestigious 
recognition of excellence, of achievement, and of contribution 
— the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act was adopted in 
1988, Mr. Speaker, to provide statutory authority for the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit as an official honour of the 
provincial Crown. This Act was amended in 1995 to include the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, and to introduce the 
Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council, a skilled group of 
independent individuals charged with the responsibility of 
considering nominations and recommending recipients to the 
highest honours in our province. 
 
In 1997 the Act was again amended to enhance and clarify 
procedures for awards and to declare sylvinite, more commonly 
known as potash, to be the province’s mineral emblem. 
 
The amendment before the House today is a significant one. 
Now the province of Saskatchewan will have a mechanism 
through which deserving individuals who die prematurely or 
unexpectedly are eligible for nomination to the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit within one year of day of passing. 
 
We are setting a courageous course with this amendment. In 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

Canada, only L’Ordre nationale du Québec currently permit 
posthumous nominations and then only under very restrictive 
circumstances. 
 
This amendment is a public testimony to the life and 
achievements of Sandra Schmirler. This woman showed us 
through thought, word, and deed, the meaning of greatness, the 
richness of leadership that one individual can leave as her 
legacy to the people of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
We are united in grief at her untimely passing, and we remain 
united in our admiration at what this great Saskatchewan citizen 
accomplished in her all too short life. 
 
We now have an opportunity to come together in this House to 
offer a tribute to her memory, a tribute that will live on in the 
history of Saskatchewan. That is the posthumous nomination of 
deserving citizens for Saskatchewan’s most prestigious honour. 
 
The Labrador explorer and missionary, Sir William Grenfell, 
said in the late 1800s: 
 

The real value of your life can only be gauged by what it 
gives to the world. Life is redeemed by achievement. 

 
Out of the untimely death of one of our most renowned citizens, 
there comes an opportunity for good, an opportunity for lasting 
public acknowledgement of achievement in fields of endeavour 
important to our province. 
 
It is a proud moment in this House when we can join together, 
and a proud moment in Saskatchewan history to propose this 
amendment before the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour 
to rise today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I apologize to the Hon. Leader 
of the Opposition. I would ask the Hon. Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs to move the motion for second 
reading of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. I move now this Bill be read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
it’s an honour to rise today to address all members of the 
Assembly regarding the amendment of this Act, The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
While there can be no denying that while a person may 
accomplish great things while he or she is here with us, those 
achievements become even more important and cherished when 
that person is gone. This most certainly holds true for Sandra 
Schmirler. 
 
I would like to take a moment or two to describe why we should 
amend the Act and grant this honour to Sandra. 
 

To the people that knew her best — her family, close friends, 
and teammates — I’m sure that they recognized long before the 
rest of us did Sandra’s great accomplishments and 
achievements. Throughout her too-short life, Sandra 
accomplished more than many do in an entire lifetime — friend, 
mother, wife, ambassador, and the ultimate champion of her 
sport. 
 
Who among us haven’t dreamed of doing great things? Who 
among us has then said that what we’re dreaming is too big, to 
figure that we just don’t have what it takes. Sandra proved that 
inside each and every one of us we do have what it takes. 
 
By continually pushing the envelope, by asking more of herself 
than before, and by giving everything she had to life, Sandra 
always came out a winner. And this was not just in curling but 
in life as well. She left us with a sports legacy that will never 
. . . will likely never be rivalled. She gave us two beautiful little 
girls who will no doubt be curling before they know it. 
 
We can’t help but remember her infectious giggle, her sense of 
humour that is always . . . that was always directed at herself — 
never others — her spirit, optimism, dedication, and 
commitment to living life as it was meant to be lived. 
 
Sandra’s team helped put Saskatchewan on the international 
map — not just in curling, but as ambassadors of the province 
itself. Jan, Marcia, Joan, and the rest of the team showed the 
world that not only are we fun to play against, but we’re darn 
good at what we do. 
 
We all watched proudly as Sandra led her team to six provincial 
championships, three national titles, and to a Gold Medal 
victory at the Nagano Olympics. We all celebrated with her. We 
thought the possibilities for her were endless because she had so 
much to offer. 
 
Never did we dream that this could end so suddenly. No one 
could have prepared us for this. Even after we have said 
goodbye, we are committed to keeping Sandra’s memory and 
her spirit alive. 
 
The residents of Biggar, Saskatchewan have taken this one step 
further. They couldn’t be more proud of their favourite 
daughter. Her spirit and her legacy will live on with the opening 
of the Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park later this summer. 
 
It should come as no surprise that Sandra herself got involved in 
this project and was only too willing to lend her support and 
ideas when needed. She made sure that the park would be 
accessible to everyone and that it would fit in with the new 
school being built. Again this is a poignant reminder of the type 
of person that Sandra was. 
 
No matter what circumstances she was facing, Sandra always 
gave her best. Whether it was on the ice or off, she always 
pulled through and helped others pull through as well. 
 
For the many, many contributions that Sandra made — not only 
as curling champion, but as a friend, wife, mother, and 
ambassador for the province — we believe that her spirit and 
memory should live on, and that Sandra Schmirler should be 
honoured in a way fitting for someone who showed all of us 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

how enriching and rewarding it can be when you never let a 
moment go by and you cherish all that you have. 
 
Sandra’s life was a life well-lived, deserving of the highest 
honours the province of Saskatchewan can bestow — including 
the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. To that end we are proud and 
honoured to lend our support to this amendment to The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2000. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ladies and 
gentlemen, guests, and fellow members of the Assembly, as 
Leader of the Liberal caucus I want to take this opportunity to 
voice our support for the proposed amendments to The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Act. 
 
The last time this Act was amended was in 1997. Today, in the 
year 2000, I believe that it is fitting that we have re-examined 
the qualifications for nomination for the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit in a manner that reflects the sentiment of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Saskatchewan Order of Merit is the highest honour that can 
be bestowed by our province. Its recipients are individuals who 
have been recognized for their significant contributions to our 
province in areas such as the arts, business, community 
leadership, and the public service. This nationally recognized 
award is bestowed to a select few and its recipients wear it with 
pride. 
 
As human beings it is within our nature to recognize individual 
accomplishments, hard work, dedication, and commitment. It is 
also important for us to honour those individuals who for their 
selfless dedication have contributed greatly to our society. 
Perhaps it is because they remind us of who we are as people, 
and they serve as role models for all of us. 
 
Yet as the past has shown, there are times when tragic 
circumstances take these individuals away from us before we 
can properly express our appreciation to them. Sandra 
Schmirler was one of these such individuals. 
 
Sandra’s contribution to her province, her leadership, her 
pursuit of excellence, and her strength in the face of adversity 
inspired and continues to inspire the people of Saskatchewan 
and all of us here today. 
 
By amending The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act, the 
people of Saskatchewan will be able to nominate individuals 
like Sandra posthumously for the contributions to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is a tragedy that she is no longer with us today, and it would 
also prove tragic if we were unable to celebrate Sandra’s 
accomplishments with this honour. 
 
I believe that the proposed changes to The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Act will be well received by the people of this 
province. I believe that these changes are the right thing to do. 

And I believe that the people of Saskatchewan will appreciate 
our leadership in this endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons that the Liberal caucus will 
be supporting the proposed amendments to The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Act. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find myself 
in an awkward position for at least two reasons, if not more. 
One, it’s very difficult to follow the eloquent words spoken by 
the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party 
in support of this amendment and in memory of this outstanding 
Saskatchewan, Canadian — I would even say citizen of the 
world, obviously, when you win an Olympic championship. 
 
I think it is correct to say, as the member from Biggar . . . 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Opposition has said, and 
the Leader of the Liberal Party has said, for most of us, most 
people in Saskatchewan, Sandra Schmirler will be remembered 
primarily for her accomplishments on the curling rink. And 
those were indeed not only prolific but of high moment. The 
recollection of the number of world championships, the local 
championships, national championships, highlighted by that 
exceptional, extraordinary win in Nagano at the first ever 
Olympic championships, and other images that we have of 
Sandra and her teammates and her family will be what most of 
us will remember forever. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that you could stop there and say 
those images represent more than the images. They represent a 
quality of character, the traits of personality, of intellect, of 
depth, which really speak to a person of high quality and high 
contribution. 
 
But there was clearly much more to Sandra than simply being 
an outstanding, world-class athlete. She was a teammate and a 
team member. This is a team sport. And while she had to make 
that fantastic shot, which she did in order to win the 
championship, she was part of a team and was able to inspire 
and co-operate and be inspired by them. 
 
In any team sport in order to achieve that goal it takes humility 
for any leader, any skip, to understand that you’re only as good 
as the third, and the second, and the lead, and the substitute in 
case of emergencies, and the coach maybe. I think that speaks 
very highly to her personality and her character. 
 
Her personality has been described, and I have had occasions in 
the past to try and put in my own rather inadequate words, the 
nature of her personality. It was very bubbly, in the sense that it 
was always optimistic, and effervescent, and refreshing, and 
unpredictable, and sometimes even shocking. 
 
It was my very pleasant occasion on two or three times to have 
the team in my office for a little bit of a lunch after a victory. 
And I remember one special occasion at 218 where all the 
members of the Assembly gathered to wish them bon voyage 
and success in the world championships. 
 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

The conversations on those occasions epitomized a very, very 
lively mind, which was the engine behind this effervescent 
personality which I’ve described. This was a person who could 
engage in light talk, as we all have to in the ordinary course of 
life and day-to-day events, but had also profound thoughts of 
meaning and importance about life and putting the sport into 
perspective, putting honours into perspective. 
 
I dare say, if she could be with us today personally, she’d put 
this into perspective as well. A deep, thoughtful, intelligent 
person, who brought in addition to her intelligence this 
effervescence. 
 
I always feel, if I may say a third thing about her persona in 
further support about this remarkable individual, she, I was 
convinced, had her priorities — all of her priorities— right. It’s 
not to say that she didn’t make mistakes in life. She was the 
first to admit some of those. We’ve all made mistakes in our 
lives. But her fundamental priorities were there. 
 
Her recreational activities for the city of Saskatoon, and for the 
people of the city of Regina — I said Saskatoon — city of 
Regina, but it may as well have been Saskatoon, at least 
extending by way of example to that and the parts of the world. 
 
That was a priority which is very important, because 
recreational and sporting activity, I’ve always held the view, 
brings out the best in character of people. It is more than just 
simply trying to take off the extra pounds and to kill a bit of 
extra time in more productive activity. This really speaks to 
determination, to discipline, to hard work, and to practice. 
 
And many of us, I would dare say almost none of us in this 
Chamber, I didn’t, witness the hours, the endless hours of 
practice which took place, demonstrating that steel which was 
part of getting the proper centre of life. 
 
And one of the most proper centres of life, in addition to being 
a stimulator, a promoter, a teacher, a friend of those who were 
involved in athletic activity, not at that world class level, was 
her centring of life around her family and the children, the 
Leader of the Opposition talked about and the Leader of the 
Liberal Party talked about, and her husband. 
 
That we did see on television on every occasion. The priority 
was: we won this particular curling tournament, but it was just a 
curling tournament; the real victories in life are the victories 
that count — family, issues of love, support, the ups and downs 
of life. I think that indicates to me quite clearly that this is a 
person who was very, very solidly centred, who had priorities 
fixed and right. 
 
And if you stop to think of it, what I said may not be all that 
profound — I’m sure it isn’t — except perhaps to this extent. It 
is so easy, I would imagine, in a world like that where you are 
feted and where you are celebrated and where you are toasted 
and where you are in effect so idolized and made a visual 
symbol in many parts of the world, to let it go to your head and 
fall off the centre of life. 
 
I remember at one of our luncheons saying to the group, I said, 
look, why don’t you people hire an agent and get out there and 
market your skills as world champions and we’ll go out there 

and sell some products? In fact, I’ll be the agent, I think was the 
recollection I made. To which there was huge guffaws and 
laughter and I got the impression that that was kind of a 
rejection. I'm not sure whether it was a rejection of the idea or a 
rejection of me as agent, or both. 
 
But it’s easy in that kind of an environment to get off centre. 
Very easy. And she never was off centre. And in a way, if I 
have read this correctly, this battle, her last battle, demonstrated 
better than anything that she was what I have just said — 
determined, committed, disciplined, and had the right stuff, as 
they say. 
 
When the news of her illness struck us, it was a shock. The 
moving poem, “To an Athlete Dying Young.” We said it can’t 
be true. It isn’t going to be true. She’s been in tough fights, but 
she’s going to make this fight as she has every fight. Her 
teammates were there; the sustenance, the support. 
 
You know, I suspect that there’s probably an energy force in all 
of us as individuals, but maybe an energy force in inanimate 
objects, indescribable relationships from which we gain 
strength and regain our health and somehow all of us are part of 
this great universe which permits us to have done some heinous 
things in the world, but has also permitted great 
accomplishments of human effort and endeavour; and when the 
news of the illness came, it can’t be true. 
 
And she brought this centred life, maybe some sense of energy 
and life force, whatever she brought her family, her religious 
background — I don’t know — to this cause. And I’m sure 
everybody in this House shared my sentiment. I said she has the 
ability to win and carry the day. Well, sadly, it was not to be. 
 
But I hope that we can look beyond, in the passing of this 
amendment today, beyond Sandra’s passing, to the fight that 
she put up, and that we can now focus on the bright and 
glorious story that was her life. A commitment to ideals, 
sporting, family, community. A life of achievement and 
accomplishment. A life of fun — I mean that in the best sense 
of the word — happiness. A life too full to be wholly recaptured 
in these brief moments of life that she enjoyed. 
 
But I look at it this way. At her age, maybe — not maybe, I’ll 
withdraw the word maybe — I bet you she lived life more to the 
fullest, to the full, than 99 per cent of us ever will, or the 
population ever will. It’s a life that deserves to be included in 
the halls of our highest honours in this province. It’s a life of 
inspiration, and it’s a life and a dedication which I hope will be 
an inspiration to future generations. 
 
My only hope — and I know it’ll be true — that her family and 
particularly her children, husband, and her children particularly, 
will come to really know who she was, and with growing age to 
really love as they do, and really love who she was. And if 
there’s anything to this theory about energy and life force, I 
have no doubt that will be the end result. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are members of Sandra’s 
family as we’ve introduced them today, some of the members 
of her team, and of course Sandra’s memory will live with them 
forever. And this legislation will assure that Sandra’s life will 
be recognized as a permanent part of the great story, the great 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

stories of Saskatchewan and Canada, and I’m very proud and 
pleased to be a supporter of this legislation. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 33  The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The official 
opposition has reviewed the Bill. We find it to be in order and 
would support this clause and every clause of the Bill. Thank 
you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do now move that 
this Bill be read a third time and passed under its title, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 3:08 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 33 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:09 p.m. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER  
 

Letter of Nomination Read into the Record 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I would like to read into the record a letter of 
nomination which I understand has already been signed by the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

and myself. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should say 
at the outset that we’d like to thank all hon. members for their 
co-operation — and the idea doesn’t come from our side, it’s a 
mutual idea all around — for passing this important legislation 
in the timely fashion that we did today. On, as the Provincial 
Secretary said, Honours Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d now like to read into the letter — into the record — a letter 
to be signed by the Hon. Minister of Education, the Liberal 
Leader; the Hon. Leader of the Official Opposition and the 
MLA for Rosetown-Biggar; and for myself. The letter is dated 
today, and it’s addressed to Mr. Ted Turner in his capacity of 
Chair of the honours advisory committee. It reads: 
 

Dear Mr. Turner: 
 
We are writing to you today to nominate Sandra Schmirler 
for the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, the highest honour 
the Government of Saskatchewan may confer upon its 
citizens. 
 
We submit this nomination with mixed emotions. On the 
one hand we, and all of Saskatchewan citizens, were 
deeply saddened by Sandra’s untimely death. The sense of 
loss, though no doubt felt most by her family and closest 
friends, is shared by literally millions of people, throughout 
this province and country. 
 
But on the other hand, we experience a great sense of 
celebration in submitting this nomination. It is a special 
opportunity — as Brian McCusker helped us all to do at 
Sandra’s funeral — to celebrate the life, the achievements, 
and the personality of one of Saskatchewan’s best known 
and most loved citizens. 
 
In the nomination form we are submitting, we highlight 
many of Sandra’s achievements — as world champion 
athlete, as wife and mother, as community leader, as an 
outstanding ambassador for Saskatchewan, and as a kind 
and decent person. 
 
The criteria for nomination to the Order of Merit include 
individual excellence, outstanding achievement, and 
exceptional contributions to the well-being of the province 
and its endeavours. We believe that the qualities that she 
exhibited during her life make her a richly deserving 
recipient. 
 
Renowned broadcaster and journalist, Peter Gzowski, once 
said that: “Saskatchewan is the most Canadian province in 
the country,” referring to the way that the values of 
Saskatchewan people epitomize the values of this great 
country. 
 
If this is true, and we believe it is true, no one represented 
and lived those values more than Sandra Schmirler.  
 
No one has made us prouder of ourselves and our province. 
 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

And no one is a more deserving recipient of 
Saskatchewan’s highest honour. 

 
Yours truly. Signed Mr. Elwin Hermanson, Leader of the 
Official Opposition; Dr. Jim Melenchuk, Leader of the 
Liberal Party; and myself as Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you Mr. Chairman. It’s a 
good afternoon and I trust the spirit of co-operation, the 
unanimity, that we saw earlier in this afternoon will continue 
throughout my departmental estimates. 
 
And I am pleased in that vein to introduce to the committee 
members of my department whom I am very proud: deputy 
minister Brent Cotter, Gord Sissin, Paul Osborne, Ernie 
Lawton, Al Hilton, and seated at the back we have Glen 
Benedict and Olivia Shumski. 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d like to extend a 
welcome to the officials that have come today with the Minister 
of Intergovernmental Affairs, and I’d like to welcome the 
minister as well. 
 
One of the first things of note is that this is a relatively small 
department if you consider that $34 million is a small budget, 
yet it’s one of the few departments that has an associate 
minister. Is the workload associated with Intergovernmental 
Affairs so onerous that you require an associate minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’d like to thank the member for that. I 
suppose on the one hand the member’s observation that, in 
spending terms, this is not one of the largest departments of 
government is certainly a valid observation on her part. 
 
I’d like to say though that, as you know, our department has the 
responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs and that therefore it has 
been found appropriate by the Premier to name to the 
department as well to work in co-operation with me, a person of 
Aboriginal ancestry and from the North where most of the 
Aboriginal citizens of the province work. 
 

And may I say that I think that was particularly beneficial this 
past winter when we undertook our consultations among 
Aboriginal peoples. And a number of the meetings both the 
member for Athabasca, the associate minister, and myself 
attended several of the meetings together. There were other 
meetings which only he attended and other meetings which only 
I attended. 
 
But I must say, especially on the Aboriginal side of the 
portfolio, it has proven to be very beneficial to have someone 
working with me who has such a good and first-hand 
knowledge and perspective both of Aboriginal peoples and of 
our North. And I’m very grateful for that. 
 
And I would also say of course in terms of government 
expenditures, that my associate minister, also as you are aware, 
has responsibility for Environment, so consequently he actually 
receives no remuneration at all by virtue of being associate 
minister. So the cost to the Government of Saskatchewan for 
having an associate minister in this department is zero. 
 
But it is nonetheless certainly a benefit to me and I would say to 
all the people of Saskatchewan to have an associate minister I 
say who is of Aboriginal ancestry. I’m not; I’m of Swedish 
ancestry, but . . . so I certainly appreciate the input of my 
associate and say taxpayers should be aware that the cost to the 
people of Saskatchewan is nil. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, a question. Prior to the election 
there was not an associate minister in this department — not 
Aboriginal nor non-Aboriginal. So what changes have you 
made in this department to warrant the need for two ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — As you know, it is one of the 
fundamental values of this government and one of the things 
which brought together the two partners in the coalition, that 
when we see the changing demographics of our province, when 
we are told that by the middle of this century, 35 per cent — 
over one third — of our population will be Aboriginal, we 
realize that there is nothing more crucial to the future of our 
province than to end the marginalization of Aboriginal peoples 
and to bring them into full participation in our economy and in 
the larger society. 
 
There simply is no bigger challenge that we’re going to face as 
a province in the next few decades than that one. And that’s a 
challenge which I’ve repeatedly said is not only facing 
Aboriginal peoples but all of us. And so I think that it is terribly 
important that we have the perspective of both Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal, and I believe that that’s what the associate 
minister and myself bring to this file. We share a common 
commitment and the goals of bringing Aboriginal people into 
full participation in the province. 
 
But we have the somewhat different perspective of Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal, I think that’s a tremendous advantage and 
benefit. I have worked very hard, as I think the member knows, 
at building ties with the Aboriginal community. But the fact 
remains that sometimes Aboriginal people feel more 
comfortable and more able to approach government when they 
see someone who is himself of Aboriginal ancestry within 
government. 
 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

And so that gives us another contact with Aboriginal people in 
the province which is, in my view, so terribly important. And 
we are getting these two ministers for the price of one, because 
as I say, I again stress, that if you want to know what the 
associate minister is getting for his duties, the answer is 
nothing. Zero. Zip. Zilch. So, he has additional responsibilities 
over and above SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management). 
 
And I realize the member from Kindersley may be skeptical of 
my word. I might say that I think my record speaks for itself 
and so does his. He campaigned for harmonization of the 
provincial sales tax; now he’s criticizing it. So I’ll stand on my 
record of credibility and we’ll have a look at his some day, but I 
realize that’s not the focus of today’s debate. 
 
But the fundamental point is, is the associate minister important 
in us looking at Aboriginal policy? I think he is. I think this is a 
valuable contribution. Is this costing additional money to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan? The answer is absolutely, 
positively — no. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, we have no argument 
with the need for Aboriginal input. Do you have anyone 
working in your department that is of Aboriginal descent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, several. I’m sorry, I’m not . . . 65 
per cent of the total, I’m told by my officials, in the Aboriginal 
Affairs side as opposed to the Intergovernmental side. 
 
Incidentally, if I may just very briefly, there are different 
components of the department. One is we have oversight in 
connection with the Office of the Lieutenant Governor. There 
then is the anniversary secretariat, which has planned the 
millennium and now is beginning to work on the centennial of 
the province. There is the Intergovernmental and trade side, and 
the Aboriginal side. 
 
I think the largest single component is the Aboriginal side. Both 
within my personal staff and also the larger Aboriginal Affairs 
side of the department, there are a number of persons of 
Aboriginal background, about 65 per cent. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Would it be accurate to say that in many ways 
your department is a go-between between other departments? 
For instance, if . . . 
 
Would it accurate in many ways to say that your department is a 
go-between between other departments? For instance, if there’s 
an agriculture issue, the Agriculture department is involved. If 
there’s a health issue, the Health department is involved. And 
because of this, does your department basically overlap on most 
issues with another department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I think that’s a valid observation. We 
view that we do correlate government policy from the various 
line departments with national, with the federal government, 
and the other provinces. Also in the area of Aboriginal policy, 
oftentimes we view our role as perhaps I could say advocacy in 
making sure that line departments are considering what are the 
special impacts of policy in, say, education or health or social 
services as it affects Aboriginal citizens in particular. 
 

But you’re absolutely right — I think a good example would be 
the Social Union Framework Agreement or the Children’s 
Agenda. My department has taken considerable responsibility 
for these two national initiatives. But we work closely with the 
line department in doing this because these are social services 
and health and sometimes education. 
 
So your observation that we are one . . . we are a department of 
coordination and advocacy and consultation with the other line 
departments is a valid one, yes. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, do you feel then that your 
department warrants spending $34 million and have a staff of 
75 people when in fact most of the issues you deal with are also 
dealt with in another department that also is spending millions 
of dollars and has full staff complement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well in the first point, I would point out 
to the hon. member that about 20 million of that budget — 
that’s the bulk of it right there — is the treaty land entitlement 
process. And that of course is strictly within our department. 
 
Indeed you’ve already mentioned that we are relatively a small 
department. I guess we get a whole lot smaller if you take out 
the flow-through monies through the treaty land entitlement 
process. So that’s a very large part of our budget right there. 
 
So I say we are a department that has the major, almost the sole 
oversight, of the treaty land entitlement process that was put in 
place by the Mulroney-Devine governments, and of course is 
something that is essential for the province to be able to 
complete and close the books on. 
 
And in the other areas, is it a waste to have a department of 
government that is dedicated to saying, if 35 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan is going to be Aboriginal, we’ve 
got to make sure that those Aboriginal people are educated, 
have full opportunities, full training, full ability to participate in 
the economy, the workforce, and the culture of this province. 
 
Is that important? I have no hesitation in saying it is. I hope the 
hon. member agrees with me. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, I do agree with you that the 
Aboriginal people of this province are very important. But we 
still have another $14 million that we’re spending that has 
nothing to do with the Aboriginal Affairs department of your 
ministry. 
 
And as you have stated, that even much of what you deal with 
with Aboriginals is to do with education and the workforce. 
Those issues are all handled in other departments, or if they’re 
not, they should be. 
 
The Aboriginal people of this province are the same as 
everyone else and so should be treated as such. And education 
should involve everyone. So the Minister of Education should 
deal with all peoples in Saskatchewan that need an education, 
not segregate the two. 
 
So again I ask you: is the department, the money spent, the $14 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

million that is spent above and beyond the 20 million that is 
spent in Aboriginal Affairs, warranted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well I would say to the hon. member, 
there’s the Metis and off-reserve strategy in addition to treaty 
land entitlement. The treaty land entitlement of course only 
affects First Nations. 
 
We also have, as I point out, sole responsibility for Government 
House and the operation of Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor’s office; the anniversary secretariat and the planning 
of the centennial of the province which is still rather low key 
and small at present. But I’ll be happy to get into the hon. 
member later by talking about some of the consultations which 
will occur this spring, and I hope that all members of this House 
will participate in the consultation meetings when they’re in 
their constituency. 
 
Federal-provincial relations; international relations; trade. I 
know the hon. member from Kindersley was very flattering 
about my participation at the recent World Trade conference in 
Seattle, and I want to thank him for that. 
 
So there are a number of areas in which we have primary if not 
sole responsibility. And again, if I may say, on Aboriginal 
policy the hon. member has said, well Aboriginal people are 
simply part of the province and should be treated the same as 
everyone else. 
 
And may I say that I agree in large part with that observation. 
And I would tend to think that in a perfect society — then 
issues of how we make sure that a particular group has the same 
educational and social and recreation and work opportunities 
that other members of the society have — in the perfect world 
that wouldn’t be needed. But we know that in Saskatchewan we 
have not done a particularly good job. In fact we have done 
unfortunately a rather poor job of making sure that Aboriginal 
people will be full participants in our economy and in our 
society. And, as we see the changing demographics, this is 
something of very pressing necessity for the future of us all. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I’d have to agree with you that 
this government has done a very poor job of treating Aboriginal 
issues with great concern and with forwarding any kind of . . . I 
mean we do not see any advancement in helping the Aboriginal 
people. So I guess again I say to you, what is your department 
doing towards helping these people and helping them to become 
full participants in our society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you for that question, and I would 
point out when you say this government’s done a poor job that 
of course this government has only been in office for six or 
seven months. So I would ask you to be a little bit patient until 
the full impact of Liberal involvement in the administration can 
be brought to bear to clean up, admittedly, the defects and 
problems left behind when the New Democrats were 
floundering on their own. 
 
But please recognize some important and fundamental changes 
have been made in the province, so whatever problems you may 
have seen in the past are certainly being quickly addressed now. 
But unfortunately we haven’t cured all the problems in the 
province in six or seven months, but . . . so I’d ask you to just 

be a little bit patient and we’ll get to them. 
 
Now however, may I also say that I just take some slight . . . 
some slight objection to what may have been a 
misinterpretation on my part. But when you said, what are we 
going to do for them. It would seem to me that one of the 
fundamental defects in Aboriginal policy over the years in 
Canada has been this idea of, what are we going to do for them. 
And we have tried to correct that. 
 
This winter as I already mentioned, we had Aboriginal 
consultations around the province, my associate minister and 
myself. And we’re trying to devise public policy and 
government policy that has input and ownership from the 
Aboriginals, especially off-reserve and urban Aboriginal 
peoples, themselves. So we think that we have to get past the 
age of us deciding what’s good for them. 
 
We realize two things: first of all, that a successful Aboriginal 
strategy is one that they have had a hand in developing; and 
two, that when we talk about Aboriginal policy we’re talking 
about the future of the province and of all of its people, we’re 
not just talking about the future of those persons who happen to 
be of Aboriginal background. 
 
So we’ve started the consultation. You know about the 
Aboriginal employment development plans and program of my 
department — that’s been so much in the news the last few 
months. I’m certainly happy to discuss that with the member if 
she wants to go into that. 
 
So we have a number of programs and plans. I think that as a 
government, after only six or seven months, we’ve made some 
important steps, some important progress. But we will need a 
little bit of time for the Liberal coalition to correct all of the 
problems in the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I would certainly agree with you 
that we need to have the Aboriginals involved with the decision 
making with regards to them in this province. 
 
I guess I’d like to ask you, considering what you just said, about 
the Liberal involvement. If it comes to the issue that you have a 
policy that you want to bring forth, and it makes sense, and the 
Saskatchewan Party supports you — will you vote with us, and 
we with you and breakaway from what the government wants to 
do and support what’s right for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — If I understand the hon. member correct, 
if the question is do I . . . are I and my Liberal colleagues 
committed to doing what is best for the province of 
Saskatchewan and will we support what is best for the province 
of Saskatchewan — the answer to your question is yes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear that 
because that has not been our understanding to this time that 
that’s what would happen. But I’m very glad to hear that that 
would be your stand should that issue come to the forefront, and 
we have to make a decision in this legislature about what’s 
right. And that the Liberals will stand for what’s right and vote 
accordingly. And I’m glad to hear that. 
 
And I’d just like to move on to another area to do with 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

minister’s travel. In the Public Accounts from last year, the 
minister, Mr. Wiens, spent approximately $50,000 on travel. 
However, under other, there’s some $557,000 spent. Who are 
these other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, and, Mr. Chairman, I am told that 
the travel which is not listed by name is of departmental 
officials, non-elected persons who work for the department. 
Again, because of the intergovernmental aspect of our 
department, there are officials, especially the deputy minister 
who is often in Ottawa or in provincial capitals, and there was 
also a fair amount of travel leading up to the world trade talks in 
Seattle. But those are for departmental officials. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And do you have a list of where these 
government officials went and what their purpose was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. I’m sorry I can’t file it right now, 
but I will give my undertaking to the member to deliver that to 
her. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, thank you, I appreciate that. 
 
Just one more large item on the public accounts is $400,000 
given to Saskatchewan Council For International Co-operation. 
Would you like to explain to us what that was for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you. The Saskatchewan 
Council For International Co-operation is a group of 
non-governmental organizations who do humanitarian and aid 
work around the world. Now what we have in the budget is that 
if they raise at least $350,000 for . . . from private sources, we 
will match that. Or put another way, they actually, I understand, 
raise about $8 million in this province. And I think we’re all 
very proud of the record of the people of this province in 
supporting international aid, relief and development. 
 
So these organizations raise $8 million, we match 350,000. 
Now 350,000 from the provincial government, 350,000 from 
private sources, that’s of course 700,000, which in turn is 
matched by the federal government and its international aid 
program. And we have found that overseas oftentimes the most 
economic and effective way to deliver foreign aid is through the 
non-governmental organizations. 
 
So the answer is that this 350,000 is the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s contribution to international aid development 
and relief and that it is funnelled through aid organizations — 
non-governmental organizations — working in this province, 
who’ve done a marvellous job; and it is a credit to the people of 
Saskatchewan that I’m told that they raised something like $8 
million from private donations. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation, do you have any control over what 
organizations they fund or is this strictly at arm’s-length? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my understanding that 
we do not exactly approve each project, but we certainly receive 
reports; and that the funding goes through what are well-known, 
recognized, and respected international agencies, including such 

agencies as Mennonite Central Committee, Save the Children, 
Oxfam. And the criteria is set in conjunction with our 
department and a complete reporting back as to what we did 
help fund is received by us. 
 
And quite frankly, the feeling is that by using 
non-governmental organizations — people-to-people as 
opposed to government-to-government — that the projects that 
we have been funding actually get down to the population of 
those peoples living in the developing countries who need help; 
and that this is the best way to make sure that the money 
doesn’t get lost in military or governmental expenditures, but 
actually gets down to helping people. These are 
people-to-people projects through well-known and widely 
respected organizations. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess the issue 
here is again the same with many other issues, is that the 
government is taking taxpayers’ dollars and giving it to a third 
party to then give it to another party and there doesn’t seem to 
be any foreknowledge of what these dollars are being spent on. 
To get the information after the fact is a little bit too late to do 
anything about it. So would it not make more sense to have the 
knowledge up front as opposed to after the fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well I guess I’m just a little bit puzzled. 
These are agencies like the Catholic Conference of Bishops, the 
Mennonite Central Committee, Save the Children, Oxfam. 
These organizations I have to admit don’t raise a lot of flags in 
my mind nor do the reports we have received back. 
 
And I guess I have to say to the member first of all, you know, a 
complete rundown of all the lists I would be happy to supply 
her with, but has she heard something or is she personally 
concerned that the Catholic Conference of Bishops or the 
Mennonite Central Committee is not honestly concerned about 
the issues of international aid, development, and relief? 
 
Does she have some concerns? Does her party have some 
concerns that Oxfam or Save the Children are operations that 
we should be worried about, that these are not legitimate 
development organizations which are providing necessary relief 
around the world? 
 
So I guess in order . . . well I’m quite happy to co-operate with 
the member in providing her with any information she needs. 
She seems to be terribly sceptical and concerned that Save the 
Children might be off doing something improper with the $8 
million that private donors in Saskatchewan have given, or the 
350,000 that the Government of Saskatchewan has contributed. 
 
If you have any information of this sort that leads the 
Saskatchewan Party to think that the Government of 
Saskatchewan shouldn’t be giving organizations like this 
350,000 — a tiny fraction of 1 per cent of the provincial budget 
as our contribution to international aid — if you have any 
reason to think that the Mennonite Central Committee is not on 
the up and up, please tell me. 
 
But I have to tell the hon. member that I have never, as a citizen 
or as a minister, heard anything that would lead me to be 
suspicious or sceptical of the motives or operations of any of 
these organizations. 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, and through to the Minister, Mr. 
Minister, I did not imply in any way that the groups that 
received the money should not have received it. What I am 
saying is that if you support these groups and your government 
supports them, that you should know upfront who’s receiving 
the money, not after the fact. That was my only point. 
 
After the fact is too late and I don’t think that it’s too much to 
ask that a minister of the Crown who’s using taxpayers’ dollars 
would look at this first, not after the fact. Because it is a 
third-party group, which there’s some concern about, but the 
issue is that it should be vetted through the minister prior to 
doing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I am pleased to advise the member that 
there are audited reports on all of the projects which are 
justified against the criteria under which these monies have 
been forwarded in the first place. 
 
And I am proud that as a government we make this small 
contribution. I know it has the support of the people of 
Saskatchewan because as I say, the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s contribution is only 350,000. And private 
donors, I suppose if anything, they put us to shame by coming 
up with donations many times that, and they know when they 
give money as private donors to groups through their churches 
and through Oxfam, through Save the Children, they know that 
these are honest, legitimate organizations committed to the 
goals they espouse. They know the monies are being well spent. 
 
We are getting audited reports back and we’re just perfectly 
satisfied that everything is legitimate here. And if it was 
otherwise we would certainly have to take action, but I’ve just 
never heard or seen anything coming out of the Mennonite 
Central Committee that raises the flags in my mind that they 
appear to raise in the minds of the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, 
first off of course, as you’re probably well aware that there are 
some Mennonites of . . . (inaudible) . . . Mennonite background 
on this side of the House, and we have a great deal of concern 
about them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you spoke earlier at some length about having an 
associate minister, the minister who is also responsible to the 
Department of the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have some confusion I guess as to why 
someone who would be the minister of a department as 
Environment Resource Management, which in this province has 
a massive responsibility and I would assume to have a great 
deal of workload, would also be able to have the capacity then 
to be able to help out with the ministry of Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Then is the government of the day of which you are a 
representative, Mr. Minister, trying to marginalize in any sense 
the Department of Environment and Resource Management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. It’s very 
difficult for me to respond when I’m laughing so hard. Boy, is 

that a stretch. 
 
The reason for having an associate minister, as I say . . . I know 
the hon. member shares a Swedish ancestry with me. Now the 
Swedes are marvellous people. Our Viking ancestors are 
certainly something to be proud of, but they’re not Aboriginal. 
 
And I have found it an enormous benefit to be able to work with 
and work in conjunction with someone who is Aboriginal. 
Furthermore, I know there are times when some of the 
Aboriginal people in the province feel more comfortable. They 
know this is their government when they see in this 
government, members and persons of Aboriginal ancestry. 
 
You know, this government is not just a white institution; it is 
an institution to represent and reflect and serve all of the people 
of the province. And that is the point we are making when we 
put into this portfolio someone of Aboriginal background who 
can advise me and assist me first of all to understand the issues 
from an Aboriginal perspective, and secondly to communicate 
with our Aboriginal people, and thirdly to give the point to 
Aboriginal people that this is their government and their 
legislature and their cabinet as well. I think those are important 
messages. 
 
Now what is the Minister of the Environment getting paid for 
being associate minister to my department and assisting me in 
my responsibilities? The answer is zip, zero, zilch, nil, nothing. 
 
And the member for Kindersley says he’s going to check that 
out. Go right ahead. I invite you to. That’s the truth. I stake my 
portfolio on that. And I’m willing to stand behind my words. 
There’s some things you have said I wonder if you’re willing to 
stand behind. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, we certainly enjoyed 
the tirade from the minister in regards . . . and we’re certainly 
very pleased that he wanted to illustrate to us three times the 
remuneration that his associate minister receives from the 
department. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, to the minister, I guess to us we need to try to 
have a real clear understanding as to the importance of having 
someone such as the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management as your associate minister. Is it because there’s 
some problems in the staffing level with the Aboriginal 
familiarity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, I’m sorry I can’t be more helpful to 
friends across the way. I guess what this comes down to . . . and 
it kind of helps, I think, if one wants to understand the coalition 
. . . what it comes down to, Mr. Chairman, is a fundamental 
difference in philosophy that unfortunately we can’t yet bridge 
here. I hope that we will be. 
 
The fundamental bridge and philosophy I see is that it is 
important over here that Aboriginal peoples be part of the 
process, part of government; that they be seen to be leaders of 
this province and full contributing and participating members in 
the society and in the government. 
 
And we think we’re making that point when Aboriginal Affairs 
is not just someone of European ancestry but also is assisted by 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

someone who is himself northern Aboriginal. We think that’s 
important. We think it’s fundamental. 
 
I respect the fact that members opposite don’t think that’s 
important. I respect the fact that notwithstanding that it costs the 
taxpayers not one thin dime, not one red cent, they still have 
spent the last hour complaining because there’s an associate 
minister who is unpaid. 
 
So this fundamental belief that Aboriginal people should be part 
of the process that I share with other colleagues over here of 
another party, I respect the fact that you don’t share that 
fundamental belief. And I can only say in regards to that: this is 
a democracy; you have the right to be wrong. And you are. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I’ll try to rephrase 
the question in a much simpler form so the minister can respond 
to it. 
 
Now my question had nothing to do with the associate minister 
and his background. My question was to you, concerning your 
senior staff and how many of them, how many of your senior 
staff have Aboriginal background familiarity? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — In regards to that question I would say 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it’s higher than zero 
which makes it higher than on the other side, yes. But it is 22 
per cent of the staff . . . 22 staff, 65 per cent — 22 staff, 65 per 
cent — have some Aboriginal ancestry. In terms of your 
question of familiarity, I believe and I would hope that the 
answer is 100 per cent. 
 
And I think in, say in my own case, prior to going into politics, 
I worked very closely with Aboriginal people and I have 
considerable experience — if I may be so immodest to say — 
with Aboriginal people. But I still accept that I’m not an 
Aboriginal person and so there are times when I certainly 
benefit from having the input of someone who is Aboriginal. 
 
But the answer to your question is 65 per cent of the staff have 
some Aboriginal ancestry; and I believe 100 per cent of the staff 
have some Aboriginal familiarity and sensitivity. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Thank you. It’s just 
too bad it took two cracks at it to get you to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, shortly after you attained the responsibility of the 
Minister for Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, a 
gentleman by the name of David Huliyappa, I believe — who was 
a former Liberal candidate — was hired as your assistant after the 
campaign. I wonder if you could enlighten us as to why he was 
removed from office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Mr. Chairman, you’ll recall that 
shortly after I was sworn in, I hired as my chief of staff someone 
who had been the Liberal candidate in Regina South. Now at that 
time he indicated to me that he was not interested in a career in the 
civil service. He saw his chief interest in being in business, but he 
did assist me to get started up. 
 
Now of course . . . And I’m very grateful for the fact that, in terms 

of getting my office established, he was able to give me an 
enormous assist in that regard before returning to his private 
business interests. 
 
Now I accept that members opposite disagreed. The hon. member 
for Kelvington-Wadena said that it was wrong to hire a candidate 
from the Regina South constituency, and then of course she 
proceeded to hire the Saskatchewan Party candidate from the 
Regina South constituency to work in the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus office. Then the member for Kelvington-Wadena said 
that, well this should not have been by appointment; this should 
have been by a Public Service competition for the staff in my 
office. 
 
So I was waiting to see the Public Service competition for staff 
positions in the Saskatchewan Party caucus office, and I 
assumed that when they hired the Saskatchewan Party candidate 
in the Regina South election that it would be by Public Service 
competition. Well unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, unless I missed 
it, there was no competition. She was just appointed. 
 
Well then I was asked, why don’t we cut down and reduce 
staff? I said, we have in my office. But again I want to ask the 
Saskatchewan Party, their communications budget, their 
staffing budget, how much has that been reduced since 
September 16? How much money have they returned to the 
General Revenue Fund, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan since 
September 16, because they don’t need to hire staff and they’re 
going to reduce staff and reduce costs to benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
But I know that I’m kind of mixing apples and oranges when 
I’m suggesting that, you know, when the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena sets out a set of rules I’m supposed to live 
my life by, of course she wouldn’t understand that those rules 
might apply to her. Because of course the situation we’re in 
here, Mr. Chairman, is there’s one set of rules for them and 
another set of rules for everybody else in the world. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister. I guess 
I’ll have to use the same process as I did for the previous set of 
questions, and that’s to try to rephrase them with much smaller 
words to help him understand. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, to the minister. We heard . . . certainly heard 
quite a tirade against the Saskatchewan Party and their hiring 
practices which are open competitions which are advertised and 
certainly went through a significant amount of work to make 
sure that we hired the best staff and make sure that we get the 
staff that will certainly accommodate us to a great deal so that 
we can do our job to hold this government accountable, Mr. 
Chair. So, and unfortunately to the minister, that for them this 
has been a big success for us because we’ve certainly been able 
to hold this government up to the limelight. 
 
Mr. Minister, then are you indicating clearly to us — it won’t 
take very long — clearly to us that the open competition 
process that the Saskatchewan Party uses to hire staff for the 
opposition office is not in tune with the beliefs of the Liberal 
Party, who prefer to make appointments? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. The Chair has a fairly long 
tradition of allowing members some latitude in questioning, but 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

I’m really struggling to understand how that question fits in 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
If the hon. member for Saskatchewan Rivers can make that 
connection, I will . . . on that basis I would allow the question. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In all honesty, I believe 
the question is very relevant to, to the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs and to his department 
and to the expenditure of this department. After all, it was the 
minister himself who raised the issue of hiring practices 
surrounding government employees. And so then we just feel 
quite strongly if he wants to broach the issue surrounding 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, we’re certainly 
willing to have him explain his policies to us. 
 
The Chair: — Order. And then what is the question? I’ve not 
seen the tie? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, highlighting the question again for 
the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
As your term proceeded in through . . . after the election and 
into the term of, of ministry for Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs, you clearly indicated to us that you had 
some problems with how the Saskatchewan Party hired staff as 
the official opposition through an open competition. 
 
Mr. Minister, how does that then reflect upon your policies, and 
why do you feel you have so much problems with that when it 
comes to hiring your staff through appointment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well of course most of the staff are hired 
through Public Service Commission competition. Now there are 
a few staff within, within the minister’s office who are hired by 
competition that the minister, that the minister publicizes. 
 
Now my point was that the member for Kelvington-Wadena 
thought that personal staff, such as the Saskatchewan Party has, 
should be hired by Public Service competition. I’m just puzzled 
as to why that wasn’t done. 
 
But if you’re asking me when we hire staff for our constituency 
assistants or the ministerial assistants, do I want that . . . a 
broadly ranging competition to ensure that we get the very best 
people possible? The answer is absolutely yes. 
 
I just still come back to it that if you, you know . . . the member 
over there says it should be Public Service Commission for 
caucus staff. You’re not doing it. But I am committed to having 
the very best people working for me and I’ve got some darn 
good people working for me; and you can see from the results 
what good people I’ve got working for me because this 
department is ticking along very nicely, thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I see in 
doing a little bit of research under your administrative budget, 
and I noticed in years past that you’ve had a great deal of 
difficulty being able to keep down to your estimates. And 
actually, in the past, in many times the department has exceeded 
the budgetary estimates. 
 
Now of course for the year 1999, year 2000, we don’t have 

those numbers yet as to how much you might have exceeded 
your estimates. I’m wondering, at this time, if your officials 
would have those numbers at this time or if they could attain 
those numbers for us in the very near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Of course in terms of this afternoon, Mr. 
Chairman, we are dealing with the last fiscal year’s estimates. 
Now they were actually under budget. So the department was 
under budget, so actually under budget spent by about the tune 
of $700,000. 
 
So I don’t know what sort of history lesson the hon. member 
wants to take us on. But there’s a particular year . . . The last 
year’s estimates are before this House today. The answer is 
there were no special warrants and the department did not spend 
its full budget. It underspent its budget to the tune of some 
$700,000. 
 
Now I don’t suppose that if we go back into history that was 
always the case. I mean, we all know under the Conservatives 
that everything was wildly out of proportion and whatever they 
said they were going to spend, they spent several times that. But 
I’m sorry, I’m not responsible for what happened in the Tory 
years. You’ll have to ask the hon. member from Kindersley to 
answer why it is that the Tories — when they were in office — 
would budget for a balanced budget and end up going a billion 
in the tank. I’m sorry, I can’t answer that. 
 
But what I can answer is we have one year’s estimates before 
us. In that one year, my department did not go over budget; in 
fact, they underspent the budget. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister, I want to thank him 
for the history lesson of the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan; after all we haven’t heard that for quite a few 
minutes now. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, to the Minister, he had some problems with me 
bringing up expenditures in administration for past years, and I 
guess what I was trying to do, Mr. Chair, through the Minister, 
was try to establish a pattern here. Apparently they don’t have 
the numbers right now but . . . well can I safely assume, Mr. 
Minister, that the expenditure line for ’99-2000 in 
administration can be brought to us in the very near future? Just 
a nod of the head. Thank you very much. 
 
Now as indicated by the information that was provided in 
Estimates that certainly administration is down a little bit, so 
mostly in salaries. Now has there been a significant or just a 
minor reduction in staffing or how is this reduction taking 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well as I said earlier in answer to one of 
the other . . . to the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 
biggest single expenditure in my department is a flow through 
to cover the treaty land entitlement process. 
 
Now last year we were expecting Kawacatoose First Nation 
TLE (treaty land entitlement) to be completed. That did not 
happen and that is mostly the reason why a 700,000 budget did 
not end up getting expended. And admittedly that is money that 
will still be spent. It just didn’t get spent in the last fiscal year. 
 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

And, as I say, I’m certainly not at all adverse to trying to answer 
questions from previous years, but my understanding of this 
afternoon’s Estimates is that we are dealing with the figures for 
the last fiscal year. 
 
I didn’t think I was supposed to answer for the craziness of the 
Devine administration, that you wanted to know how this 
province got $15 billion into debt by wild overspending and 
lack of control that the members over there are concerned 
about. But I wasn’t here then. It was your friends who were 
running the show. But I’ll try and do the best I can if you want 
to go into that again. 
 
But I thought I was here to answer for the last year, the last 
fiscal year, and at that last fiscal year the government, the 
department underspent its budget. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister, I’ll have to use 
smaller words again. Obviously the minister is not 
understanding my question. Certainly we got another tirade 
against the Devine administration who was in existence much, 
much prior to the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs ever being involved in the provincial . . . operation of 
the provincial government. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, to the minister, in very recent history there has 
been some problems in the department with exceeding their 
expenditure line, and in fact in the very recent history in 
administration they were spending as much as a million and a 
quarter dollars here. But I see that for this year, the estimates 
are down by almost $200,000; and this is on the administration 
line alone. 
 
So I’ll try to keep this very simple for you so that you can 
understand it, Mr. Minister. There’s a huge significant reduction 
here in the last two years of almost 20 per cent. Has there been 
a significant reduction then in how your office, your immediate 
office, is being operated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well as the member will be aware, we 
are budgeting a $30,000 decrease this year. It is expected that 
there will have to be less travel. There was considerable travel 
over social policy — the Social Union Framework Agreement; 
over trade policy, it is expected there won’t be as much travel 
this year. 
 
I would also say that a couple of years ago there was in fact 
both a minister and an associate minister in this department. So 
there were some administrative costs there. Whereas today, as I 
pointed out, although there is an associate minister of the 
department, that associate minister receives no salary and no 
staffing. So it’s completely gratis for his work in assisting me. 
Whereas a couple of years ago the associate minister in fact did 
receive staffing and administrative costs, today the associate 
minister of this department is a totally gratis operation as I think 
I’ve mentioned a time or two already this afternoon. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I’d like to just 
switch what we’re talking about in your department for a few 
moments and go to the telecommunications and broadcasting 
sector of your department. 

A year or so ago the legislature passed an all-party resolution 
calling for a universal access fund in order to keep the costs of 
telephone and Internet down in rural areas. Can you tell us what 
has occurred regarding this since that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. I’d like to thank the hon. member 
and to advise her that, first of all, on July 1 SaskTel comes 
under the jurisdiction of the CRTC, the Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission, a 
national agency. And it has, as you’ve correctly pointed out, 
been the position of this House and this government that we 
need what is known as the universal service fund to ensure that 
telecommunications access will be available to all of our 
residents. 
 
This is an issue which affects rural and northern obviously. It 
also affects the viability of those businesses that are heavily 
dependent on telephone use. Now as things stand now the 
Canadian Radio and Television Commission has only allowed a 
service fund on what is called a service area basis. In our case 
that would be the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have a service fund that is considerably higher than that 
of say Toronto, because in Toronto they are served by a 
company that does not in fact serve Northern Ontario. Our 
concern is that if we don’t have a national service fund then we 
will be up against two very, very unpleasant choices. 
 
The one is that service to rural and northern residents would 
become prohibitive at a time when our farmers are under a lot 
of stress, as the hon. member knows. Or the other is that the 
urban members of . . . residents of Saskatchewan have to pay a 
very, very high service fund. 
 
We think the fairest thing would be to have a service fund that 
is national in scope. Australia has got this. United States has got 
a national service fund; in fact three. And the United Kingdom 
— which of course is, in geographic terms, tiny compared to 
Canada — has a national service fund. So we think it’s terribly 
important that Canada have a national service fund. 
 
You know, one of the marvellous things about the Internet is 
that all of a sudden for the first time in human history we 
thought we were going to have available to everyone, no matter 
where they lived, instant access to all of the world’s knowledge 
and information. This is just as available to somebody who lives 
in Val Marie or Fond du Lac as it is to somebody who lives in 
Toronto or New York. 
 
And this is a marvellous development — as I’m sure the 
member will agree with me — and we’re afraid that this can 
now be undermined if we don’t have this national service fund, 
and the result is that to have a telephone in Fir Mountain or 
Stony Rapids could become prohibitively expensive; and the 
same for Internet hookup and connections. 
 
So to conclude though in answering the question, we have 
appealed now to the federal cabinet asking that the federal 
cabinet overturn the CRTC decision, and we have asked that the 
federal cabinet order that we have a universal service fund in 
Canada. We think that’s extremely important. 
 
And if I may just go one moment further, this is also an 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

example of the way my department functions. Because it is 
SaskTel it involves that Crown corporation, but because it is 
intergovernmental my department had the primary 
responsibility for preparing the appeal documents to go before 
the federal cabinet. So this appeal was done by my department, 
in co-operation with other branches of the public sector in 
Saskatchewan. And this appeal is to be heard by the federal 
cabinet, I believe this month . . . this month, and we are hopeful 
that we will get a more satisfactory response from doing this 
appeal. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it is my 
understanding, and you’ve clarified that July 1 is when the 
SaskTel will come under a jurisdiction of CRTC. And my 
question to you is why have you moved already to implement 
fees that are under CRTC when that is not in effect yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’m not entirely sure I understand the 
question. I don’t think we have done that. 
 
The point is though that SaskTel not so many years ago, as 
we’re all aware, had a monopoly. A few years ago it lost its 
monopoly in the area of long-distance operation and is now 
facing competition in long distance.  
 
With facing competition in home delivery service SaskTel 
needed to make some moves to ensure that it would be a viable 
corporation in a competitive atmosphere. So the only 
anticipation, the only anticipation is that we are preparing for 
CRTC regulation, preparing for globalization, open marketing, 
competition, and this has been the stress that SaskTel has been 
under the past few years. 
 
But in terms of the service fund specifically, the point is that 
we’re already in the position that there is no national service 
fund. And so we as a province have to deal within the province 
to find ways of making sure that people living in rural or 
northern areas will have access to telephone telecommunication 
services, because there is no national fund. 
 
So the question for us is: how do we make sure that people 
living in remote rural and northern areas will have affordable 
service? And that’s something we have to address as a province, 
and we are hopeful that the federal cabinet and the CRTC are 
going to assist in that regard. But that’s a challenge that’s here 
right here and now. It’s not July 1; it’s here now. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Chairman. Mr. Minister, well your argument 
unfortunately will not be very strong with the federal 
government if while you are on one hand appealing to them to 
put in what you call a national service fund to keep fees in line 
and on the other hand you’ve already moved to implement 
those higher fees in Saskatchewan and have been charging the 
people of Saskatchewan since the beginning of the year these 
fees. 
 
So how can you argue on one hand one and on the other you’re 
doing the exact thing that the CRTC is saying that they’re going 
to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’m not entirely sure that the member and 
I are talking on the same purpose, and I’m not trying to be 
sarcastic here. 

There are two separate issues. One is SaskTel’s rates to keep 
the corporation viable. Now that has nothing to do with my 
department. So my department is not involved with SaskTel 
setting the rates for its service. 
 
Where we are involved is as to whether there will be a 
surcharge on long distance, which is 3 cents a minute in this 
province and that applies to everyone using our phone lines, not 
just SaskTel. But 3 cents a minute is a surcharge that goes into a 
fund, and that fund is expressly for the purpose of a 
cross-subsidization to making sure that subscribers in more 
remote locations will have affordable rates. And that is the only 
area that we’re involved in. 
 
As I say we’re already doing it as a province, but we think it 
would be better to do it as a nation because the problem that we 
are up against in Saskatchewan — though no doubt it exists 
elsewhere — the problem we’re up against in Saskatchewan is 
that our mix of urban versus rural is greater than in other 
provinces. As I’ve already pointed out, Ontario’s got Toronto, 
BC (British Columbia) has got Vancouver — a higher per cent. 
 
We have in relative terms the most thinly scattered population, 
a large area and a small population that we’re trying to serve. 
And this universal service fund, at present 3 cents a minute on 
long distance users, carriers — and that’s a charge against the 
companies — it’s what we use to cross-subsidize. And that’s 
where we’re trying to get the federal cabinet to agree to a 
similar fund on a national rather than a provincial basis. 
 
And as . . . I guess I would have to ask the hon. member, just to 
make sure that we are in fact on the same page here: does the 
hon. member agree that some sort of cross-subsidization is 
necessary in order to make sure that residents living in rural and 
northern areas will be able to afford to have the Internet, to have 
telephones, to have telecommunications the same as other 
residents? Or does her party think that we should just simply 
have an open free market which would mean that telephone 
services would come down in the large urban areas, and be out 
of sight in some of the rural areas? 
 
So if she could tell me where she and her party stands on this, it 
would help me to answer her concerns. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Minister, my question 
to you is: why have you made the move to charge the rates that 
are being imposed by CRTC at this time when it has not come 
into effect yet? You are gouging the people of this province and 
charging them fees that I have been told — I’ve met with 
SaskTel officials — I’ve been told that they have to charge 
these because of a CRTC ruling that is coming into effect in 
July so they’re phasing it in now. The government has decided 
that they’re going to do it now. 
 
Now tell me why, on one hand you’re going to Ottawa and 
saying we’re appealing this, we want you to help us to keep 
rates down. And on the other hand, you’re already 
implementing them. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’m not trying to duck the question, but I 
was trying to flag that the rates charged by SaskTel — which, I 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

understand, are among the lowest in Canada — those rates, I 
and my department do not have any involvement in. Our sole 
involvement is on this issue of a service fund which is 3 cents a 
minute for long distance in this province. And I understand it’s 
considerably lower in Toronto; I think it’s half a cent. 
 
So if you want to complain about SaskTel rates, I mean we do 
have the rate utility commission. You recall in the last 
provincial election, the Liberals said we should have 
independent rate review. Now it’s not part of my department, 
but the Liberals said we should have independent rate review; 
the NDP weren’t so sure. Since the coalition, we’re getting an 
independent rate review commission. 
 
So, I think you should go before them if your issue is SaskTel 
charges. Because they’re the people who are in charge of that 
— not me. 
 
But on the universal service fund — if I could come back to that 
— because we’re not doing it on a national basis, our service 
fund here in Saskatchewan is relatively high. It has to be 
because we don’t have a lot of urbans. And so, our service fund 
charge is 3 cents per long distance minute. In Toronto, it’s half 
a cent for long distance minute. 
 
And we think that it’s very important, for national reasons, that 
there be a standard policy across Canada. We think that one of 
the modern, democratic rights that our citizens should have is 
access to the Internet, access to telecommunications, on an 
affordable basis. And we’re only going to have this if we have a 
universal service fund such as what this legislature has 
endorsed. And that’s what we’re pushing for. That’s what my 
department is leading the appeal to the federal cabinet on. 
 
That is, unfortunately, the only involvement my department has 
on SaskTel rates. The rest of the SaskTel rates, you should take 
to the independent rate review commission that my party 
pushed for and demanded. And that’s the proper format for 
dealing with that issue. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, your department is 
responsible for CRTC. SaskTel claims that their service rates 
are tied to CRTC rulings. I met with SaskTel officials because 
of people in my constituency that have been charged outrageous 
fees for installation. Now if they go into a town, they pay 
$5,000 less than if they step over the line and they’re in the RM. 
This is because of CRTC rulings. And you have put these into 
effect ahead of the deadline. 
 
I would like to know why your government has put these into 
effect before they had to implement them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’m certainly not trying to duck the 
question but may I again say — one, in a few weeks we’re 
under the CRTC. And if I may say, the Canadian Radio and 
Television Commission, the reason they have jurisdiction, is a 
reinterpretation of the Constitution of Canada. You are aware 
that under the constitution, public works of a local nature are 
given to the provinces. 
 
Now in the early days of this province, of fence phones, etc., 

telephones were of a local nature and consequently they were 
provincial in jurisdiction. Now what has happened is of course 
with modern telecommunications, our telephones give us 
instant access around the globe and therefore it has now been 
interpreted that they are no longer local, they are national and 
therefore they fell under the jurisdiction of the federal 
government. 
 
Now there will, I understand, be greater administrative and 
regulatory costs to SaskTel because they will have to fall under 
the CRTC; and they’ve tried to get ready for that. 
 
Now that isn’t a function of my department, that they have to 
deal with the fact that they used to have a monopoly in long 
distance; they don’t any more, they’re in competition. They 
have to deal with the fact that they’re going to be regulated by 
the CRTC. They’re trying to cope with a changing global 
economy, a changing global environment, and a changing 
regulatory environment. 
 
I don’t have any direct input into that except on the issue of 
whether or not there should be a national service fund, whether 
or not you believe in cross-subsidization. 
 
So I come back to the hon. member. The appeal that my 
department is taking to the federal cabinet is to ask the federal 
cabinet for cross-subsidization whereby in effect urban 
Canadians will pay to make sure that rural Canadians will have 
the same access to telephone telecommunications as they have. 
 
Now we believe that’s important. We believe that’s very 
important, that rural farmers, reserves, the North, these people, 
should be able to get the Internet and they should have 
telephones. Now we accept that as important. Do you? Do you 
agree with us? 
 
The only involvement of my department in SaskTel — period, 
full stop — is this appeal to the federal cabinet asking for a 
national service fund which in effect establishes 
cross-subsidization so that rural Canadians will have affordable 
access to telecommunications. Do you support that appeal? 
Because that’s the only involvement my department has got. 
 
I sense that you think this is wrong. I think . . . I sense that 
you’re saying you would support Toronto and Saskatoon and 
Regina having low telephone rates so that people who don’t live 
in the urban areas will have to go back to sending letters or 
smoke signals or whatever. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Chairman, to the minister. I’ve asked a simple 
question. On one hand you tell me that your responsibility is to 
put in the national service fund agreement — to work on that — 
but on the other hand your department has no responsibility for 
CRTC rulings today. 
 
I’m sorry, you can’t have it both ways. The CRTC rulings that 
are supposed to come into effect July 1st are already being 
implemented by this government. The people of Saskatchewan 
are paying the price. 
 
You’re telling me that your department is trying to cope. Well 
our concern is not your department. Our concern is the fee that 
the people in rural and Northern Saskatchewan are having to 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

pay for rulings that aren’t even in effect yet but you are 
implementing. Now I would like to know how you can justify 
this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Mr. Chairman, what I explained a 
few minutes ago about telephones transporting from provincial 
jurisdiction to national actually occurred everywhere else in 
Canada several years ago, about seven years ago. And we 
applied for an exemption here which was granted for seven 
years. But that exemption is now expiring on July 1 which, after 
all, is a few weeks away. 
 
And with that exemption we had a moratorium on increases in 
rates. Now we’ve also had SaskTel lose its monopoly on 
long-distance service and will be losing its monopoly on local 
service. And so we have to cope with this environment which in 
terms of protecting the rural people that you mentioned, our 
point is that if SaskTel is not competitive in the cities we could 
end up with a scenario where the subscribers are in 
Fond-du-Lac and Val Marie and Fir Mountain and Carrot River, 
in other words in the communities that Ma Bell isn’t interested 
in servicing, and how do we guarantee good service for them? 
 
Well what we say is we are going to guarantee good service for 
the entire province, no matter where you live, by convincing the 
federal cabinet to adopt a national service fund. That’s how we 
are going to protect rural people. So this is not about gouging 
rural people; this is about protecting them in the long term so 
that they will have telecommunications, Internet, telephone 
services on the same basis as urban Canadians. That’s what 
we’re fighting for. 
 
Now will you support the amendment that is sponsored by my 
department to ask for this national service fund? Now that’s my 
only involvement, that’s my only involvement on this file is the 
national service fund. Will you support us, will you lobby the 
federal government for the national service fund? Or do you 
believe, do you believe that say Toronto shouldn’t have to pay 
as much for telephone, so that the people who don’t live in 
Toronto will just have to pay whatever the market can bear or 
do without? 
 
I put it to you: do you support what we are doing — because 
this is the only involvement we have is the national service fund 
— do you support what we’re doing or do you support 
telecommunications services only being available to urban 
Canadians on an affordable basis? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I will ask the 
question again. If you are concerned as you say about the 
people of this province in rural and remote areas having 
reasonable fees, then why is your government today charging 
the fees that will come into effect on July 1? You have been 
doing this since the beginning of the year. 
 
We have people in rural Saskatchewan that are putting services 
into businesses. If their business is within the town, they pay 
$5,000 less than if they’re over the line and in the RM. And we 
are told that by . . . from SaskTel that this is because of CRTC 
rulings. They have no choice — no choice. So if SaskTel 
doesn’t have any choice, then obviously the direction is coming 
from your department which does control CRTC. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I realize that . . . You 
know when . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, when the hon. 
member says that I control the federal CRTC, I realize we’re in 
one of those fundamental disagreements. It’s sort of the same 
fundamental disagreement when I say it’s important to have an 
Aboriginal minister of Aboriginal Affairs, and they say it’s a 
waste of taxpayers’ money even though we’re not spending any 
taxpayers’ money. I realize we’ve just got that philosophical 
difference. 
 
I’m telling you that we now have in this province, thanks to the 
Liberal Party, an independent rate review commission; and if 
you have complaints on rates presently charged on SaskTel, 
they go before the independent rate review commission. 
 
Now after July 1, those issues will be decided by not our 
independent rate review commission — they will not be 
decided in Saskatchewan at all, they will not be decided by the 
cabinet of Saskatchewan — they will decided by the federal 
CRTC, which I regret to inform the hon. member I do not 
control. I’m sorry I don’t control it. 
 
However, the one thing that we see we can do to make sure that 
Canadians living in rural, remote, northern, and reserve areas 
will have a portable access to modern telecommunications is 
through this national service fund. That’s why we’re . . . that’s 
why we’re advancing this afield. That’s why we’re working on 
it. 
 
And I ask again, the hon. member says she’s not getting . . . 
Honestly, Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to answer her questions as 
best I can. I’m trying to understand her when she says that I 
control the CRTC. It’s hard to understand her but I’m honestly 
trying. 
 
But I ask her again for the fourth or fifth or sixth time: does she 
support the work of my department in trying to get a national 
service fund to protect rural and remote and northern Canadians 
to get modern telecommunication services? Does she? Does her 
party support us in that appeal? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, and to Mr. Minister, I will 
re-phrase the question. Did your department advise SaskTel to 
start implementing CRTC ruling now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — No. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Chairman, and to the 
Minister. Mr. Minister, if your department did not advise 
SaskTel to start using . . . to implementing CRTC fees, then 
why would SaskTel be using these fee structure now? And why 
would they be telling MLAs on this side of the House, when we 
inquire of them why they are using these fee hikes, that it’s 
because of CRTC ruling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well you know, again, I’m not trying to 
duck this but you know unfortunately SaskTel is not within my 
department. I can only say that in a very few weeks time we’re 
under the CRTC. We’re now under an independent rate review 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2000 

process established by the cabinet of Saskatchewan. That will 
be falling away very shortly as we move under federal 
regulation. And you know we’re going to have to, we’re going 
to have to get ready. 
 
(1645) 
 
And SaskTel has worked very hard to deal with the issue of 
competition in long distance, which is already here; competition 
in the rural market, which will soon be here. 
 
And the only involvement my department has is to try and make 
sure that Canadians who do not live in the large urban centres 
— Canadians who live on the farm, Canadians who live in the 
small villages, people who live on our Indian reserves, people 
who live in the Far North — that they will also have the benefit 
of modern telecommunications. That’s what I’m committed to. 
That’s what my department is committed to. That’s what this 
government’s committed to. 
 
May I ask for the seventh time: is the Saskatchewan Party in 
agreement with us? Do you think it’s important for affordable 
telecommunication services to rural people? Or should we just 
cut them loose and not worry about this national service fund 
that we’re so concerned about? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, when 
did your department talk to SaskTel about CRTC rulings? They 
obviously know this is coming in effect. When did you first 
start discussing this with SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, it was 
actually seven years ago that the constitutional ruling came 
down that telephone telecommunications service was no longer 
under provincial jurisdiction but under the jurisdiction of the 
federal government. At that time Saskatchewan obtained a 
five-year exemption, which subsequently became a seven-year 
exemption. 
 
But I think the answer to the hon. member is, we have known 
for seven years that this was coming. And we’ve delayed it. But 
the delay time is running out. The delay time is now a few 
weeks away. But in terms of how long have we been discussing 
this, how long have we been planning for it, how long have we 
been preparing for it, the answer is seven years. 
 
The issues became more urgent last fall when the CRTC made 
its ruling against a national service fund. That was, I believe, 
last October. And we appealed it. Now this ruling against a 
national service fund did not directly apply to us at the time 
because of course we still weren’t under federal jurisdiction, but 
we knew that we would be in the matter of a few months. And 
now we’re going to be in the matter of a few weeks. 
 
But the short answer to the hon. member’s question is, we have 
known and been preparing for national regulation for seven 
years. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what concerns did 
you have that made you appeal it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, we are very, very concerned 
that without a national service fund, one of two things can happen. 

The first is that if we don’t have proper cross-subsidization, then 
the cost of telephone telecommunication services in our rural and 
northern areas will become prohibitively expensive and our 
residents who don’t live in the cities simply won’t have 
telephone access or Internet access. That’s our chief concern. 
 
The other concern is to keep SaskTel competitive in the cities; 
that with cross-subsidization, if you have cross-subsidization, 
you run the risk that city rates do not become competitive. 
Because the concern is that some of the larger international 
companies may be interested in servicing, may be interested in 
servicing the large urban areas, but would they be interested in 
servicing some of the smaller towns or the farms. And our fear 
is they would not. 
 
So the fundamental commitment of this government which led 
to the appeal is that we want to make sure that all of our 
residents, no matter where they live, will have affordable 
telecommunications and telephone service whether they are on 
the farm, whether in the small villages, whether they are on the 
reserve, whether they are in the North. 
 
And that’s why we have asked for a national service fund, that’s 
the only device we can come up with that will ensure that 
young people will have the same access to all the world’s 
knowledge, the libraries of the world, through their Internet, 
that they would have if they lived in New York or Toronto. 
 
And that’s why we launched this appeal and I would hope that 
the Saskatchewan Party would agree with this. I’ve been 
waiting to hear the Saskatchewan Party say they agree with the 
national service fund. I haven’t heard it yet. I’m hopeful that 
maybe before we adjourn here that I will hear it. 
 
But that’s why we launched the appeal because we are 
committed to affordable telecommunication services for all the 
residents of Saskatchewan no matter where they live. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. The problem that the 
Saskatchewan Party has is with the fact that SaskTel has been 
charging CRTC rates before it’s implemented. 
 
And the constituent that I have, who is a business — he is 
definitely expanding his business so it’s great for the economic 
development of the province — was charged CRTC rates on 
July 1 of 1999. So that’s a year prior to supposedly these 
becoming into effect. 
 
So can you explain why that is not gouging this business 
person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Again, I’m not trying to duck the 
question, Mr. Chairman, but of course this does not fall under 
this department. It’s a question to CRTC and of course the 
independent rate review commission that has been established 
as to the purpose and their rates. 
 
My department does not set rates for SaskTel or any other 
Crown corporation, nor do we have any involvement 
whatsoever in the setting of Crown corporation rates. 
 
Our sole involvement is the national service fund, and the 
reason for the national service fund is that we believe that 



May 3, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

Saskatchewan residents — living on the farm, living in our 
small villages, living on our Indian reserves, living in the North 
— they have the same fundamental rights to 
telecommunications and telephone services as those Canadians 
living in Toronto and Montreal and Vancouver. 
 
That’s my department’s involvement, and that’s what I’m here 
to talk about this afternoon. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can you . . . Since 
this isn’t your department, would you mind informing SaskTel 
that until July 1 you are not under CRTC regulations? You 
could send them a letter and perhaps . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I’m not sure, I’m not sure that SaskTel 
needs to be informed that July 1 is the magic date under which 
they will switch over to CRTC regulation. But if they’re not 
aware of that fact, I would certainly be happy to communicate it 
to them. But I suspect that they are. 
 
But I would say to the hon. member opposite, your party has 
asked for deregulation. Your party did not want SaskTel under 
provincial regulation. Well it won’t be under provincial 
regulation any more. You wanted deregulation; you wanted 
globalization; you don’t want controls. You want the free 
market operating even though we all know that the free market 
is going to be kinder to Toronto than it’s going to be to Val 
Marie. That’s what you wanted. 
 
You want a free market in which the companies will decide 
what is an appropriate charge in Montreal and what is an 
appropriate charge in Fond-du-Lac or Roche Percee. So you 
fought for deregulation. Congratulations — you won. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


