





























































Hansard: June 12, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1737 
 June 12, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair: — I remind committee members that this 
department was last here on May 8 and, before that, on April 
14. Committee members will find the estimates starting on page 
71 and 72, and before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Highways to reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Seated to my right is the deputy minister of Highways and 
Transportation, Ron Styles. Immediately to my left is Barry 
Martin, assistant deputy minister of operation. Seated behind 
me and to my right is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy 
minister of corporate services. And seated directly behind me is 
Fred Antunes, the director of operations, support and planning. 
 
I actually thought I might have gone through an entire day 
without questions, but I guess that’s not the case. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
There’s been a lot of contention as to how much money the 
government is or isn’t spending on highways this year, 
therefore I’d like to ask some questions in direct relationship to 
what the budget talks about as far as it comes to spending 
money on highways. The budget has allocated $250 million this 
year for highways, but most of that — I shouldn’t say most — a 
significant portion of that goes for administration and various 
other items. The two largest pieces though are for preservation 
of transportation system, 109 million, and construction of 
transportation system, 61 million. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can explain to us exactly how 
much of the $61 million of construction money actually ends up 
on the road not counting your planning department and all of 
the other auxiliary services that we’ve included in construction 
planning, but that actually makes it to going onto the road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My response to that would be that all of 
it goes into the roads . . . into construction, I should say. 
However, there is for engineering services — which obviously I 
don’t think you could do any of this work without engineering 
— there’s 5.491 million. So the total, if you discount any 
engineering costs, the actual amount is 55.792 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much of 
the 61 million allocated to construction is purchase of materials 
and supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t know if you can be any clearer 
in the question. You’re fairly specific in what you’re asking. 
But when we do a tender, the tender includes in most time . . . it 
most often includes the supplies as well or the material as well, 

so it’s difficult to answer the question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay when you’re doing a tender for 
construction of a piece of highway, you include the material in 
it. The equipment would be included as part of the tender and 
salaries. Do they take up the entire $55 million that you were 
talking about for those three items? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to your question is yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of the $109 
million that you have allocated for preservation, how much of 
that . . . now that, because it’s not being tendered in most cases, 
that’s being put on by the Department of Highways itself. How 
much of that is material and supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, to answer the question. First of 
all, when I run through this I want to respond to one of the 
points you made that the private contractors get very little of 
this work. 
 
First of all, salaries — 18,116,000. That’s the salaries we pay 
internally to the department staff that do the work. To suppliers 
and for supplies — 31,440,000. And over 50 per cent — 
59,942,000 — goes to private contractors that do a lot of the 
work that you’ve described in the 109 million, which is a point 
that I’ve often made is that a large part of this work actually 
goes to private contractors and road builders as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well as you 
drive around this province and whenever you see a highways 
vehicle, there’s a good number of them that are fairly new 
vehicles, if you happen to see one. Where in the budget is the 
purchase or lease, as the case may be, of new highway 
equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We apparently do the specifications for 
the types of equipment that we want and then we turn it over to 
Sask. Property Management who does the tendering for the 
purchase of the equipment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And where does that show up though in 
the Highways budget? Do you pay them a lease or do you pay 
them capital costs for the purchase of the equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s purchased through the revolving 
fund. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, you know I’ve waited a long 
time for this opportunity and I almost missed it tonight, so we’ll 
get right to the meat of the matter here if we can. Mr. Minister 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you doing? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I hate it when he puts words in my mouth, but 
sometimes he gets more to the point than I do. 
 
We’ve got a $250 million budget which you repeatedly have 
said is the largest your government has ever had for highways. 
It’s a 6.6 per cent increase, $15.4 million more money. Now in 
terms of percentage, the largest increase, when I went through 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

the Estimates, appears to be going to the airport projects, 
particularly in the North, and I think most specifically the La 
Ronge airport. Now the money for this project, as I understand 
it, comes from the federal government. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes it is. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well if so, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to continue with this line of questioning. If this is so, really 
that amount of money is just a flow-through amount. The fact is 
that $4.5 million of the total 15.4 is actually a gift from the 
federal government for which your government is taking credit 
in this budget. That means 30 per cent of the whole increase is 
not really provincial money at all. Would you care to elaborate 
on that particular item please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’d just say, at that level of contribution 
we think the federal government should be contributing a lot 
more than that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chair, the federal government seems to be 
on the hook for a lot of money for the Department of Highways 
these days, and if you can get it, we’ll all be grateful. 
 
For the record, Mr. Minister, will you explain to us the 
difference between the new road classification system and the 
system which we are currently using and are familiar with? Are 
there costs associated with the implementation of the new 
classification system, and where are they indicated in your 
estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just to add one more point before I 
answer the question that you’ve just asked. 
 
The funding that we talked about through the airports, which is 
ACAP (Airports Capital Assistance Program), that is essentially 
the only funding that the province receives from the federal 
government. There isn’t any other source of funding for 
transportation, other than I understand . . . I think $300,000, that 
really is almost nothing, through the CAIP 
(Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) program 
that’s left. Other than that, the province funds transportation 
entirely on its own. 
 
I’ll answer your other question in just a second. 
 
We’ve gone from 12 classifications down to 7 classifications. 
There’s no cost at all incurred in going from 12 to 7 for anyone. 
And the rationale for it was just simply to get some consistency 
across the province as traffic patterns have changed to some 
degree. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, just following up on that, I 
understand that the classification system, the new system, was 
arrived at after extensive efforts on the part of a committee. So 
the cost for that committee — they would have meeting costs 
and travel costs and so forth — are they indicated anywhere in 
the estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Apparently not because that would have 
been last year’s costs and we’re dealing with this year’s 
estimates. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, as I looked at the estimates this 
year I see a $4.5 million additional amount going to airports 
which we have talked of as a flow-through from the federal 
government; salaries increasing by $2.3 million; 
accommodation and central services estimates up by $1.5 
million; for a total of 8.3 million. Now if the increase in the 
budget is 15.4 that means that more than one-half of the 
increase isn’t even going to get to the road system for 
construction or repair. 
 
The $1.5 million going to supplies or suppliers as an increase in 
the budget is quite substantial in my estimation. Can you tell me 
what the supplies are and what do the increases actually 
represent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Now if after I’ve gone through this I 
haven’t answered your question, just rephrase it. Here’s our 
breakdown of the 15.5 million increase. Seven, just let me, 
highway construction and maintenance is 7.9 million; winter 
maintenance .54 million; pavement, marking, and other road 
safety initiatives, 830,000; ferries, 100,000; and airport 
upgrades, 4.53 million. That should give you the total of 15.5. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The deputy Highways 
critic just handed me a news release which I had on file and 
neglected to bring with me today, but in this news release of 
March 6 there is in this amount a warrant of $2.2 million to 
Highways for improvements to northern airports. 
 
And I guess what I would like you to tell me is that’s obviously 
money over and above the budgeted amount we were talking 
about earlier, so can you explain where that additional money 
went? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Those are all federal, those were all 
federal dollars, and it was a flow through. If you want, I’ll just 
read into the record where they went: La Ronge, so it’s the 
ACAP program for ’99-00; La Ronge, engineering, 25,000; 
Stony Rapids, electrical, 54,000; Fond-du-Lac, surfacing 
1,589,000; Fond-du-Lac, fencing 224,000; Fond-du-Lac 
electrical, a hundred and fifty-five thousand; Fond-du-Lac 
engineering, 21,000; Wollaston Lake surfacing, 459,000; 
Wollaston Lake engineering, 18,000; Uranium City grader, 
275,000; Uranium City lighting and resizing, 763,000. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give us some 
background or explanation as to why all federal monies are 
earmarked for northern airports versus any of the other airports 
that serve the province from — let’s say — Saskatoon south. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Essentially, it’s a federal program, and 
they determine which airports the money will go to. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In view of the increasing need for support, for 
runway renewal and some other improvement to southern 
airports, the examples of which have been brought to my 
attention by a number of communities, especially in the Cypress 
Hills constituency but others as well, do you anticipate at any 
point to being involved in financing projects of that nature in 
some of the southern airports? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In terms of capital funding there’s not 
any capital funding provided, we still provide the . . . I think it’s 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

$104,000 in operating grant money. However, most of these 
airports that are owned by municipal governments, they’re 
certainly free to apply under the infrastructure. I guess probably 
there would be no reason why they couldn't qualify, some of 
them, for the Centenary Fund as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would that be the provincial-municipal 
program you’re talking about or is it an anticipated 
federal-provincial infrastructure program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer would be both. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Over the last week or 10 days, the prospect of reverting roads to 
gravel has been a fairly contentious issue and maybe we could 
move into that area at this point, seeing it has considerable 
public appeal, if nothing else. 
 
Mr. Minister, for the record, would you please describe for us 
the financial rationale for returning portions of TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads to gravel. For example, what is the 
cost per kilometre to undertake such reversion and what is the 
maintenance cost of a reverted road on a per kilometre basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — While they’re getting some of the 
numbers together, first of all let me say that primarily . . . and 
our number one rationale for this is safety. In many of the roads 
which are, by the way, very short sections of a thin membrane 
surface that have been converted back to gravel. As you will 
know some of them are parts of a kilometre, I think, to the 
longest one I’ve seen, I think, so far is about 15 kilometres. 
 
Now if we wanted to reconstruct the thin membrane surface, 
they would really last my department tells me probably — with 
the traffic that they’re having to bear now — probably a 
maximum of about three years. So really it doesn’t make a lot 
of sense to spend a fair bit of money reconstructing a similar 
road surface. 
 
So what we’re really looking at is two decisions: either trying to 
maintain the thin membrane surface — I should say three 
decisions — thin membrane surface that will break up fairly 
quickly and is fairly costly; going to the gravel surface which is 
safer we think and which structurally does stand up; or go to a 
structural pavement which we’re looking at, my understanding 
is, anywhere from 150,000 to $250,000 per kilometre. 
 
Obviously if we made that decision there would be very few 
kilometres of road that we could actually do. But I’ll get the 
answer to the question in terms of gravel in just a second here. 
 
I want the member to understand that these are . . . the numbers 
I’m going to give you are averages, because there’ll be a huge 
variance — I shouldn’t say huge — but there’ll be a large 
variance depending on the area that you’re in. 
 
The cost to convert, on average, to gravel would be $12,000 
about per kilometre. The cost to reconstruct the thin membrane 
that many of these surfaces, when they’ve been converted to 
gravel, have come from is about 15 to 20,000 per kilometre. So 
not significantly more to go to, to reconstruct the thin 
membrane than to convert to gravel really. But here’s the . . . 

and I’ve given you the structural pavement — it’s 150,000 to 
250,000. 
 
But here’s where the real significant difference is. The cost of 
operating a gravel and a safe surface is somewhere between 
1,500 to $2,000 per kilometre per year. And what we . . . with 
the thin membrane surface that we’re . . . right now we're 
spending up to $8,000 for maintenance to try and hold them. 
And in many cases, even at that cost per kilometre and with the 
truck traffic that’s on them, we’re not able to hold those 
surfaces as you’ve pointed out to me on a number of occasions. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I must 
be getting hard of hearing. Even with the aid of a hearing 
assistance, I didn’t catch the last figure you gave concerning . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eight thousand. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Eight thousand, is that right? Okay, thank you. 
You did mention . . . you did mention in your comments earlier, 
the possibility of reconstructing a TMS road. I’d like to know 
precisely what you mean by reconstructing. Is that lifting the 
existing surface, reheating it and laying it down, or is there 
something else associated with that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes we wouldn’t . . . When I was using 
that number, we wouldn’t actually pick that up and regrind it 
and put it back down again. What it really is, is clearing that 
right off and putting down the same type of surface that was 
there before which would cost us 15 to $20,000. So it would be 
the same type of surface. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask now in view of 
the cost it takes to return a road to gravel, that’s a capital 
investment in that road. How long do you anticipate recouping 
your costs given what you’ve perceive to be cheaper 
maintenance? How many years would it take you to recover 
your costs generally speaking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I want to remind the member again, Mr. 
Chairman, that our number one concern in all of this is safety. 
That’s our first concern is safety. We want to be sure that when 
the public and when large trucks are travelling on these roads 
that they’re doing it safely, so that’s our number one issue — 
not the cost. But based on your question, somewhere between 
two and three years and we would have recovered that cost. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate the concern for safety. I think that we all have that as 
a kind of a motivating factor when we make these decisions. 
But in the interests of safety, you’ve spent millions of dollars 
providing an exchange, an overpass and a turnout outside of the 
city here, and yet in the interests of safety we’re reverting roads 
to gravel in the many of the areas of rural Saskatchewan. In 
some respects that won’t seem equitable, I don’t think, even to 
the most unfair-minded person. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, I’m just going to make the point 
that I think the Premier made during question period today. The 
bulk of our budget goes to rural Saskatchewan. So while I 
understand the point that you’re making, the majority of our 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

maintenance, preservation, construction, it all goes into rural 
Saskatchewan. I understand the concern by citizens that are 
affected by the conversion of gravel, but the bulk of our budget 
by far goes to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, earlier in the minister’s comments 
he mentioned that he was giving me averages, and I appreciate 
that. It’s pretty hard to be specific from road to road. But there are 
sometimes variables that come into play. Some roads may recover, 
you may recover your costs quicker than others. Could you give 
me an indication of what kind of variables might come into play in 
ascertaining what those averages are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just before I answer that question, I’ve just 
been handed some statistics here as well. This is the Pasqua 
interchange you were just alluding to and I thought you might 
be interested in this. Obviously, I mean, the interchange is used 
not only by the residents of Regina; it’s used by a good number 
of Saskatchewan residents, both urban and rural. 
 
It actually has a fairly — in the interests of safety — it actually 
has a fairly high accident rate. The average number of accidents 
between 1990 . . . between 1988, I should say, and 1997 was 9 
per year. There were 2 fatal accidents and 62 injuries over this 
period of time. And the number of accidents has been 
increasing, so that was the rationale for there. 
 
And with the construction of that interchange, certainly we 
don’t view that as — as a matter of fact, it’s actually 
constructed outside of the city limits — but we don’t view that 
as a capital construction . . . as capital construction for the city 
of Regina. 
 
Some of the issues — getting back to your most . . . to your 
latter question — some of the factors that affect those variances 
I talked about earlier would, first of all, be the amount of truck 
traffic, the width and height of the existing roadbed, soil types, 
and certainly the environment, the amount of rainfall that we’ve 
had in the recent past. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Just as an aside, one of my colleagues asked me 
to ask you: in the construction of the Pasqua interchange, when 
you went to the expense of building the type of system you did 
there, would it not have been just as cost effective to go to a full 
cloverleaf because in the interests of safety, they said, some of 
those interests are not well-served with the current design? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No it wouldn’t. We don’t believe it 
would have made sense to go to the full cloverleaf. It was the 
most economic design. It’ll easily handle the traffic, we believe, 
even projecting into the future — even at the phenomenal 
growth rate that’s taking place in Saskatchewan right now — 
for the next 25 years. And we thought if we used that design we 
could spend more money on roads in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to return to the TMS and gravel issue if I can. 
I understand that contracts have been let for some of the 
projects that the department has scheduled for this year already. 
And I’m wondering how many of those contracts are going to 
be undertaken by private firms, and how many projects of that 
type will be undertaken by the department itself? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If I understand your question correctly, 
they would be all private contractors. We don’t have that type 
of equipment to do the milling that you’re describing. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well then that kind of takes the wind out of my 
next question because I was going to ask which of those two 
options might be more cost-effective. 
 
This year’s anticipated projects for gravel conversions are in the 
range of 210 kilometres. And I’d like to know, for the record, 
what the determining factors were in making the decision to 
turn those specific roads back to gravel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You asked how we picked the . . . 
selected the pieces that go back, revert back to gravel. Really 
there’s absolutely no plan about how we pick sections that go 
back to gravel. 
 
Many of the sections I think that we’ve described that might 
possibly go back to gravel, two or three months ago it would 
have been our plan to hold those. And that’s our objective from 
the department’s perspective to hold those thin membrane 
surfaces actually as long as possible and forever if possible. 
 
But they . . . some of those have broken up much quicker than 
we would have anticipated, and obviously by the fact that some 
of these are as short as 300 metres, 400 metres says that we 
haven’t sort of laid out a plan to pick out sections that are 300 
metres or 400 metres or a kilometre or five kilometres. They 
simply fail and we just can’t simply hold them. 
 
As an example, on Highway No. 18, the one that we’ve talked 
about quite a bit in the last week or so, there was a significant 
amount of money spent on that road in the last year . . . last year 
actually, in last year’s budget, in trying to hold that thin 
membrane surface and it simply, the department couldn’t do it 
any more. Another statistic or number you might be interested 
in is that we spent $44 million in capital and maintenance on 
thin membrane surface roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to follow this line of 
questioning with the minister because I would assume that 
when you look at a piece of highway you can decide whether or 
not you’re going to change it back to gravel by the number of 
potholes there or the cost of the project or possibly the 
destination that can be reached via that stretch of road. 
 
So I guess my question is going to be summed up by the 
following sort of indications. When you’re looking at a piece of 
road, would you consider the economic impact of reverting that 
stretch of road back to gravel? Would you look at it vis-à-vis 
the communities that are affected or the destinations, such as a 
tourist area or tourist-related facilities? Would those be 
considered in your equation at all? Because I think what we’re 
hearing from a lot of the people who are most adversely 
affected is not an issue of convenience but a real issue of 
economics, from their standpoint. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We take everything into consideration 
really when doing this and when taking a section of road then 
and putting it back to gravel. There would be . . . We’re trying 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

to think of a circumstance where this hadn’t occurred, but I 
don’t think that is the case. 
 
We would almost always — I can say probably always — I 
don’t want to say with 100 per cent assurance because sure as 
heck somebody’s going to say you didn’t talk to us about this, 
but we are of the view that in every case we’ve talked to local 
government, to describe to them what we’re planning to do in 
that area, if it includes some reversion back to gravel. Now they 
might not be in agreement with it, but that’s . . . we’ve always, 
as far as we know, have had the discussion. 
 
Very simply, we try to consider everything before we make the 
decision as to whether to revert to gravel or not. And it’s simply 
a matter of the amount of money that we have available within 
the department to spend on highways. 
 
If we decide, as an example, to pick one section of road and 
hold it as a thin membrane surface or as a structural paved 
surface, then that . . . and if it’s in severe disrepair, that would 
mean therefore, obviously, that we’ll have to pick some other 
parts of the province that probably we won’t be able to hold. 
 
So we try to take the amount of dollars that we have and spend 
them in the most judicious way that we possibly can. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the limitations on 
your budget, departmentally, but when you’re looking at the 
economic impact of roads, I think more than the Department of 
Highway’s budget has to be taken into consideration. 
 
If you make the failure of a business a result of not looking after 
the road properly, or if there is a tourist destination, and I’m 
referring more specifically now to a golf course that was 
featured on the news just recently, if you make that particular 
place non-viable because patrons can’t reach it safely, there is 
an economic impact that doesn’t necessarily reflect in your 
budget. Your budget is limited to the circumstances that you 
have to deal with. 
 
But the overall effect, the overall economic effect of the 
downturn in business at any of those establishments that are 
served by that road, have a very negative cumulative effect on 
the economic well-being of that particular area, and maybe in 
terms of the provinces well-being too. 
 
So I guess I would like to see the Department of Highways, 
when they make these kind of determinations, take a broader 
view — not just what they can afford to do, but what is 
necessary for the good of the province in terms of those kind of 
decisions. 
 
Maybe we can just move on to another . . . I think maybe the ice 
cream truck has arrived. Is that what’s happening here? Maybe 
we could move on to another area. 
 
How much of the traffic count, numbers, are taken into 
consideration? Is that ever part of the determination when a 
certain section of road is planned to go back to gravel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I was negligent I think in the last answer 
by not raising as well that we do a lot of work with the area 
transportation planning committees who identify many of the 

priorities that you’ve been asking about. They’ve been very 
helpful to the department in that regard. 
 
Absolutely, we look at traffic counts. Especially we look at how 
much commercial traffic is on those roads. As an example, if 
there would be a low, large truck traffic count; and high vehicle, 
small vehicle or private vehicle traffic count as opposed to large 
trucks; we would probably try and hold that thin membrane 
surface much longer and likely it’s not going to see as much 
disrepair. But absolutely, we consider the amount and volume 
of traffic. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to address this question 
as a supplement to the previous one. When doing traffic counts, 
how are sites selected for the placement of these traffic counts? 
And the reason I’m asking that question is that it’s been 
suggested to me in several instances that counters were actually 
placed in such a position as to minimize the count that would be 
obtained on a given stretch of highway. 
 
The question I suppose secondarily is, have department 
personnel been instructed to make efforts to place the counters 
at points where the traffic count would be less than normally 
expected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, may I have leave to 
introduce guests before I answer the question? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll let the members 
opposite guess who’s asked me to make this introduction. I’d 
like to introduce to the members of the Assembly seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Matthew Lingenfelter, who’s sitting up there 
visiting us this evening. So if people would join me in 
welcoming Matthew to the Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To answer the question regarding traffic 
counts we believe that absolutely that the numbers that we’re 
getting are accurate. As a matter of fact, the department argued 
that we actually strategically place them to get as accurate a 
count as we possibly can. 
 
The way the department describes it for me is that most of the 
roads that they put them on are . . . the way we describe them is 
closed loops so that we put them in a section so that if they 
enter one section of road they have to go over the counter 
before exiting. So we would do our very best to get as accurate 
a count as we possibly can. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I think 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

that there are people who would disagree with that assertion 
frankly, and I have some specific examples I would be happy to 
share with you and the department at a later date. 
 
I’d like to ask now though, now that you’ve described the traffic 
count and the accuracy that you hope to attain with those traffic 
counters, are those figures that you gather, are they subject to audit 
at all or review or challenge by municipal authorities or the public 
at large? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Chair, if I could say to the 
member, if he is aware of situations where he thinks a traffic 
counter is inappropriately placed or he knows of somebody who 
thinks it is, we would really encourage him or others to let us 
know about those because truthfully we really do want to find the 
spots that most accurately reflect the actual traffic count. 
 
Are we subject to challenge on those actual numbers? Apparently 
we are, and we would encourage you to challenge us on those 
numbers as well. But again, this is really, I am told, a very 
well-established science. We use a methodology that is accepted 
internationally in the placement of these traffic counters and that 
goes back some 30 to 40 years in North America, and any 
government, whether it’s our government or other governments, 
over the last 30 to 40 years in Saskatchewan have determined 
that this is the most accurate methodology to get accurate 
vehicle counts. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I will provide that information 
to the department at my earliest convenience. 
 
We’re rapidly running out of time, but I noticed that coming up 
very soon, in Saskatoon, June 18 to 22, is the sixth international 
symposium on heavy vehicle weights and dimensions. I think 
that there should be some valuable information coming out of 
this symposium that could be applied directly to our provincial 
situation and some of these roads that we've talked about. 
 
What I want to know though is . . . I understand that this is 
being sponsored — at least in part — by the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. Can you tell me what kind of 
investment the people of Saskatchewan have in the conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We can get back to you with the actual 
number, but right now we’re actually anticipated to make some 
money as opposed to costing money for the taxpayers. There’s 
been a lot of interest, we understand. I think it would be safe to 
say that even if it would cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan a 
little bit to put this symposium on — which it won’t — this is 
an issue that so affects the province of Saskatchewan that I 
think we really do need to do a lot more study than we have. 
We’ve done a lot of study on it, but this is something that we 
can get . . . that as much information as we can possibly get is 
really important for us. 
 
So right now we are of the view that there will be . . . the 
province will actually make some money on this, and we’ll 
provide that actual number to you when we have that, if that’s 
okay with you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just coming 
back to turning highways back to gravel . . . over the weekend, 
that’s all I heard. That’s all the debate I heard . . . was on some 

sections and especially in my area. For example, No. 47, just 
south of the No. 1 Highway, yesterday morning, I took that 
piece of road, travelling to an event in the Wolseley area. And 
I’m not exactly sure you can say that turning that piece, the 
piece of highway, back to gravel is making it safer. 
 
I found while the crews were out there trying to level the road 
off, the roadbed obviously was quite soft, and it was very 
difficult driving on that specific section of the road that was 
already reconverted to gravel versus areas of the road that had a 
number of potholes that I had the . . . at least I could dodge and 
I had something firm to travel on. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, there’s certainly concern that parts of No. 48 
that were discussed last time I believe, and I’m not sure, but I’m 
wondering if you could confirm whether or not some of the 
sections of 48 are going to be turned back to gravel? 
 
But I would have to question the safety factor of converting 
some of these highways back to gravel. And I wonder if you 
can give me an update of sections in the southeast that you’re 
looking at right now and whether or not you’re rethinking some 
of the suggestions that we convert this to gravel. 
 
Because I can tell you that the constituents in my area, and even 
certainly in my colleague’s area, are not very pleased to hear the 
fact that some of those roads may be indeed turned to gravel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The member from Moosomin is actually 
I think making my point about safety. The road that you’re 
describing, Highway No. 47, my deputy and assistant . . . or 
associate deputy I should say, have just driven that in the last 
two weeks. And they say that that road actually has not been 
reverted at all yet. There’s been no milling taking place on 
there. So what you’re really seeing is you’re seeing a surface 
that is badly broken up with intermittent sections of gravel. So 
there’s . . . that road has not been milled at all yet. 
 
Once that road is milled, as they describe it — it will from our 
viewpoint or our perspective, I should say — will be a much 
safer road than you’ve currently driven on just yesterday as I 
understand it. 
 
With respect to other sections of road, we handed out a 
document to the press on Friday I think it was, describing 
possible road . . . small sections of road that could go back to 
gravel. We can provide that for you. That lists the ones, if you 
don’t have it. Okay? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, one further question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you’re saying that you haven’t turned that back to 
gravel, that is just the way the road is crumbling up. 
 
When I drove . . . I believe it’s about six or seven kilometres 
that looked like it been turned exactly to gravel. There’s nothing 
but gravel on it. They were up and down grading the road just 
as if it was a grid road. And that road was so soft that the 
vehicle just didn’t want to go a straight line on it, and it just 
appeared to me that that’s been gravel all along. And I’m not 
exactly sure where . . . just south of the No. 1, exactly south of 
the No. 1, about the first six or seven kilometres. And it seemed 
to me that that’s been gravel for a little while now. It didn’t 
have any broken sections of pavement in it. So just a 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

clarification on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that once the road is entirely 
milled, even the sections you’re describing as gravel roads will 
actually be improved. They’ll actually mix in more gravel and 
mill it up better so that it will be better than what you’re driving 
over right now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I think what you’re talking about here is known as 
NDP (New Democratic Party) neglect and natural 
disintegration, because that’s what’s happening to our 
highways. You have been neglecting them now for the last eight 
years. You dropped the budget down to 164 million, then you 
promised that you’d put in $2.5 billion over 10 years. This is 
the first year in that program which has been running now the 
fourth year. This is the first time you have met your 
commitment. 
 
If you’d made your commitment in the other years, maybe we 
wouldn’t be into this position where you’re now proposing to 
gravel a good portion of the highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
These highways, Mr. Minister, are not just transport systems to 
haul grain out which seems to be what your colleagues keep 
saying all the time. It also brings supplies in, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
the groceries and the furniture and the fuel supplies for the 
communities across this province. 
 
Without all-weather roads which you’re taking away from them 
by reverting back to gravel, these communities are in that much 
more danger of disappearing, just like your highways. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development likes to talk about 
tourism. Well tourism in this province will simply dry up and 
cease to exist if people can’t get from the borders into our 
tourist locations. 
 
I was down at Sherwood, North Dakota a couple of weeks ago. 
The number one question people were asking me about No. 8 
Highway, is when are you going to fix the highway because 
they simply cannot drive over it. They drive up two miles and 
turn off on to a grid road . . . the people that have to drive that 
direction. The tourists don’t have to. They don’t like our 
highways, and they don’t like our fuel taxes, and they’re 
avoiding Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you like to blame the feds for it all. But you, Mr. Minister, 
have been part of this government for the last nine years. And 
while you hate to take any responsibility for what’s happening, 
I wouldn’t want to take responsibility for what the member 
from Rosetown did, Bernie Wiens when he was in here, and he 
had the original proposal to turn it back to gravel. 
 
I wouldn’t want to take the responsibility for what the member 
from Yorkton did to the highways. But you’re the Minister of 
Highways now, and that responsibility lies on you. 
 
Now what have you been doing as the Minister of Highways in 
talking to the Minister of Finance in getting money that’s 
needed to fix our highways to make it so that commerce can 
happen in this province, so that the tourists can visit us, so that 
people could come back into this province and visit their 

families. 
 
You have failed in that area, Mr. Minister. You have failed the 
people of Saskatchewan in providing proper transportation. 
Now what is your answer? Why have you failed them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, 
I should say. Well first of all, Mr. Chair, part of the way we 
address the concerns that the member raised is by having the 
highest Highways budget in . . . Highways and Transportation 
budget, I should say, in Saskatchewan’s history of $250 million 
— an increase of 6.6 per cent. 
 
This government, our government, has expended 922 million — 
you talked about our commitment — $922 million over the past 
four years, and with just modest increases, we will easily reach 
the $2.5 billion commitment that we made. 
 
Just to run through, from 1997 to 1998, we saw 17.8 per cent 
increase; ’98-99, there was a 10 per cent increase; from ’99 to 
last year or to the year 2000, March 31, 2000, there was a 7.2 
per cent increase; and then this year, a 6.6 increase. Since 
’96-97, that’s an increase overall in our budget of 48.1 per cent 
or $81.6 million. 
 
Just as an aside, the Canadian Automobile Association annual 
report says the following, and I quote, it says: 
 

If the government continues to increase the annual Highways 
budget at the same rate it has for the past few years, it will 
fulfil the 10-year, $2.5 billion commitment. 

 
Now we acknowledge, and we have always acknowledged, Mr. 
Chair, that this amount of money is not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Adequate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Is not adequate — he’s right — to 
sustain the system that currently exists with the change in traffic 
patterns that have taken place in the last few years. 
 
We have always argued, as we’ve done recently and I know 
even members opposite have argued, that we need the federal 
government and their treasury to assist the province in 
transportation in Saskatchewan, and to that point we agree with 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move we report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
evening I have with me a number of officials. Seated to my 
right is Mr. Ken Pontikes, who’s the deputy minister of 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing. Next to him is Mr. 
Peter Hoffmann, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
Housing. Behind Mr. Pontikes is John Edwards, who’s the 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

executive director of program and policy. Behind me is Larry 
Chaykowski, who’s the executive director of finance. Seated 
next to Larry is Lana Grosse, who’s the executive director of 
protection emergency services. Directly beside me is Mr. Doug 
Morcom, who’s the director of grants administration, and next 
to him is Joy Campbell, who’s the acting provincial librarian. 
Those are my officials with me this evening. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials here tonight. A number of us have 
questions tonight, Mr. Minister, so I’ll get right into it. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we left off last time, I couldn’t remember if 
we had asked you the cost, and at that time it was even out, of 
Price Waterhouse, the work that PricewaterhouseCoopers did 
for your department. Could you give us the figure that cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The cost of the Price Waterhouse work 
was $91,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, now if we start to total up the fee just goes higher and 
higher. I believe Mr. Garcea was 750,000, Mr. Stabler and Ms. 
Olfert were 100,000, and now we got another 91,000. In 
hindsight, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t it have been easier to get 
somebody like Mr. Garcea to do this whole study, let him have 
the freedom to find out what he could find out there, and come 
back and report to you. Wouldn’t that have been a lot cheaper 
than spending, right now we’re closing in on a million dollars, 
and really to this point we’ve really got nowhere, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member from 
Saltcoats. It would be, I think, an interesting thought if we were 
to suggest today that Mr. Garcea would do all the work, because 
as you know, Mr. Garcea and his committee had a fairly warm 
reception across, particularly, rural Saskatchewan — of which a 
number of your members were concerned about Mr. Garcea 
doing any work at all. So for you to suggest this evening that 
Mr. Garcea should do the whole piece of work is an interesting 
sort of switch. 
 
I think what’s important here, of course, is that Mr. Garcea’s 
. . . Mr. Garcea’s task was far different than what the task of 
both Ms. Olfert and Mr. Stabler were as well as the task of the 
Price Waterhouse review of the cost-benefit analysis numbers 
was far different. 
 
So you have here three pieces of work that were conducted by 
three different groups of people to provide a different analysis 
and understanding of the kinds of requirements that we could 
look at, I think, as municipal leaders at the round table to try 
and ascertain what direction we might go in as we talk about 
renewals in the province. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I guess 
— and you know my opinion of what I thought of what Mr. 
Stabler or Mr. Garcea originally came out with before he went 
to the public this last time — but I will give Mr. Garcea the 
benefit of the doubt. At least he went out to the public, talked to 

the public, and whether we feel that he reported back honestly 
on what he heard or not really doesn’t matter because he was 
out there and met with the public, where I don’t believe Mr. 
Stabler or Ms. Olfert did. I don’t think they had any indication 
from the public that I saw at all. 
 
This was probably a preconceived view, especially of Mr. 
Stabler. I’ve heard this man say this same type of thing for the 
last number of years; that I’ve heard of Mr. Stabler as a 
professor and talking on this subject. I think his view was 
predetermined before you ever contacted him, you ever paid 
him the $100,000, and I think you knew that when you actually 
paid him the $100,000 what kind of an opinion you were going 
to get out of this man and this lady. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I look at the Price Waterhouse review and 
the audit they did, I’m almost tempted to call you the minister 
of assumptions instead of the Minister of Municipal 
Government, because this whole thing is built on assumptions 
created by your department. And Price Waterhouse, I believe, 
did a fine job of what they were given to work on with the 
numbers and assumptions. And most of the numbers are 
assumptions, Mr. Minister. You have to, I think, agree with 
that. 
 
So really what we come out with here is an assumption that we 
would save all this money out there, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, whether it be RMs (rural municipality), towns, 
or whatever, by doing away with their council and making this 
glorified board that you keep talking about. Where we remove 
all autonomy from rural Saskatchewan, resembling somewhat 
the health districts that you were very familiar with, Mr. 
Minister, because I believe at one point you were minister of 
Health. 
 
And we’re told to believe now that there’s a big money saving 
by creating these monster boards because the bureaucrats will 
be less, they will be more efficient, they will be less costly. 
Well if the Department of Health is any example, Mr. Minister, 
that’s totally the opposite of what happened. 
 
What we saw were boards that were next thing to volunteer, 
replaced by health boards that are paid very adequately for 
going to meetings. But every time we turn around within the 
health districts, we’re getting reports on these new little name 
tags within the health departments that jobs are created all over 
the place. The bureaucrats are multiplying like — for lack of a 
better expression — rats. All over the place we’re getting more 
of them, and these are not cheap people, Mr. Minister. 
 
And now you’re trying to lead us to believe that to do this with 
Municipal Government will make it: (1) cheaper; (2) more 
efficient. Which you didn’t give Mr. Garcea the mandate to go 
out and find out anything about either of them, because we’ve 
had to spend more money on that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, by all these assumptions, why should anybody 
out in rural Saskatchewan, after they’ve saw what happened in 
health care, believe what you’re trying to sell them today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just want to say to the 
member from Saltcoats, that first of all I want to respond to 
your comment about Mr. Stabler and Ms. Olfert. 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Both of these people have done work in this province for now 
better than 30 years. And they’ve criss-crossed this province 
several times over, doing research work not only for Municipal 
Affairs as it relates to this particular subject area, but they’ve 
done work for economic development authorities across the 
province. They do work for tourism authorities across the 
province. They do major, major presentations across the 
country about demographic trends. 
 
And so I have to say to you, sir, that I am quite convinced that 
both Dr. Stabler and Ms. Olfert have a solid and sound 
reputation of their understanding about what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan over the years. And their work is very well 
documented. And there are few people, I would suggest to you, 
who haven’t had an opportunity to meet and discuss with them 
around a number of issues. 
 
But I want to go on to say to you that we should keep in mind 
that the work that’s been done by the three groups of people 
who have done evaluation of municipal renewal in the province, 
had a very different task. 
 
The Garcea committee’s task was to look at legislative renewal, 
legislative reform, what kinds of legislation should we be 
crafting in the province today to give municipalities greater 
authority, autonomy, greater access to the resource base. That 
was their job. 
 
And in their wisdom and in their work, as they went around the 
province they said — which created a great deal of anxiety for a 
lot of people, including you and I — is that they came back 
with the statement that said that we need to reduce the number 
of municipalities from the current numbers to something less 
than 125. And that was where the stir began, as you and I both 
know. 
 
And the information that Garcea and his committee garnered 
was that before you can give greater responsibilities, legislative 
authority, you in fact should look at changing the structure — 
didn’t say what the structure should look like, you just said you 
should change the structure. 
 
Now very specifically, what Dr. Stabler talked about, and Ms. 
Olfert, is that if you were going to reconstruct the province, if 
you were going to do that in a different fashion and you were to 
have fewer municipalities, he talked about 11 or 17 economic 
regions. And he bases his 11 and 17 economic regions based on 
the demographic trends of this province over a period of 50 
years, of which he’s been studying for 30. 
 
And it’s no secret for us. In fact on the 6 o’clock news tonight, 
we could see the report of what’s happened in Saskatchewan 
today in terms of the number of farms and what’s happened to 
rural Saskatchewan communities. 
 
So when Stabler based his model, he based it on there being 17 
or 18 . . . or 11 or 17 economic regions in the province. He 
didn’t say that you would have 17 municipalities or 11 
municipalities. He said that’s how many economic regions 
you’d have in the province. 
 
And for the first time in this province in over 50 years where 
you’ve been studying municipal reform, you have somebody 

who put forward a model. Now are we married to that model or 
am I married to that model? The answer is that I’m not and 
neither is this government. But this is the first occasion that we 
get an opportunity to take a look at something that will 
resemble something different than what we have today. 
 
Is it the right model? Well at the round table, we’re not 
convinced it’s the right model. And at the round table, we say 
we’re going to examine other models as they come forward 
over the next little while. And we’ll do a cost-benefit analysis 
on those as well. 
 
But to date there hasn’t been any model that’s ever presented 
itself, other than this one, that gives us an opportunity to 
examine whether or not there are efficiencies that we can find in 
restructured municipalities. And based on this model, the 
analysis shows that there could be as much as $29 million in 
savings in administration and governance. That’s what it says. 
 
And those numbers have been verified by, in fact, Price 
Waterhouse. And those numbers aren’t ones that we sort of 
drew out of the air and said this is the numbers we’re going to 
use. They all come out of the audited financial statements of all 
of those municipalities of which we drew the conclusions 
around. So that’s whose numbers they are; they’re the 
municipal numbers, which have all been audited by individual 
auditors. So I say to the member opposite, this is not rocket 
science. This is simply taking a model that they’ve in fact . . . 
that’s been provided in the province, the only one. Taking the 
analysis of each of the municipalities across the province and 
then putting them into the kind of framework that we have 
today. 
 
Is it the most appropriate model? I can’t answer that. Are there 
other models that we should be looking at? Absolutely there 
should be. Are there going to be other models that will make 
their way to the municipal round table in the future? I would 
say there’re going to be. And we’ll continue to work 
collectively at the round table to see what kind of renewal we 
can advance. And renewal is about efficiency, effectiveness, 
new legislation, that’s what the discussion’s going to be about. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess 
I could respond here for 20 minutes disagreeing with a lot of the 
things you said, and I won’t bother because for a shortage of 
time tonight. 
 
I’d like to get right into though, some of the assumptions that 
you made to come up with this $29 million. And I’d like to start 
off with expenditures and some of the things that you have 
come up with in this Price Waterhouse paper. It talks here about 
wages, and I’ll just quote it so that you know what I’m talking 
about. It says: 
 

Net of service enhancements for each district, estimates in 
the mix of employees and salary levels were made to 
determine the projected salaries after amalgamation. 
 

Mr. Minister, in your assumptions did you take into 
consideration that this was a good possibility that these jobs, 
which are not unionized now, would very likely be in the future. 
Was that taken into consideration? And the value that those jobs 
would cost compared to what they cost now. 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, we did not, because what we were 
doing was really comparing the people who were in the 
workforce today with what we would see in the workforce in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your honesty. 
Because I believe, and as you well know as I do, that people 
such as grader operators right now out there for RMs, number 
one, in most cases, I don’t know of any in fact that get paid 
overtime. You might work 14 hours a day in the summertime 
on straight time right through. And that’s a tremendous benefit 
to the local taxpayer out there . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Excuse me. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce a guest? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you 
colleagues. I would like to introduce to the House a former 
member of this House, Mr. Rod Gardner, who was the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Pelly 
constituency from 1986 to 1991 and served with great 
distinction. I’ll ask all the members to offer him a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, while 
I’m on my feet if I could have leave also to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I’d also like to join 
with the member opposite to welcome here tonight one of my 
constituents, a very successful small businessman in the town of 
Kamsack, a farmer in that area, and actually he’s turned into a 
very good friend of mind. So I’d like to welcome Rod Gardner 
also here tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we 
talked about and I was talking about grader operators being on 
straight time instead of overtime and all these things, and we 
talked about these jobs being non-unionized now. And I think in 
all fairness they may well be unionized in the future what . . . I 
think would be a great cost to the local taxpayer out there, and 
we go through all these things. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this breakdown did you do an actual council 

remuneration average throughout the province? And let’s start 
with rural municipalities. What would the average reeve make 
in a year, and what would the average councillor’s remuneration 
be? And I’m not talking expenses, I’m talking remuneration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What we did is we use the actual numbers. 
Rather than doing averaging, we actually use the actual 
numbers out of the annual statements. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. By actual 
numbers, do you mean you picked out a specific area and took 
the actual numbers out of that area? Or you took all the . . . say 
all the reeves in the province, you still should have come up 
with an average, Mr. Minister. Did you not come up with some 
kind of a number out there because I think this is a big bone of 
contention with where a lot of the money savings are supposed 
to be. 
 
And I, for one, don’t believe for a minute that there’s a money 
savings there because I’ve been a councillor and I’ve been a 
reeve, Mr. Minister, and a lot of the work we did out there, 
whether it was 9 o’clock at night or 8 o’clock in the morning or 
whatever it was, we dropped our own work, went out and did 
that, and quite often you never even put in an indemnity bill for 
that work. You just went back to your farming or whatever, and 
went back to work. 
 
So as far as there being this great saving there, I disagree with 
you, Mr. Minister. But I think a lot of people out there would 
like to actually know what the average is, say for a reeve and a 
councillor of a rural RM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well what we did is that we took the four 
geographic regions that we had identified out of the 17 — 
which is the Kindersley one, the one around Yorkton, the one 
around Regina, and the one in the Moosomin area. And then we 
took every one of those actual administrative offices and the 
number of councillors — took actually every one of them — 
and said this is how much it cost to administer those. 
 
What we would then do is take the largest number that was 
identified there, and then use that number as the one that we 
would be using for a new structure, a new system that would 
then be in place. If that’s what you mean by the averaging 
piece, we would have actually taken the actual numbers, and 
then taken the largest number and applied it then to the new 
structure. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — But I’m still not getting the answer that I’m 
looking for, Mr. Minister, and I believe you must know what 
I’m talking about here. And I think it would be of interest to 
many watching tonight because I know there’s a number of RM 
and town people watching because they want to hear what your 
answers are to some of these questions because there’s a lot of 
myths and misconceptions going on about what these bodies 
that you’re thinking or proposing would actually do to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Is there no numbers you have to actually tell when you’ve gone 
through all this? Price Waterhouse went through all that and we 
don’t have an average number of what the reeves of this 
province actually cost and yet we’re being told there’s all this 
money to be saved. 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we do have the actual costs of what 
each of the reeves in the province earn because they’re all 
reported in the annual financial statements. 
 
So when you ask me how it is that we arrive at the present 
model, what we’ve done here, as I’ve said to you already, is that 
we’ve taken the aggregate numbers of all of the reeves in the 
province and taken the aggregate numbers of what all of the 
municipal leaders in the province would be using and then use 
the largest number to provide us then with what you would 
apply if you were going to be going to a new municipal system 
in the province. 
 
So that’s the process in which we used. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’m 
going to have to go a different route then. 
 
What was the highest number say in the Yorkton model that 
you were thinking of proposing? What was the highest figure 
that you got of a reeve in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would be around $5,000 I’m told. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s what I was 
looking for. I would have projected that it was anywhere from 
four to six from being a past reeve so that fits right in with what 
I’m saying. 
 
Now remember the councillors probably in most cases, I think 
of the RM that I was involved with, would probably be 
somewhere around half of that, of what the reeve got. And I 
guess, Mr. Minister, if we’re going to be honest about this and I 
hope we are, you’re replacing these people that I always 
believed to a degree does a lot of volunteer work out there and 
certainly doesn’t get paid number one, for their time; number 
one for the loss of time they spend on their own businesses, 
mostly farming. We’re getting a lot of free work and a lot of 
expertise out of these people and for one reason — because they 
care. 
 
Now we’re going to take and we’re going to replace these 
people with bureaucrats, for lack of a better word because that’s 
what we’re replacing them, Mr. Minister. And I would suggest 
in many cases who really won’t care and won’t be as dedicated 
to what they’re doing, won’t drop everything after 5 o’clock at 
night and run out and unplug a culvert in the spring when it’s 
flooding, like farmers do when they climb off their tractors to 
run and do this, run back and jump on their tractors. 
 
I think we’re playing with danger here, Mr. Minister, because 
once again as we did in health care, we’re losing the local 
touch, the care that these people put into the jobs — and they’re 
not there for the money, you just admitted that. And I confirm 
that, Mr. Minister, I think you’re right, they aren’t there for the 
money, they’re there because they’re interested in their 
communities surviving, and we now flip this RM picture over to 
the town picture and it’s exactly the same picture, only now 
we’re in an urban setting. 
 
And I think why the backlash you’ve received over this forced 

amalgamation is so much more than I think you even dreamt 
would be out there, is because number one you’re changing our 
whole way of life in rural Saskatchewan by suggesting what 
you would like to see down the road. What Mr. Stabler would 
like to see down the road, was what Mr. Garcea has said that he 
actually proposes down the road. 
 
This is nothing small to people in rural Saskatchewan — this is 
the biggest thing that they’ve had suggested to them for many, 
many years that I can ever remember that I’ve been out there. 
 
And why they’re not taking it lightly is because I think we’re 
losing our highways out there, they’re going back to gravel; 
we’re losing our hospitals, we saw a number of them being lost, 
Mr. Minister, in fact since your government has come to power 
I believe it’s like 54 hospitals. Mr. Minister, in the last two 
years I’ve lost two of my schools, in fact three of my schools, 
I’m losing another one next year. 
 
So forgive people in rural Saskatchewan when some big model 
comes up and they really get nervous about all these changes 
being better for them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know as well as I do that these people are 
hard-working people out there. And the thing that we keep 
forgetting in this is the cost saving you’re talking about is not 
your government’s money but local taxpayers’ money to pay 
for local administration. And I find this amazing, Mr. Minister. 
Like the lady — and I repeated once before — said, we didn’t 
have a problem out there until you people invented it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I could keep going on and on in here. I just want 
to go into some of the revenue side that you talked about. And I 
need an explanation, Mr. Minister, on part so I understand what 
you’re talking about here; and under revenues it’s got tax 
savings, projected tax savings, would result in the following, 
net expenditure savings. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you just give me a quick, short explanation 
of that so I understand what we’re talking here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite, 
because I think it’s important to realize that we on this side of 
the House . . . And certainly I understand the kind of work that 
municipal councillors and reeves do across the province. I don’t 
think there’s any question about that. 
 
But I think when you take a look at the models . . . and you can 
answer this for yourself and Saskatchewan people who are 
watching can answer this for themselves as well. In this House 
we’ve debated on many, many occasions the cost of health care, 
if you use that example because you’ve gone there a number of 
times, and you’ve indicated how in fact we have too much 
administration in health care. And you’ve been someone who’s 
said that many times over, that what we need to do is that we 
can find efficiencies in the health care system if we just reduce 
the administration. And there may be some value to that kind of 
debate today in the health care system. 
 
But for you then to stand up and then say that in the province 
where we have municipal levels of government today, 
councillors and administrators and reeves, in that very area that 
you talk about, which is the one that you and I come from, there 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

are 240 councillors who serve that particular, geographical area. 
 
Now maybe that’s a sufficient number of men and women to do 
the job there. Maybe it is. And maybe to do that work in that 
particular area today we need to have probably two dozen 
administrators who live eight miles apart from each other to do 
the work because you and I both know in the area that I work 
on my farm with, I pay taxes to two municipalities that are eight 
miles away from my farm, and I’m two miles away from a 
town. And most of these people today are earning somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 40 to $45,000. 
 
And so I think that we could certainly ask the question, at least 
it would be important for us to ask the question whether or not 
in the municipal structure today there are some efficiencies that 
could be found by providing a different kind of a model or 
structure, and that’s all I’m saying to you is that we need to 
examine that whole piece because I think if we say that there’s 
too much administration in government, then I think that also 
has to apply for our friends who do work today in the municipal 
side as well. 
 
And I don’t think that they’re disputing that. They’re saying to 
us at the round table that we need to examine that, and so today 
we’re examining that piece as well. 
 
And I hope that you’re not saying to me that the structure today 
in municipal side doesn’t have too much administration. I’m not 
hearing you say that, but I would be interested in your comment 
if you're going to be making one in that respect. 
 
I say to you that in terms of net, what we did of course is we 
grew some of the other sides where we think there needs to be 
enhancements in the area of economic development, in the areas 
of community planning, in the areas of public service. We 
added more money to that side because we think that there 
should be additional revenues that are put into that side so that 
municipalities out there in Saskatchewanville would be able to 
provide stronger municipal services, greater fire protection 
services, greater public safety, and so we added additional 
monies to those areas to ensure that we can strengthen them. 
And so after we did that, this would be the net figure that we 
would then arrive at. And that’s how the net was attained. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister I’m 
just going to touch on one thing you said there. You talked 
about . . . I keep saying about the health care of the 
administration growing and growing. Well I don’t think that’s a 
fair comparison because in 1991 when you came to power, Mr. 
Minister, RMs and towns have been cut in funding drastically 
from what they were then to what they are now. Administration 
had no chance to grow out there because I know from 
experience we cut every corner we possibly could because we 
had nowhere to pass the buck to but the local taxpayer. 
 
Health districts were totally different, Mr. Minister. They 
weren’t actually dealing with the local public, they were 
looking at government for funding. And I guess an audit in the 
health care system would prove either you’re right, Mr. 
Minister, or I’m right. I think what we’re saying is we’d like to 
see that audit happen to actually find out who’s right and see if 
we are wasting dollars on administration. At that point you 
could turn to me and say, Mr. Member, you are wrong or you 

might have to turn to me and say, Mr. Member, you were very 
right. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also say here . . . you talk about the increase 
in potash tax sharing revenue. And I’m kind of wonder where 
you’re getting the increase in that all of a sudden because we 
have large municipal districts, where that extra potash money 
would be coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The way in which the potash revenue 
sharing is today is that it crosses the boundaries of the districts. 
What the model suggests is what would happen is that it would 
be incorporated only within the boundaries of the new 
municipal districts, is what the model is suggesting could 
happen. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But if I’m getting 
this right, there actually would be no real increase in 
potash-sharing dollars. The same dollars would be used, just go 
to a different area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct. It would just be 
redistributed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
another question that I have is that you’ve gone to all this 
trouble to draw this all up. Could you tell me where the capital 
fund and the surpluses and the reserves would go for each RM 
then, when these big districts were made? Because as you know 
as well as I do, some RMs have worked very hard to build up a 
reserve. They put money in capital funds and they have 
surpluses built up and some don’t. Where would this money 
disappear to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would stay within the district. It 
wouldn’t disappear anywhere. Stay within the district is where 
it would remain. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Correct me, Mr. Minister. Am I 
understanding you to say it would stay within the local area that 
that RM was originally, or all that would be lumped into the 
new district municipal area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — At the round table, as you may or may not 
be aware, one of the discussions that we had, of course, is what 
in fact would you do with the revenues? How would you share 
the debt? For example, what would you do with the grants in 
lieu, what would you do with the revenue-sharing fees? 
 
And the discussion that we arrived at is that there is the thinking 
here . . . and we’re going to test it of course over the next 
couple of weeks at the regional meetings with each of the 
councillors who attend the regional meetings across the 
province to see whether or not those decisions can be left to 
agreement within the new districts, or within the new regions. 
It’s our view that . . . initially it’s our view that they would 
remain within that larger body of the new consolidated region. 
 
And then by agreement, municipalities would decide what 
portion of that revenue might be shared with the larger district, 
what portion of the debt might be shared with the larger district, 
what kinds of responsibilities the province might have, because 
there’s going to be some discussion of course around the whole 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

issue of liability. As you know, there are orphan sites across the 
province of which we’re going to have to have that kind of 
discussion, and contaminated sites. 
 
There’s going to need to be some discussion around what 
happens with waste management systems, because as you know 
there are a number of small municipalities today where waste 
management systems are in some difficulty and we need to 
discuss that. 
 
Now who inherits that particular debt, not only the asset but 
also the debt? And what role is there going to be then for the 
province to play in that particular instance and what role do the 
municipalities play in that particular instance? So it’s my view, 
and I think the view of the round table as of this morning, that 
this discussion would be better I think served first by having it 
at the regional level and then applying through agreement, you 
know, how in fact we might be able to share some of those 
responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can see, Mr. 
Minister, a number of RMs out there really shaking their heads 
tonight that have worked very hard to build some of these 
counts up. And as you know as well as I do, in years past 
agriculture is not near what it was say in the ’70s, but every one 
of us tried to have a year’s grain in the bin or a year’s money in 
the bank to carry us for a bad year. 
 
And I think I know from my experience with RMs, a lot of 
them tried to have the same thing, either in surplus reserve or 
whatever, built up. And through that good management, some 
of them have done that. And others, through no fault of their 
own, haven’t been able to do that, Mr. Minister. But I can see 
RMs out there now really regretting that they, to a degree, taxed 
people to build that reserve up, and now it’s all going to be 
thrown in the big pot. I don’t think that some of these RMs’ 
taxpayers and councils are going to be very happy. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you put this together . . . and if I understood 
right, we talked about a representative for every 4,000 or 5,000 
people. What value did you put on that employee? What cost 
did you put along with that employee that would replace the 
local people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What’s important to recognize here is that 
this particular model that we’re talking about this evening is 
one that comes out of some discussion around what Mr. Stabler 
and Ms. Olfert suggested might be a possibility. 
 
I think we should be careful here this evening to make it clear 
that this is not the government’s model. And I’ve heard you on 
a number of occasions throughout this evening say that this is 
the direction in which the government has decided that it’s 
going to be moving on and that the folks who might be 
watching tonight, which are reeves or councillors, are going to 
be quaking in their shoes because what’s happening here is that 
there’s going to be some kind of an initiation of a plan. 
 
2045 
 
And I say to you very distinctly and very clearly that today, as 
of 1 o’clock this afternoon, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and we came away from a 
very, very productive round of five meetings at the round table, 
of which it was explicitly stated over and over again the 
decision making around what’s going to happen with municipal 
reform in this province will be very much that of the municipal 
round table and the membership out there: the municipal leaders 
and those of us who serve today at the round table. That’s 
where in fact the direction of where we’re going to go in the 
future is going to be. 
 
And so there is no decision at all about how in fact we’re going 
to be structuring the province in the future, but there’s going to 
be a discussion about what we need to do in this province. 
That’s going to be the discussion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for dancing 
around the question I asked you. The question was, is what 
would these people be paid? What would their annual . . . you 
must have had a hypothetical situation. We call this the project 
of assumptions. There must have been an assumption that these 
people would cost 60,000 a year or 70,000 a year. What was 
that number, Mr. Minister, because really I’m starting to get a 
kind of a funny picture here. There’s a number of these areas 
where you really never delved in and put actual figures to them. 
But yet when it come time to tell how much we could save, you 
put $29 million on it. 
 
What actually would these people be paid that represented the 
4,000 to 5,000 people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What this new structure would look like, I 
believe the . . . And now we’re talking about taking 240 council 
members and reducing them to somewhere in the 
neighbourhood, if this model were adapted, 10 or 12 or 14 
representatives. 
 
Associated to that then would be a team of individuals who 
would be administrators to that particular structure. Within that 
unit, you would see a council member earning somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of around $8,000 I believe. A reeve or a 
mayor or whatever you might in fact identify this person as 
being would be somewhere in the neighbourhood of 25,000, 
and your senior management people would be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 75,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well all I can 
say, Mr. Minister, is I certainly hope I don’t lose this job 
because I certainly wouldn’t want to rely on one of them for the 
work it’s going to take for $8,000. I know the work I put in as a 
reeve for six. 
 
And if these people are going to, I would say, replace many, 
many councillors and reeves and they’re only going to get 
$8,000, I can see how we got to the $29,000 . . . $29 million 
saving, Mr. Minister. I don’t believe that one for a minute. 
 
Mr. Minister, because time is running short, I’ll get to the end 
of my question so my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone 
can ask some questions. 
 
But I thought it was interesting this last week, Mr. Minister, 
when we’re talking about highways, and we’ve saw where 
volunteers have gone out to fix holes on the highways. Is there 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

any stretch to the imagination that that may be put forward out 
in rural Saskatchewan in the RMs — are we looking at 
something like that? 
 
Because I think I for one am not sure that I think that’s a great 
deal, a great idea. And I understand why the people are doing, 
but I don’t . . . And I really think I believe that’s such a great 
idea for the highways. I’m hoping that won’t be happening out 
in the RMs. Is that anything that’s in the plans for rural 
government out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What I want to say first, in respect to what 
the remunerations to people who serve on municipal councils 
are today, I want to say to the member opposite, that if I were 
sitting today as a council member at the city of Yorkton, I’d be 
earning about $6,000 a year. And the population that I would be 
serving is in the neighbourhood of about 17,000. 
 
And so when we took a look at what this value . . . when we 
took a look at what the value of what council members in fact 
are going to be receiving, we based it on what municipal 
councillors are earning today in larger urban centres. So this is 
in fact where we got some of our numbers. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that when you ask the 
question today about whether or not there’s some thought here 
that what we’re going to be doing is disassociating our role in 
the Department of Highways today and passing those 
responsibilities on to municipalities, that’s not the discussion 
that we’re having at all. That’s not the discussion that we’re 
having at all. 
 
There is no interest here in municipalities assuming greater 
responsibilities for highways, and we’re not talking about 
taking on greater responsibilities for highways. 
 
But we are talking about how we might be able to enhance our 
transportation networks across the province. How in fact the 
province and municipal governments can partner up in a more 
significant way, transportation systems within the province, and 
some of that work is being done today. What we might do 
around land planning, what we might do around assessment, 
those are all issues that we would talk about into the future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess your 
numbers and ours don’t quite jive here because you were 
talking about the city of Yorkton and you representing X 
number of people, but you’ve got to remember you have how 
many aldermen and a mayor in the city of Yorkton that would 
look after that volume of people. 
 
Now take that scenario out to rural Saskatchewan and add a 
volume of miles and a volume of roads to look after which 
changes that picture completely just because of distance, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, moving on, I’ve been getting a lot of calls, and 
you may be as well, where we know our highway system is in 
drastic need of many dollars and a lot of repair out there. And 
what’s been happening in many RMs — and maybe your 
officials today can also respond to you on this one — is that 
many RMs out there are really concerned because a lot of the 
highway traffic is diverting over to our grid roads — in fact, in 

some cases, what used to be our main farm access roads — and 
just pounding the living daylights out of them, Mr. Minister. 
 
What it’s doing is actually, in a way, it’s downloading onto the 
RMs again because they’re responsible for repairing these 
roads, especially the main farm access ones all by themselves, 
Mr. Minister. Are you getting calls to that same degree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I have to say that I have had some calls 
from some of the municipalities. I’ve been around the province 
a bit and have had an opportunity to talk to municipal leaders 
and there is no question that as the truck traffic in the larger 
inland terminals make their way, there’s a greater load that’s 
being carried today by the municipal road system. That’s 
correct. 
 
And in some instances today, some of the municipal road 
systems are under pressure as well and we’ve tried to provide 
some assistance over the last couple of years. As you can 
appreciate, we had, last year, the 10 million provincial 
municipal infrastructure program. We have it in place again this 
year of which some of that money on the rural side will make 
its way into rural Saskatchewan to help alleviate some of the 
additional pressures that they have. 
 
Now my hope is that next year as we get into the 
provincial/municipal/federal program, which has been 
announced, as you know, in February, we’re hopefully going to 
see a larger chunk of that federal money make its way to 
Saskatchewan; and some of it of course, hopefully, in our 
discussions and deliberations will see it make its way on to the 
grid road system where we have some pressures as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll wrap it up 
with just one more question for you, and in advance of that, I 
would like to also thank your officials tonight for the support 
that they’ve gave you to answer the questions we’ve asked. 
 
A comment by the Deputy Premier this week has somewhat 
worried RM people out there, where he talked about talking to a 
town out there in passing the highway or the access road over to 
the municipality; and I think what we saw in my area, Mr. 
Minister, where I believe it was the RM of Churchbridge took 
over the maintenance of Highway 8 out there. 
 
Is this maybe something that’s in the works that may be coming 
because I think a lot of councils out there, town and RM for that 
matter, because when you come to access roads into towns, are 
very concerned about having these roads dumped on to their 
responsibility but the funding not following. Is that anything 
that may be coming in the future, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think one of the discussions that we 
had that might help sort of answer the question is that as we 
talked at the round table today, and over the last four or five 
weeks, clearly there is a number of responsibilities that we think 
municipal governments could provide a function around today. 
Some of it was around water management, some was around 
road services, some was around economic development, some 
was around public transportation. 
 
And we think that we need to explore all of those kinds of 
discussions. But what will be important in that debate and what 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

will be important in that discussion is that municipalities don’t 
just take on additional responsibilities without taking with them 
additional resources. And that will be the important piece of the 
discussion. 
 
I mean today if there are roadways that are going to be 
transferred or have been transferred, along with those transfers 
have gone bags of money to help them do that. Now I think the 
discussion will be how much is in the bag. That will be the 
discussion. 
 
But clearly there are some roadways in the province today. 
There is some economic development opportunities today. 
There is some land planning that can be done far better at the 
local level than we’re doing it at a provincial basis. So that 
discussion we’re going to continue to have. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. I have a few 
questions on this Price Waterhouse cost analysis. I’m not going to 
spend a lot of time on it, however, because I’ve talked to a 
number of people in SARM and SUMA and asked their 
opinions of it, and they just said the number of assumptions that 
are put forward in this document, that it has no credibility 
whatsoever. I mean, $90,000 for Price Waterhouse to audit the 
assumptions that came up by the department. 
 
The cost analysis is only one side of the issue and I know when 
I talked to a number of people, they wanted to see if there was 
some cost savings. And I guess that was what was attempted 
with this document, is to show that there’d be cost savings by 
amalgamating, by bringing a bigger government — bigger unit, 
I should say, maybe less governance or less councillors, that 
type of thing — but a bigger government, bigger area, and 
that’s where the cost savings would be. 
 
And I look in the Regina regional municipal district and I add 
up all the number of towns of 16, the villages of 40, resort 
villages of 14, and RMs of 22. It works out to a little over a 
hundred local governments down to one. 
 
You talk about the councillors in those areas. And I don’t know 
how many you’re replacing. If there’s a hundred, there’s . . . 
local governments, you’re probably replacing roughly 600 
councillors, reeves, mayors, with how many elected officials to 
represent that area. 
 
I’d like to ask that question first, and then from that, probably 
another couple of questions on this, although I promised myself 
I wouldn’t spend a lot of time on this document just because of 
the assumptions made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the member identifies appropriately 
that the cost-benefit analysis makes some assumptions. And it 
makes the assumptions based on the particular model. And as 
I’ve said before, we’re not married or tied to the model. I mean 
what we tried to do here is to take the existing model that’s 
been provided and put some data around it as accurately as we 
could in hopes that others can then look at it and from it will 
stem other models. 
 
And I expect that what we’ll do is see other models that will 
make their way around to the round table as we move our work 
ahead. 

The Regina district that you talked about I believe has 15 
elected officials that would be responsible for the governance 
piece of that particular area. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I guess that gets to the base of the 
assumption to assume that 15 elected officials will look after 
what the amount of councillors and reeves and mayors are 
doing in those communities right now. For an increase . . . and I 
just think of the RM where I farm and looking at how much 
those councillors and the reeve were getting paid, to go from a 
councillor roughly about 3,000 to 8,000. 
 
But the amount of responsibility from 15 councillors to . . . 
from 6 to 700 hundred councillors down to 15 is really 
unrealistic. I think you’d have to agree with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I guess what I’ll be looking for then 
is for somebody to provide us what would be a realistic kind of 
a model. If 15 is not suitable and somebody thinks that we 
should have 20 or 25, there’s no magic in deciding what that 
kind of representation should be. 
 
And I think the round table is open to that discussion for sure — 
not I think, I know — that the round table is very open to that 
kind of discussion. 
 
I mean when I look around this room here today, we have 
people who . . . I mean you represent a geographical area that’s 
a large one, and you’re expected to know a whole lot about a 
whole lot of different issues. I mean you need to know about 
highways and grid roads, and you need to know about health 
and social services and education. And so as one elected 
member today sitting in this Assembly, you represent the very 
large regional area of somewhere I expect between 10 and 
15,000 people that you would be representing in your 
geographical area. 
 
And to do that work, you have your administrative office and 
your salary. So you have one man, in your case, who’s 
responsible for that large a jurisdiction, as well as knowing all 
of the provincial issues, as well as all of the municipal issues. 
 
And so if you say to me today that 15 people are not enough to 
provide the governance model for that particular area, then you 
know what is it? You know what is that? And I don’t have a 
solution to that, nor do I have a particular answer to it. All I am 
saying is that I think that it is important for us to examine what 
that governance and administration system should look like. 
Because municipalities, by and large, are consolidating some of 
their administration on their own. And it’s happened in a few 
places across the province. 
 
And so I say to you if there are no efficiencies in consolidating 
your administration, why are they doing it? Because obviously 
there is some efficiencies in doing it. And I expect if you were 
to apply that in a broader way across the province, you’d find 
some broader efficiencies. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think — thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair — 
the assumptions to assume that I know my responsibilities as an 
elected official, and to go to that scale at the wages that you 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

assume is just unrealistic. And I think probably the thing that is 
more frustrating than anything else is then to wave this out in 
the public through the media and say we would save $29 
million. You’re trying to sell your amalgamation idea. 
 
And no, maybe you’re not married that. Great, I hope you’re 
not because it’s unrealistic and it wouldn’t work. But you’re 
charting that out and you’re using it to sell the very point that 
you want to do — forcing a bunch of communities, picking 
winners and losers, who’s going to get the RM office. 
 
And I realize that a number of communities are amalgamating 
already with sharing administrators and offices and things like 
that. But they’re doing it on their speed when it makes 
economic sense, and they still supply the service in their area 
that they were chosen to and elected to do. 
 
And I think that’s the difference between what you have done 
here with this cost analysis, and the difference between what 
they are doing out there in local communities by amalgamating 
on their own. That’s all the time I want to spend on that 
document. 
 
I wanted to ask a few questions regarding the First Nations 
fund. And we’ve asked many questions through question period 
and different venues, and every time we seem to bring up this 
subject we get labelled with labels . . . we get branded with 
labels that are really untrue, unrealistic, unfounded — not 
certainly what we want to do. 
 
Now it was very interesting that the former Provincial Auditor 
talked for a number of years, pretty much every year, that this 
fund under the gaming fund should be audited by the Provincial 
Auditor. And there are other areas in government that aren’t 
audited by the Provincial Auditor but can be and would be, I 
think, if pressure was put on. I find it really more than a 
coincidence that the new auditor in his report and different . . . 
is of the same opinion. Why is this not audited? Not necessarily 
because there was anything wrong with perhaps the auditing 
process, but the whole cloud around it because you say it can’t 
be done. And we get called racist and everything else because 
we bring it up, causes so much more suspicion than what really 
needs to be there. And so I guess I have a number of questions 
surrounding this. 
 
First of all, could you explain to me and take me back quite 
aways on how the whole process works — you know, how the 
money is divided up, what goes to the First Nations fund, and 
what stays with government? So if you could give me a bit of a 
Reader’s Digest history of this whole process and then we’ll go 
from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, to the member. 
As you can appreciate, when the casino operations in the 
province were first established back around ’94-95, there was 
an agreement that was signed in 1995 that permitted a portion 
of the revenues that would be generated on the First Nations’ 
casino that would make their way into a fund called the First 
Nations fund. That First Nations fund then would apply those 
revenues that they had received to organizations and groups that 
would be of First Nations. 
 
The board of directors that was appointed to the First Nations 

fund were a group of men and women that, by and large, were 
selected by the First Nations. They would put their names 
forward, and through order in council we would identify them 
and also approve of them. And that’s how the fund was 
established. 
 
Throughout the process of the First Nations fund, they’ve had 
an auditor of name that’s been involved in making sure that the 
auditing practices of the First Nations fund was adequate, by 
their belief and ours. And it’s KPMG, I think, is the firm of 
audit that’s been doing the work. 
 
And as you can appreciate, there has been a lot of discussion 
with First Nations people about where the province has 
responsibility or where the province might have jurisdiction or 
where they believe the province does not have jurisdiction. And 
this debate doesn’t only centre around the First Nations fund, 
but as you know well that it has a lot of implications in a whole 
lot of other areas of our work with First Nations people as it 
relates to inherent rights. 
 
And so when we proceed to ask the question about how is it that 
we can provide full assurances that the First Nations fund is in 
fact being . . . meets the kind of expectations and obligations of 
an audit process, I’ve been saying to you that the private audit 
meets those kinds of obligations on our behalf. 
 
And to date, the private audit signs them off and says in fact 
that there hasn’t been any kind of, if I might use the word, 
misappropriation of funds, but in fact funds are being 
adequately distributed. 
 
And I said, I think, at the last time the question was asked of me 
by the member from Estevan, that in fact we’ve had another 
discussion with the First Nations people about how we might be 
able to expand the accounting requirements within the fund to 
ensure the kinds of questions that you’ve been asking, as well 
as the Provincial Auditor has been raising with us. 
 
And it’s our hope that we’re going to be able to move that 
discussion to that particular place. And that continued dialogue 
is in place today, and our hope is that we’re going to be able to 
achieve that in a broader way as we’re moving ahead. In the 
same way that you’re asking to try to be accomplished, we’re 
seeking that kind of understanding and appreciation with the 
First Nations people as well. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was very 
interested in what you had to say there as far as you can take 
from my assurance that, you know, the audit is being done. And 
I really do believe, isn’t that the whole purpose of a Provincial 
Auditor? Is so that, you know . . . I’m sure every minister would 
like to say, well you can just take from my insurance that the 
audit is going to be done properly because I am in charge of it 
and it’ll be done properly. 
 
And that is the very point, the very point of why we have a 
Provincial Auditor to look into that so that we don’t have to just 
take your assurance, but we are assured by the Provincial 
Auditor that there is no misuse of funds or misdirection of funds 
or any other sort of process. 
 
And that gets to the very root of why we would like to see this. 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Not that we are assuming that there’s misuse, but it clears up 
any questions that we have to have by assuming that you’re 
taking care of it in the manner that you feel it should be taken 
care of. And it may not be the manner we feel it should be taken 
care of. 
 
So could you . . . give me maybe another reason of why this is 
not going through the Provincial Auditor’s office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as I tried to say, Mr. Chair, in sort of 
my dissertation about how we in fact got to where we are today 
in the arrangement that we have with the First Nations and the 
First Nations fund. The reality is that when we signed an 
agreement in 1995, the understanding was that those books in 
fact would be addressed by the private audit, and that as we go 
to negotiate a new agreement in the future, if in fact we can 
change that particular agreement that we have in place today, 
we’re contemplating . . . we’re having that kind of discussion as 
you and I speak this evening. 
 
It’s our hope and we rest our position today with the fact that 
there is a working arrangement that we have with the First 
Nations people and that if we want to see a broader access to 
the fund, we’re promoting that at this particular point in time. 
We’re promoting that. And it’s our hope that we’re going to be 
able to achieve the kinds of requirements that the Provincial 
Auditor is asking us to try to achieve. 
 
In the meantime, while we’re going on the premise that the 
work that’s been done by KPMG is in fact work that parallels 
the work of the Provincial Auditor, in fact that the reporting 
process out of the fund is today meeting some of those kinds of 
requirements, that particular document is not filed here yet. But 
we assume that it should be filed here. It’s filed with the First 
Nations community. And so there is some accountability at that 
level. 
 
Now it will be my objective to try and enhance that as we move 
along and as we proceed to move into our next agreement 
which we’re going to be signing with First Nations people 
around the whole gaming piece. Our ’95 agreement is at term 
now, there’s a short extension on it, and this is part of the 
discussion that we’re having today. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. I’m very glad to hear that you’re 
moving in that direction. It seems pretty slow at times, but I guess 
maybe that is the process. It’s nice to have been able to ask a 
couple of the questions about the very issue and not be labelled, 
which we have been on this side of the House over and over and 
over and over again. And I think the questions are very 
legitimate and very honest and forthright. 
 
I think what I’ll do is to thank you very much for your time. I’ll 
turn it over to the member from Carrot River Valley to ask a 
question, and then we’ll go from there. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just 
one very, very quick question. 
 
As you mentioned a little earlier, the first of the SUMA regional 
meetings will in fact be held in Porcupine Plain this coming 
Wednesday. And my question is: are you planning to attend that 
meeting in Porcupine Plain on Wednesday? 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I first thought that it was a paid 
political ad that you were giving tonight to suggest that you 
might be there too. I understand that you’re going to be there as 
the mayor of the community. 
 
I’m going to be attending 10 of the 13 regional meetings across 
the province. There are three that I’m not able to attend because 
the session is still on, and there’s a duplicate here in terms of 
time. So I’m having to be here unless there are members who 
are prepared to accompany me on that trip. And if I could take 
two or three of you as I go, I’d be happy to do that, and then I 
might be able to attend all 13 of them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
have with me tonight a letter that was sent to my office by the 
RM of Arlington No. 79. And I’d like to read it into the record 
here if I could. It’s addressed to me personally, and it reads as 
follows: 
 

Council passed the following resolution at their April 2000 
council meeting: 
 

Whereas, policing costs were imposed on the 
municipalities in 1999, and 
 
Whereas, at that time the municipalities were told that in 
the future they would only have to pay for policing costs 
in excess of $5,000, and 
 
Whereas, this year, when policing funding was cut, the 
provincial explanation was the $5,000 policing grant was 
an interim measure, 
 
Therefore, that a letter be sent to Wayne Elhard, MLA, 
to express council’s dissatisfaction with the provincial 
government’s decision to discontinue funding the first 
$5,000 of policing costs; and to request that Mr. Elhard 
lobby the provincial government to re-instate the 
provincial police funding that was promised the 
municipalities in 1999. 

 
And that resolution was carried. 
 
I would assume that you can consider yourself lobbied at this 
point. But I have a question that is supplemental to this 
resolution. 
 
Can you give this municipality and others throughout the 
province a rationale for the downloading of policing costs at a 
time when the rural economy is near its historical worst and tax 
revolts have been the number one topic throughout much of the 
country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important in this discussion 
— and I appreciate the letter that you’re quoting from, and I 
have a copy of it as well — I think what’s important here is that 
this is the kind of debate that when you attended a meeting with 
a group of municipal leaders, those people who had . . . or 
represented communities over 500 would say to you that it isn’t 
fair that we’re having to pick up the policing costs for those 
people who don’t pay . . . who pay for the policing costs . . . 
who don’t pay for policing costs under 500. 
 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Because the way in which the policy existed before is that any 
community under 500 in the RMs didn’t provide any policing 
costs here. And those communities over 500 looked after all the 
policing costs. 
 
In 1997 when the task force on policing — and it has a more 
elaborate name than that, cost redistribution for policing 
services across the province — came up with a formula that 
said that there would be a period of time in which there’d be an 
expectation that those communities under 500 would have their 
portion of their policing costs paid, of which what happened is 
that the province ended picking up those costs on their behalf, 
not the municipalities over 500 but the province picked them 
up. 
 
Then when you attend the same meetings again, those people 
over 500 would say well how does this work. Those 
communities under 500 still aren’t paying their policing costs; 
they’re being paid for by the province. 
 
And the understanding, as I understand it, has always been that 
over a period of time, those communities under 500 would 
assume those policing costs eventually. 
 
Now this year in our budget process, we made a conscious 
decision about how we’re going to provide policing for the 
future. And the Minister of Justice has been up on his feet a 
couple of times and has articulated how, in fact, we’re going to 
be adding more police services across the province. 
 
And today, he’s indicated that there’s 25 additional police 
officers that are in the field. And over time, what we’ll see is 
we’re going to see as many as 200 police officers in the field. 
 
So our hope will be or our objective will be that over the next 
two or three years, you’re going to see more police officers in 
Saskatchewan providing policing services to those rural 
communities today who were entitled to a broader policing 
service, of which they’re going to be expected to pay for as has 
been the decision of this past budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d like to ask the 
minister. I understand, and I appreciate the explanation, but did 
your government not in fact promise a $5,000 policing grant? 
And was it qualified at any time prior to this year as interim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well my understanding, Mr. Chair, to the 
member is that it was recognized as being an interim process. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is there any documentation, Mr. Chairman, for 
that particular time period? Was the interim time period 
defined? Can it not be assumed that interim would ordinarily 
mean more than one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I don’t think that there was a timeline. I 
haven’t read anywhere that there was a timeline established on 
it. And you know this is a two-year period in which the funding 
has been looked after for. And I don’t know what the definition 
of interim might be. It might be one year. It might be two years. 
It could be three years. It could be six months. But in this case, 
the policing costs have been provided for those municipalities 
for a period of two years. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — I can appreciate the concern that would be 
raised by this type of arrangement. It’s not specific in any 
respect. It kind of leaves the municipalities hanging when they 
had full reason to expect that the interim measure would carry 
on for some time. 
 
What I would like to know from you now is that do you have 
any plans of any sort to revisit the rural policing funding 
arrangement that would restore some of this grant that is now 
missing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We certainly have it on our agenda for 
further discussion at the round table, because as we’re looking 
at a whole host of services that are provided by municipalities 
today, policing is one of the discussions that we’re going to be 
entering into. So it would be fair for me to say that we’ve 
touched on it and that we’ll have a broader discussion around it 
at that venue. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, once 
again we want to thank your officials tonight. We do have some 
letters here from concerned ratepayers in the province we’d like 
to table, Mr. Chair. And once again we thank your officials and 
we’d like to report progress at this time. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 
Subvote (SM01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
believe the only question we really have tonight is that I see the 
budget has actually gone down for the Municipal Board. Could 
you maybe give us just a quick explanation of the reason for 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we’re just going to need a 
second here because I need to consult with another group of 
officials around this particular piece. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, we have no problem if the 
minister wants to check and get back to me tomorrow would be 
fine. If the officials aren’t here tonight that would be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ll provide that information tomorrow 
then for the member, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (SM01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move we report progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — This concludes the estimates for the 
Municipal Board, and I just want to mention to the government 
deputy house leader that I’m advised we don’t need to report 
progress. We can move on to the next estimates. 
 
So the estimates now before the committee will be for Energy 
and Mines. And we’ll just give the . . . I want to thank the 
officials for Municipal Affairs, and we’ll just take a moment to 
do a change around in terms of officials. And my thanks to the 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

minister and to the critic for Municipal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to 
the critics for their questions this evening as well. Thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — Before I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials, I’ll just inform the committee members that this 
department has appeared twice in the committee previously, and 
we’ll begin this evening by inviting the Minister of Energy and 
Mines to reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is my deputy minister, Ray Clayton. To 
my left, Bruce Wilson, who is the executive director of 
petroleum and natural gas. Behind me is Mr. George Patterson, 
who is the executive director of exploration and geological 
services. And directly behind me is Donald Koop, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of finance and administration; and 
Doug Koepke, who is the manager of accounts. 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and I 
wish to thank the departmental officials in advance for their 
help. I know they’ve been a great help on the previous two 
occasions. 
 
On our first kick at this cat, the minister asked me to kindly 
proceed to the real financial estimates, so I’m prepared to do 
that tonight, and it won’t be good television, but it needs to be 
done. 
 
Under the heading of administration, Mr. Minister, estimates 
show no change whatsoever for supplier and other payments. 
Why is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’m told by the officials that the line items that 
you’re referring to are budgeted on an annual basis. And as you 
will know, the Department of Energy and Mines budget has 
been very stable. And upon reviewing those different 
components of the Energy and Mines budget, the officials saw 
no need to increase or decrease. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 
subheading of salaries, in this department I see they’re going up 
from 924,000 to 941,000. In light of the entire mining claims 
drafting department being laid off, why the increase, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, in response to that, 
the increase was as a result of changes in my office. For a 
period of time my office functioned with two ministerial 
assistants as opposed to three, which is the norm in a cabinet 
minister’s office, and that increase reflects the increase in my 
office changing from two to three MAs (ministerial assistant). 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Who is the third 
ministerial assistant, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — His name is Mark Pitzel, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Under accommodation and central services for supplier and 
other payments, we see an increase from 1,915,000 to 2 million. 
Why the increase, Mr. Minister, and where is it going to 
specifically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That is just a small adjustment in 
terms of the accommodation rate that’s charged to the 
department by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) in the building that they occupy. And I’m told by 
the officials that when they moved in we had put together an 
estimate; this is an adjustment that corrects that. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In petroleum and 
natural gas then, under supplier and other payments, I see 
there’s a reduction from 482,000 to 460,000. Can you explain 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that is for a transfer 
of funds for computer purchases to another line item under the 
budget, system services, in the amount of $22,000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Salaries in this 
department are rising from 3.802 million to 4.045 million. Can 
you explain this? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are three 
components to this. There is the 2 per cent out-of-scope salary 
adjustment that was effective July 1, 2000. And adjustments for 
new in-scope class plan which amounted to 98,000. 
 
And as well there were some additional staff that were acquired 
for dealing with the deep rights petroleum lands, the new 
initiative that the government embarked upon a while back that 
has, by the way, been very successful. That amounted to 
$125,000 of incremental salary costs. And additional funding 
from mineral compensation for salary shortfalls. And basically 
that’s an adjustment to salaries in that particular area. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under exploration 
and geological services, the subheading of supplier and other 
payments, I see there’s a reduction there from $540,000 to 
$518,000. Why the decrease, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that’s similar to the 
decrease that you saw in the natural gas division. It’s a transfer 
of funding for computer purchases to system services. So you 
will see that increase in the system services component of that 
budget. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I note that salaries in 
this area are up from 2.815 million to 2.977 million. Can you 
explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are again three 
components to that. There is a $71,000 incremental amount for 
a 2 per cent out-of-scope salary adjustment that took place July 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

1, 2000. There was a reduction of 134,000 in support staff that 
reduced by four FTEs (full-time equivalents), and I think the 
member may have referred to that a little earlier. And there’s 
additional staff dealing with deep oil formations. There’s one 
person there. And oil exploration data, there’s seven FTEs at a 
level 4 amount. So there’s four permanent and four temporary 
in the amount of 225,000 which is a net increase of 162,000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In mineral revenues, 
mineral revenue collection is up from 3.257 million to 3.358 
million. Now where did that increase come from, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are a salary 
increase in minerals revenue collection area of 256,000, and I’m 
told a reduction in operating costs of 155,000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see mineral 
compensation is down from 221,000 to 171,000. That seems 
like quite a decrease. Can you tell us what that’s all about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, these are actually 
amounts that have been expended in terms of compensation for 
land and mineral rights on land. And it comes really in two 
forms. There was a process where an annual cash compensation 
took place and we have negotiated arrangements with these 
landholders where we swap land. So it’s a combination of land 
and cash payments. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under expenditures, 
supplier and other payments are down from 1.102 million to 
947,000. Why this decrease, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the . . . my 
officials tell me the simplest way to answer that is that in years 
past we did quite a bit of contracting for computer consultants. 
We went to the market and hired the folks outside. What we 
found was, that for our purposes internal to the department, it 
made more sense to have these done by people within our 
department and basically these are salaries that are quoted and 
expensed to that area based on the in-house work that’s being 
done for those computer services. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does that explain the 
entire increase in salaries then, Mr. Minister, from 2,115,000 to 
2,411,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the breakdown on 
that is for the in-house consultants rather than outside of the 
department. That amount is $208,000 and we had referred to the 
out-of-scope salary adjustment in other areas of the budget that 
you questioned earlier tonight that took place on July 1 of 2000. 
That amounts to $40,000 in terms of that amount. So those two 
come very close to the total amount. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, in Resource Policy and Economics, Resource 
Development and Taxation is up from 1.537 million to 1.581 
million. Why this increase, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the increase in 
salaries was $53,000; 31,000 of that was due to the out-of-scope 
salary adjustment that we just referred to a little earlier. And 
there was some salary adjustments that we weren’t estimating 

appropriately within that component of the budget in the 
amount of 22,000, so what this did was put them more in line 
with what the actual cost of those particular employee expenses 
were, for a total of 53,000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Apparently energy 
sector initiatives are way down from 1.461 million to 517,000. 
This seems like a huge drop. What’s that all about, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the total decrease 
for that particular part of the budget was $953,000. The largest 
component of that was one-time federal funding for climate 
change modelling that was compensation, a one-time funding 
from the federal government in the amount of $1.056 million. 
 
There were expenditures in their funding for CO2 (carbon 
dioxide) technology initiatives that you’re aware the 
government has been involving itself in with respect to 
enhancement of heavy oil and managing CO2. So that was an 
increase in the amount of 112,000 and there was a transfer of 
budgeted computer purchases to service systems in the amount 
of 9,000 that we referred to in another part of this budget a little 
earlier. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see although 
supplier and other payment expenditures are down by a huge 
amount, I see salaries in this department are again going up 
from 1.371 million to 1.424 million. How do you explain that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think if you 
look at them all together you’ll see that basically this was done 
as an out-of-scope salary adjustment that became effective July 
1, 2000. That’s an awful lot of this. 
 
I would want to make a few comments with respect to the 
Department of Energy and Mines. It is one of the departments 
in this government and in this administration that has been very 
effective in maintaining its costs of operations over the years. 
And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that, in spite of the fact that 
the activity in the oil and natural gas sector, potash, and 
uranium industry have been very strong and been very active. 
 
If you look at the number of wells that have been brought on 
stream and if you look at the increase in the number of natural 
gas wells that have been drilled, I think it’s fair to say that the 
department has done very, very well in managing what has been 
a very stable budget even in spite of the fact that they’ve been 
producing more paper, more licenses, collecting more fees. 
 
And I think if you look at the rate of return that the people of 
Saskatchewan get on their investments within this department, a 
budget of well under $20 million generating hundreds of 
millions of dollars of revenue in a year and with very few 
people, I think a very strong case could be mounted on behalf of 
the people within that department that we get very much a good 
bang for our buck. 
 
It’s a very small investment for the amount of revenue that 
they’re able to generate, and do it in a timely fashion so that we 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

can maintain interest within the industry in terms of investing in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I do concur that you do seem to get good bang 
for your buck from the employees of the Department of Energy 
and Mines. My question was really since the program in that 
department seems to be cut by more than half — that’s why I’m 
curious about salaries, not only maintaining but increasing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, with the money that 
came as a part of a one-time funding program from the federal 
government, that money was spent on contracts. So as the program 
depleted, the number of employees within the department didn’t 
go down because basically that million dollars was spent on 
contracts with individuals whose expertise we didn’t have within 
the department at that time, so it was done on a one-time 
contract basis. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
the June sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights netted 
the province I think $4.46 million. It’s also showing a trend in 
higher prices per hectare. How does this sale relate to the April 
sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the information 
must be too current. We just released that the other day, and we 
haven’t got a copy of that release with us, for June. But you’re 
right. The price per hectare was up. And I guess for the 
province that is good news in that there seems to be more 
competition, driving the price of the land up. So that can help us 
pay some of the expenses we run here on an annual basis. 
 
I will get a copy of that over to you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the bottom 
line for the province’s finances as a result of this in terms of an 
increase over 1999, June of 1999 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Year over year, and June to June, 
last year, was 4.74. This year it was 4.46. Or was it the 
aggregate that you wanted or just the June over June? Well 
that’s June over June. Last year it was 4.74; this year it’s 4.46. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — In light of that, in terms of trends in the 
industry, are we in an up trend or are things more or less stable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think we can 
safely say that we’re on a bit of an up trend this year over last 
year. 
 
Our drilling activity is over three times what it was last year, so 
I think we can continue to expect a lot of activity out there. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say as well that a lot of the interest is in 
natural gas. It seems to be a very large demand. The price is 
very strong right now as you will know, and that seems to be 
driving a lot of activity in the province. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, a news release from May 11 from your department states 
that mining companies plan to spend $30 million this year on 
mineral exploration in the province. Could you tell us about these 

plans and what you’re hoping for from them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to give 
the member a breakdown for the year 2000 estimated. And I think 
what is really interesting is the platinum group and the activity that 
is being done to pursue some opportunities there. There’s about $4 
million estimated to be spent out of the 30. Three million dollars in 
diamonds. Uranium takes the bulk of it up, at about $15 million. 
That’s always very much an interested activity in northern 
Saskatchewan. Base metals at 5 million and gold at 1 million. So 
those are roughly the estimates. 
 
But I think that, you know, certainly I know from the department’s 
perspective the interest is . . . the platinum group is very 
interesting and certainly hopefully we can have something of that 
nature come on stream. It’s very much a growing demand for the 
commodity in terms of all the of energy initiatives, and certainly 
that platinum group is a big part of that and hopefully will 
continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The release also 
mentions recent changes to the royalty structure for precious 
and base metals. What was done and how do you see this 
affecting the industry, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the changes that we 
made in the base metal and precious metal royalty structure for 
1999-2000, I’m just going to try and condense it here as much 
as I can. The provincial sales tax on the purchase of mineral 
exploration equipment was removed; additional mining 
equipment; investment in northern Saskatchewan supports. The 
northern strategy was signed by the Premier and the northern 
leaders to promote economic diversification in that area. 
 
Some of the changes as well to the royalty structures, and these 
are effective January 1, 1999, companies will be allowed to 
claim, for royalty purposes, new mine development expenses at 
150 per cent of their actual cost. The royalty rate has been 
lowered from twelve and a half per cent of profits to 5 per cent, 
increasing to 10 per cent of the profits once it reaches a certain 
level of cumulative production. And companies will as well be 
allowed to report royalties on a company basis instead of by the 
current lease-by-lease basis. 
 
So I think some fairly dramatic changes. Certainly it’s our 
attempt to be more and more competitive. We think that these 
have moved us in that direction, and from the feedback that 
we’ve seen from industry it appears to be very well received. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m reading from a 
commentary in The Leader-Post dated May 25, 2000. It states 
that “the (mining) industry will shy away from further northern 
development if circumstances do not change.” These comments 
are from Saskatchewan Mining Association president, Josef 
Spross, talking about provincial royalty fees and red tape, he 
says. 
 
We’ve discussed this before in estimates. I’m curious what 
conversation you’ve had with Mr. Spross since this article came 
out on May 25 regarding this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say that discussions with the mining industry through the 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

Saskatchewan Mining Association and with the Saskatchewan 
potash producers and as well with individual companies has 
been ongoing and continues at this point. 
 
Certainly I’ve talked with Mr. Spross, as well as the mining 
association. I can report to you that with respect to overlap and 
duplication, we feel that we have made — just in the last very 
short period of time — a lot of headway with the AECB 
(Atomic Energy Control Board) as it relates to uranium mining 
regulations to try and eliminate the overlap, the duplication, and 
to clarify the areas of jurisdiction. 
 
And so I think our sister or brother department, SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), has 
worked very closely with us on this file. And I think the federal 
government is in a position where now it’s becoming more and 
more receptive to understanding the need to make the uranium 
industry more competitive by reducing the overlap and the 
duplication. 
 
With respect to regulations, that is an ongoing review within 
our department to attempt . . . and within the government to 
attempt to reduce the cost and the paperwork process. And I can 
report as well that we are negotiating with the uranium industry 
with respect to their costs of operations as it relates to royalties 
and taxation. Those are . . . part of those discussions are part of 
a process which will take some time. Certainly we want to 
conclude them in a positive result as soon as we can. 
 
But I would want to report to you that we are certainly wanting 
to assure that we in Saskatchewan remain the number one 
producer in the world with respect to uranium. We have the 
resource. We have the companies headquartered here, who are 
very much involved as part of our economy and in wanting to 
develop this resource. And we are going to ensure that we’re 
competitive with opportunities for investment in other areas of 
the world. And that’s why we’re negotiating at this point with 
the uranium industry, as we’ve done with the potash industry, 
as we’ve done with the oil industry, as it relates to heavy oil, 
and as we’ve done with respect to base metals and precious 
metals. 
 
So it’s been an ongoing process within the department. You 
never seem to get done unfortunately because there’s always 
more to do, and there’s always changes in the marketplace, and 
so there’s always requirements to ensure that you’re keeping up 
to speed with what’s going on in the world, and that you’re 
making sure your industries can be and are competitive. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you for that very comprehensive 
answer, Mr. Minister. It eliminated two more questions that I 
had on the subject. 
 
For clarification sake, Mr. Minister, while we wrap this up, 
every once in a while we still get calls to our office about the 
PST (provincial sales tax) expansion and how it affects the 
industry — oil, chemicals, used equipment, professional 
services. Have you had meetings since we last chatted in 
estimates, and are you trying to alleviate any concerns these 
businessmen have before they leave the province? And I 
particularly refer to the oil field service industry. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can say that we have been . . . The 
Department of Finance has certainly been working closely with 
the oil producers and people within the industry as my 
department has. 
 
I would want to say that with the activity that’s taking place in 
this province, as I indicated a little earlier, we’re almost triple 
the number of wells that are being drilled. So that would 
suggest to me that there will be business opportunities for 
Saskatchewan businesses in this province. 
 
Our goal is to ensure competitiveness, and there are many facets 
to the cost of doing business in a province — sales tax being 
one of them. But I think the business climate that we are trying 
to work towards will ensure that we’ve got businesses not only 
growing but expanding here in this province. 
 
I think it’s really important to remember we have a very 
important resource here as it relates to oil and gas. There is 
much potential and I think investors see that and I think they 
know that. 
 
I wouldn’t suggest to you that we always agree when we’re 
negotiating with industry. That’s the nature of business. But 
what we do is try and find areas where we can reach agreement. 
With respect to the sales tax, I think you know that we have 
been working very hard with industry to ensure that the 
interpretation of these taxes will minimize the impact on the oil 
and gas sector. And I think that’s a responsible approach to 
take. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say the goal in this province, whether 
it’s with oil or whether it’s gas or whether it’s any other 
commodity, we’re going to work to ensure that we’re 
competitive. 
 
You know the pressures that we face with respect to balancing 
our budgets, with the debt load that we still carry. But we’re 
dealing with those. We’re reducing that debt load and we’re 
going to make this place even a more competitive business 
climate than it is now. And certainly with the work of industry 
and a positive attitude towards investment and developing this 
province and growing this province, we’ll make it happen. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also for the record, 
Mr. Minister, in terms of the capital tax on resource companies 
which is unique to Saskatchewan, what headway has been made 
on this issue? What meetings have you held and what’s your goal 
here and what kind of a time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman I can say to you that 
the corporate capital surcharge that the member refers to is one of 
a number of initiatives or issues that has been raised and are under 
discussion with CAPP (Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers) and as well with the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association. 
 
Those include, and they’re no secret, power rates, corporate 
income tax, the corporate capital surcharge and, as well, and I 
think is important to all of those, is municipal surcharges that 
they’re facing on a daily basis which is becoming, I must say, 
much more and more of a concern in particular to the oil and gas 
sector over time. 



June 12, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

And it’s certainly one of the issues that I think municipal 
politicians will have to take a very close look at because their cost 
of doing business is much more than just provincial taxes or the 
Department of Finance or the Department of Energy and Mines. 
There is power rates, there’s, as I’ve said, municipal charges, 
there’s a whole myriad of things that create the environment in 
which they do business and create costs for them. And we will 
continue in the future as we have in the past to put their issues on 
the table, to see areas where we can effect change so that we can 
ensure the competitiveness of this province and the ability to 
attract their investment and I guess confidence of their boards of 
directors that Saskatchewan is a good place to do business. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have 
two questions but they may have a lot of supplementaries. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome you and your officials here. I 
wonder if you could tell me how closely you and your 
department work with the Department of Justice when it comes 
to dealing with Saskatchewan surface rights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the Surface Rights 
Board is under the purview of the Minister of Justice and they 
report to him, so certainly that is his responsibility. If there are 
issues that would be pertinent to my department raised by the 
Surface Rights Board, the Minister of Justice has no hesitancy 
in calling my office and discussing the issues with me. I can’t 
tell you that I’ve had a call from him in the last while, but if he 
has an issue but I’m sure his question will be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps as my 
colleague suggests, the Minister of Justice is too busy 
campaigning for the leadership. 
 
My question deals with the issues surrounding the Surface 
Rights Board. Do you advise the minister at all on any of the 
issues related to the board dealing with the interaction between 
the owners of the land and the oil companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, it’s always in the 
interest of the department, of the government as a whole, and of 
the industry, as a matter of fact, to ensure that there is harmony 
between the landowners, people who are on lease land, or 
whether it’s owned, whether they own the mineral rights, 
whether they don’t — it’s our job to attempt to create harmony. 
 
Now sometimes there’s a dispute between a farmer, someone 
holding land, and an oil company. Most cases, I would say, that 
they are able to resolve those issues on their own. There are 
times when they’ll use the Surface Rights Board. There are 
times when contact will come direct to my department. 
 
We try to facilitate a good working relationship because that 
only makes good business. The oil and gas sector are going to 
be operating in areas where there’s agricultural activity taking 
place, and certainly it’s our goal to attempt to find harmony. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Hopefully 
then, you can answer a couple of these questions in an attempt 
to find some harmony between the agricultural producers, the 
Justice department as representing the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board, and the oil industry and your department. 
 
In particular, I have a letter here from Miles Vass who is the 

chairman of the Southeast Surface Rights Association, and one 
of the resolutions they passed at their last convention or 
meeting dealt with physical surveys, seismic surveys that 
hopefully are touring our province. I know that in my own case, 
I’ve had two in the last month, so I’m certainly not complaining 
about them being around. But there are, sometimes, there are 
some complaints and the resolution that they passed suggests 
that the compensation be paid to municipalities if they are 
operating on municipal lands, which they do not do now, or that 
they remain on private or Crown land and not on the road 
allowances for the conducting of their surveys. 
 
Has the minister discussed any of this with the Justice 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say that this — 
and my officials tell me — that this has been discussed at the 
municipal board. And so certainly they are well aware of the 
issue. 
 
I want to say that as we have in the past this evening, we like to 
see harmony between the landowners and the oil companies. 
But I think what would not be tolerable is an environment 
where the industry is not able to operate and extract the 
resource and put in on to the market. 
 
So I would say that Mr. Vass has some, I know, some very 
strong views, he’s very much involved in the area where oil and 
gas activity takes place, but our officials are aware of the 
concern and the comments that have come from that 
association. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. This in 
no way, shape, or form would restrict the operations of the oil 
industry. It would simply mean that they would not be able to 
avoid paying compensation for access doing seismic activities 
or for damages, in that matter, in carrying out seismic activities. 
 
There are times when the seismic companies carry out their 
activities in the ditches of the municipal roads and leave those, 
especially if it happens to be a wet season, in very terrible 
shape. If they are on private land or on Crown land, I’m 
assuming Crown land that they would pay some compensation, 
but certainly on private land, they pay some compensation, both 
for access and for any damages that occur. 
 
And what Mr. Vass’s association is asking is that the seismic 
companies be in a position of paying compensation and access 
no matter whether it be on municipal land, whether it be on 
Crown land, or whether it’s on private land, that it’s all operated 
under the same basis. Therefore there’s no advantage to simply 
running down the municipal road allowance to avoid paying 
compensation to the landowner adjacent to the road. 
 
As the department, have you, Mr. Minister, made any 
recommendations to the Department of Justice surface rights 
board on any of these issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it 
would be fair to say that we would take the position that it only 
makes sense for the oil and gas industry to be using the road 
allowances. They compensate for any damage that they do 
during seismic. 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2000 

But I think, from my perspective, it would be . . . make much 
more sense to have them investing money drilling oil wells and 
producing oil, than it would be to not be on road allowance 
areas and spending seismic dollars going across private land 
when the same job can be done using the road allowances. 
 
So I guess from my perspective, I’d far sooner see that 
investment spent in drilling oil wells, producing oil, and 
creating jobs for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the amount of money 
that they spend on seismic does not impact the amount of money 
that’s spent on drilling. In a lot of cases the seismic operations are 
being carried out by independent operators with hopes of selling 
their results to a company at some point in time. In some cases 
they’re being done for a particular company who are searching for 
oil to know what’s below the ground. In other cases, it’s simply 
being done on speculation. So just to say that if you reduce the 
amount being spent on seismic, you could drill more oil wells. 
 
If that is a good argument that you’re presenting, Mr. Minister, if it 
is, then what you should be doing is something like reducing the 
royalties. That would certainly allow them to drill a lot more oil 
wells then, if they didn’t have to pay your royalty taxes. That 
would provide for more oil wells. Or perhaps you could say we’re 
not going to charge the high electricity costs, because then that 
would allow those companies to drill more oil wells, Mr. Minister. 
 
So if you’re going to be consistent, Mr. Minister, in your 
argument, are you then advocating the reduction of the royalties so 
that they can drill more oil wells? Are you advocating a reduction 
of the electricity costs so they can drill more oil wells? Are you 
advocating the reduction of fuel taxes so they can drill more oil 
wells? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, let me just ask that 
both of us be consistent. February 16, 1998, the Carnduff news, 
and the member is quoted as saying their new lower royalty tax 
structure will help eliminate disincentives of low prices for many 
companies and will therefore help to at least maintain, if not 
increase, drilling activity in the southeast and around the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, not to be argumentative, but on a regular 
basis the opposition is pursuing incremental costs for highways, 
they’re pursuing reduction in terms of the fuel tax on . . . that are 
sold through our service stations in the province. 
 
The member is advocating lower royalties and taxation, and I 
agree with him, as we can and when the province can afford it, 
and that is the position we take. All the while we need to ensure 
that we’re balancing budgets because no one wants deficit 
budgets in this province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well Mr. Minister, reducing the 
royalties certainly would increase the drilling, and since you’re 
saying compensation is already being paid for any damages on 
municipal property, then that wouldn’t have any impact either. 
So Mr. Minister, again you’re the one who suggested that if you 
provided more compensation to the owners of land for seismic 
survey that that would reduce the drilling. Well then your 
royalties and your other taxes are reducing the drilling. 

Mr. Minister, another issue that comes up quite often that I 
would like some clarification on what your department is doing 
and where you’re doing it is on the orphan wells. What’s 
happening with those circumstances? Has that issue been 
settled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can report to the 
member that those discussions have been ongoing. We’re 
certainly all of a similar mind, both the government and the 
industry, and certainly what we want to do is prevent orphan 
wells. And when they do occur, which on occasion they can, we 
have a mechanism to deal with them, and of that we’re very 
much of one mind. We haven’t reached an agreement yet, but 
I’m confident within the next very short while, we will have an 
agreement with producers. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:20 p.m. 
 
 


