

















































Hansard: April 26, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 857 

 April 26, 2000 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I rise 

on behalf of several citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

opposed to private sales exemption of $3,000, and the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 

private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 

consumers of this province wherever they choose to 

purchase a vehicle. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the signatories to this petition come from the community 

of Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 

signed by the good people from Elfros, Regina, Foam Lake, all 

around the province, and they’re concerned about the 

government’s misthought budget, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 

therefore providing these dealers with the opportunity to 

pass on the savings to their customers. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 

today to present petitions from people in our good province of 

Saskatchewan that would like to see the exemption of the PST 

(provincial sales tax) on private sales under $3,000 extended to 

all dealers throughout the province, and the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 

private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 

consumers of this province wherever they choose to 

purchase a vehicle. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the good 

community of Humboldt. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today against 

forced municipal amalgamation: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 

any plans it has to proceed with the forced amalgamation 

of municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 

Foam Lake. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens expressing a concern about the high cost of fuel. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

communities of Choiceland, Kinistino, Archerwill, Prince 

Albert, and Melfort. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 

petitions regarding the fuel tax, and reading the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present are signed by individuals 

from the communities of Melfort, Kinistino, Naicam, and St. 

Brieux. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 

regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents per litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 

 

And the signatures are from Unity, North Battleford, and also 

Kerrobert. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

stand today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this is signed by folks from Macoun and Estevan. 

 

I so present. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 

people in Swift Current and area concerned about their hospital. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer could be summarized with the 

following sentiment, that the petition calls on the provincial 

government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 

Current regional hospital by providing approximately 7.54 

million, allowing the Swift Current Health District to provide 

improved health care services. 

 

This petition is signed by the people in Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition of 

citizens who are opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 

any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s signed by constituents of Swift Current. 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf 

of residents of Saskatchewan opposed to private sales 

exemption of $3,000. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 

private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to 

consumers of this province wherever they choose to 

purchase a vehicle. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed from people in Regina, Regina 

Beach area. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to reduce fuel 

tax. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 

by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 

government. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners are from Davidson, Saskatoon, Regina, Girvin, 

Bladworth, Martensville, Estevan, Swift Current. There’s even 

a signature from Petalon, Turkey, who thinks this is a good 

idea, and we pay too much tax here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

a petition regarding the private sale exemption of $3,000. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers, in addition to 

private sales, therefore providing a fair tax break to the 

consumers of this province wherever they choose to 

purchase a vehicle. 

 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

White City, Yorkton, and Foam Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition requesting exemption for tax paid inventory. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day, 

therefore providing these dealers the opportunity to pass on 

the savings to their customers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the good folks of Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, and Perdue, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

These are petitions of the citizens of the province 

petitioning the Assembly on the following matters: 

 

To provide a $3,000 exemption of the PST for dealers on 

the purchase of vehicles; 

 

To grandfather vehicles that were tax paid on budget day; 

 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 

municipalities; 

 

To provide funding for Swift Current Regional Hospital; 

 

And to reduce fuel taxes. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next move first reading of The Democratic Unionism 

Act. 

 

And also on standing, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

Friday next move first reading of The Trade Union Amendment 

Act, 2000 (Freedom of Speech in the Workplace). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would ask your indulgence, sir, and the indulgence of my 

colleagues to make a somewhat lengthier introduction if I may. 

 

I want to ask leave of the Assembly to welcome a truly 

distinguished and accomplished Canadian who is seated in your 

gallery, Dr. A.W. (Al) Johnson. And I’ll just ask him to remain 

seated for a moment because this will take a little time. 

 

Joining Dr. Johnson is another familiar face, former deputy 

minister of Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan, 

Professor Hartley Furtan, from the University of Saskatchewan; 

and Saskatchewan’s deputy minister of Finance, Dr. Paul 

Boothe. I’ll be inviting all members to join me in welcoming 

these guests today but before I do I’d like to ask the Assembly’s 

indulgence, as I say, to make an extended — not too extended 

— statement in recognition of Al Johnson’s many 

accomplishments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the legislature will recall the 

commitment in the 1999 Throne Speech to appoint a special 

adviser on agricultural policy to assist Saskatchewan in dealing 

with the long-term challenges and opportunities facing this 

important economic sector. That commitment was made as part 

of the determination to maintain a role — a strong role — in 

this very important field of public policy. 

 

Later today my colleague, the Minister of Finance, will be 

announcing the establishment of the A.W. Johnson 

Distinguished Chair in Public Policy, a position that will 

formalize the obligation which I’ve referred to in this regard 

and strengthen our ability to attract Canada’s brightest and best 

public policy advisers right here to Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m pleased to advise the Assembly that the first occupant of 

that Chair will be Professor Hartley Furtan who will serve as 

special adviser on agricultural issues and provide support to the 

province at the next round of international trade talks. And the 

Minister of Finance will further elaborate following question 

period. 

 

My main purpose in introduction of guests, however, is to just 

say that this Chair and this announcement is a reflection of the 

commitment to excellence in public policy that Dr. Al Johnson 

has bestowed upon us; and has given us the privilege, the 

honour of using his name in so determining this Chair and 

establishing it. 

 

I’ve said many times, and firmly believe, that service to the 

public is among the most noble and worthy of professions and 

nobody in my estimation more clearly exemplifies those values 

than Al Johnson. Here we have an individual who spent a 

lifetime dedicated to furthering sound public policy in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada as a whole — in areas ranging 

from finance to national health and welfare. 

 

One who has taken his talents to the international stage, 

providing nations like Indonesia and South Africa the benefit of 

his expertise at the very highest levels. One who throughout his 

esteemed career has won accolades, awards, and tributes for his 

many achievements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly worthy to note that Dr. Al Johnson 

began that career right here in Saskatchewan. A Saskatchewan 

boy, born and raised in Insinger, he received bachelor degrees 

in political science and history from the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) and then went on to achieve an M.A. (Master of 

Arts) in public administration from the University of Toronto. 

And two further degrees from Harvard —a masters in Public 

Administration, and a Ph.D.(Doctor of Philosophy) in Political 

Economy. As he told me this morning over coffee, at Harvard 

he had a little time to think. 

 

Upon his return to Saskatchewan he joined the provincial 

Budget Bureau at the ripe old age of 28, became Deputy 

Provincial Treasurer — one of Canada’s youngest ever to hold 

a deputy minister’s position anywhere. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer of the day was the Hon. C. M. 

Clarence Fines, who said this about Al Johnson’s appointment, 

quote: 

 

His example should serve as an inspiration to our young 

people in realizing that there is room at the top for those 

who have been well trained and have given outstanding 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for some achieving the top position in finance of a 

large organization like the provincial government might in itself 

be the apex of a fine career, and it is; but not for Al Johnson, it 

was only the beginning. 

 

Following 12 years as deputy Provincial Treasurer, Al Johnson 

accepted positions with the federal government serving amongst 

other positions during his tenure as the assistant deputy minister 

of Finance, economic adviser to the Prime Minister, Treasury 

Board secretary, and deputy minister of National Health and 

Welfare. 

 

In 1975 he moved outside executive government to become 

president of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, the CBC. 

And seven years later, took his wealth of talent and experience 

back to the academic world, this time as a professor, a fellow, 

and advisor at Queen’s, University of Toronto, and the 

Canadian Centre for Management Development. 

 

His achievements are outstanding, and I would say greatly 

appreciated by a grateful nation. And this nation acknowledges 

it, because he has been recognized with the Order of Canada, 

the Vanier Medal from the Institute of Public Administration of 

Canada, a gold medal from the Professional Institute of the 

Public Service of Canada, and honorary degrees from the 

universities of Regina, Mount Allison, and Queen’s. 

 

As all of us look to the future of our province and our nation, I 

can think of no better example of serving the public with 

integrity and professionalism and dedication than that that has 

been offered by our special guest, Al Johnson. And with the 

highly respected name of Dr. Al Johnson attached to our newly 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

created Chair, we recognize a contribution and a contribution of 

the civil service. 

 

And also, I believe we can look forward to a second plus, the 

attraction to this civil service of people with research and advise 

and an eye to the future to define public policy to this province 

and Canada well into the new century, the 21st century. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thank you and the members for the extended 

invitation and I would ask now all members to join me in 

warmly welcoming Al Johnson and asking him to stand in 

recognition of his many and valued contributions to 

Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world. Dr. Al Johnson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition I too would like to welcome our guests, as 

the Premier has already done, to the Assembly; to Professor 

Furtan, to Dr. Boothe and particularly to Dr. A.W. Johnson who 

has had a long and distinguished career. The distinguished 

position now of the Chair of Public Policy I believe is very 

fitting for Dr. Johnson and we certainly support the fact that his 

name is associated with this esteemed position. 

 

He started his career in Saskatchewan and I must say he looks 

surprisingly well for having gone back to the days of C.M. 

Fines and having had to work with all those CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) and NDP (New Democratic Party) 

governments. It speaks to the quality of his character and his 

strength. 

 

He though has gone on from the province of Saskatchewan and 

has served Canada and served the world and obviously needs to 

be commended on those remarkable accomplishments. 

 

Mr. Johnson has received many distinguished awards, and the 

official opposition takes the opportunity to thank Dr. Al 

Johnson for his many contributions in so many outstanding and 

notable initiatives that he has undertaken. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, congratulations and 

welcome to the Assembly, Dr. Johnson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, the four 

most favourite people in the world to me who I love and 

cherish. And their presence here should remind each one of us 

as to why we are in this Chamber. And that’s to go before and 

make the world a better place for our children and for our 

families. 

 

So in the west gallery, would you please welcome my wife, 

Karen, and our three boys, David, Eric, and Connor. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s truly an honour to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, my three daughters who are seated in your gallery — 

Crystal, Shannon, and Lindsay. Would you please join me in 

welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, a constituent of mine and a former colleague of 

many of the members with us here, a distinguished career in 

this House; please welcome behind me — behind the bar — 

John Brockelbank. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 

special day for me as I have the opportunity to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, my family. 

 

My wife, Leona, starting — I’ll have everyone stand up — 

starting with my wife, Leona, an employee of the Pasqua Health 

District; my daughter, Carla, who’s just had some new-found 

independence acquiring a driver’s licence and a new car; my 

daughter, Krystal, who is the artist in the family and I have her 

paintings proudly on display in my office; and my son, Tyrrell, 

our resident Pokémon expert. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you’ll be interested to know my son had two 

requests on the way here yesterday, neither of which I can 

understand very well. One was to get a pack of Pokémon cards, 

the other was he wanted an opportunity to be able to meet the 

Premier. So I told him I might be able to arrange the Pokémon 

cards but I wasn’t sure about the other. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

legislature, two special guests of ours who are here today. The 

president of our party, Bill Allen, seated in your gallery, and the 

executive secretary to our party, Steven Bobiash, also seated in 

your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to see Bill here again. For many of you 

who may not be aware, Bill served in this Assembly and is 

certainly no stranger. He served here from 1991 . . . sorry, 1971 

to 1982, I think, and was a former constituent of mine. It’s nice 

to see him back here — Bill, and Steve. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 

60 cadets from the 723 Moose Mountain Squadron in Carlyle. 

Also communities such as Redvers, Manor, Arcola, and Kisbey 

are part of this squadron. 

 

But special guests, Mr. Speaker, of the 60 include 26 members 

of the No. 2565 Army Cadet Corps from Spaniard’s Bay, 

Newfoundland. They’re here on an exchange tour, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

also like to join with my colleague, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, to welcome the cadets, and just to let them 

know I believe we have some of the cadets from the 

Langbank-Kennedy area down there as well. 

 

I have been pleased to have addressed this cadet group, and I’d 

like to welcome each and every of them. It’s certainly a 

pleasure to have them in the Assembly, and to ask the members 

to again join with me in welcoming these cadets. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, if I may be permitted. I do 

have some guests in the Assembly from our good neighbours to 

the South. I would like to introduce them here who are in the 

Speaker’s gallery and in the Chamber. They are from the Mount 

Pleasant Baptist Church in Carolton, Georgia, USA (United 

States of America), which is about an hour’s drive west of 

Atlanta near the Alabama state line. They are here to volunteer 

their missionary services to the Discovery Baptist Church here 

in Regina. They are accompanied by Pastor Larry Spencer of 

Discovery Baptist Church. 

 

I know that all members will want to join me in wishing them 

an enjoyable and productive visit here to our great province and 

to the city of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

First Nations Annual Winter Games 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 

I had the distinct pleasure of attending the opening ceremonies 

of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 20th Annual 

Winter Games taking place in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 2,000 athletes are participating in six athletic 

events during the winter games, including broomball, 

badminton, boys and girls’ hockey, volleyball, and soccer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this marks the first time that the games are being 

held in Saskatoon, and teams and individuals from each of the 

11 tribal councils are competing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these games provide a great deal of enjoyment 

through athletic competition, but there’s also a significant 

spiritual and cultural component as this is the first year that the 

medals will be handed out in the youth category for the 

powwow, which is a featured event being held early this week. 

 

I also feel that it is noteworthy to mention that all of the athletes 

and participants in the games must abide by a strict code of 

ethics, teaching the youth respect for themselves and for their 

fellow athletes. Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 

FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) on their 

wonderful work on coordinating these games, and I wish all of 

the athletes the very best of luck in their respective sports. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Nations Winter Games  

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want join in and 

announce to the Assembly this week that the city of Saskatoon 

has been proud to welcome the 21st annual Saskatchewan First 

Nations Winter Games. The games were initiated to promote 

First Nations youth involvement in sport, culture and recreation. 

In Cree we say, “Soogi kuwes tu metuwechik” — to play with 

strength and fairness. 

 

More important, Mr. Speaker, the games are designed to allow 

2,300 athletes between the ages of 8 and 18 to have a great deal 

of fun by competing against their peers in the sports of hockey, 

broomball, volleyball, badminton. This year the demonstration 

sport is indoor soccer. 

 

The five-day event has been held in Saskatchewan Place. Chief 

Joe Quewezance and the Saskatoon Tribal Council are to be 

congratulated for organizing and hosting the games. As well, 

Chief Darcy Bear of Whitecap Dakota First Nation is the Chair 

of the 2000 First Nations Winter Games. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opening ceremonies on Monday were 

spectacular with dignitaries and attendants including National 

Chief Phil Fontaine, FSIN Chief Perry Bellegarde, colleagues 

from the legislature as well as elders, veterans, participants and 

their families. These games are good for young athletes, good 

for the host city, good for sport in general, and good for 

promoting public awareness and support of First Nations talent. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Tape geechi, meegwach and Marsi choo. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gardiner Dam Terminal 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 

pleasure I rise today to inform the members of the Assembly of 

a project in my constituency — the Gardiner dam terminal. It’s 

a joint venture between local investors and Agricore. 

 

This terminal is unique in the fact it’ll be 50 per cent owned by 

local farmers and investors. Mr. Speaker, this means that the 

terminal will be run by the people who know the most about the 

agriculture industry — the farmers. The head office will be 

located at the terminal, where it should be, not in some huge 

corporate building in another province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this terminal will provide many benefits for the 

Gardiner dam communities. It will ensure the retention of the 

CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) rail line. It will increase tax 

revenues for the local municipal governments. Once in 

operation, the terminal will employ approximately 12 full-time 

employees. 

 

These benefits have translated into renewed sense of economic 

optimism in the area. Construction on the project is expected to 

begin in June of this year. The facility is expected to be ready 

for farmer deliveries in the summer, year 2001. The terminal is 

expected to handle up to 150,000 tonnes of grain per year and 

will be able to clean grain to export standards. 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent example of how rural 

Saskatchewan can band together to become economically viable 

if given the proper tools. Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan can 

grow and thrive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert Business Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 

Speaker, I too want to join in sharing the mood of optimism, 

and this comes from my home community of Prince Albert. 

 

I was fortunate enough to attend the annual business 

recognition, the Samuel McLeod Awards, and I want to say that 

it was very much a celebration of outstanding businesses and 

individuals who have made contributions to Prince Albert and 

Saskatchewan in the past year. 

 

Carolinny Sprouts won for the best new product or service. 

Boston Pizza was recognized as the best new business. P A 

Janitorial . . . (inaudible) . . . factory outlet won the service 

industry category. And in the category of marketing, Rod’s 

Decorating Service was chosen. 

 

Fresh Air Experience was awarded for its community 

involvement; and Wapawekka Lumber won in two categories, 

for investment and for job creation. The business of the year, 

Mr. Speaker, was the Prince Albert Credit Union. 

 

And finally, a very important award, the legacy award, 

designated to celebrate the contributions of business persons to 

the community over the years was to a very deserving 

candidate, Mr. Ab Pellegrini of Leon’s Furniture. 

 

I want to congratulate all of the finalists. I want to thank all of 

the sponsors for their involvement. But most of all, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to thank the business community of 

Prince Albert for their faith in their community and their faith in 

our province. They deserve to be very proud of each other. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pasqua Regional Park Wins Award 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

fortunate in Carrot River Valley to have four regional parks in 

our constituency. And the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association has named one of them, the Pasqua Regional Park 

which is located on Highway No. 23 between Carrot River and 

Arborfield, as the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association 

park of the year. 

 

The award was presented by Mr. Gillis MacDonald, president 

of the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association during their 

annual conference held April 13, 14, 15 in Saskatoon. The 

annual award is a major achievement in which all Pasqua park 

board members, staff, volunteers, and local residents can be 

very proud. 

 

The award was granted on the basis of board effort and 

effectiveness, volunteer support in park operations, community 

support of contributing bodies, recent park developments and 

enhancements, potential for further expanding tourism 

opportunities. 

 

And the Pasqua Regional Park board chairperson Richard 

Colborn noted that the award was a particular honour given the 

number of exceptional regional parks in the province. And 

Colborn went on to commend past board members and 

volunteers for making the Pasqua Regional Park what it is 

today. 

 

Just an interesting note, Mr. Speaker. The Pasqua Regional Park 

is near the site of the paleontological discovery of prehistoric 

bony fish, sharks, birds, turtles, and a skeleton discovery of a 

92-year-old crocodilian named Big Bert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Administrative Professionals’ Day 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today is Administrative Professionals’ Day. You might ask 

yourself, what exactly is Administrative Professionals’ Day? 

Here’s a hint. It used to be called, Mr. Speaker, Secretaries’ 

Day. 

 

But as we all know, Mr. Speaker, secretaries do much more 

than purely secretarial tasks. This is why a changing profession 

deserves a change in name — a new name that more accurately 

reflects the demands placed on administrative professionals. 

 

During the information age, Mr. Speaker, administrative 

professionals are doing more and more for all of us. They are 

becoming our information managers. Behind every successful 

office, there is an efficient unit of administrative support staff 

making those of us fortunate enough to have support, look 

good. Administrative professionals go that extra mile to make 

our offices run smoothly. 

 

Though we are thankful for the support of our administrative 

professionals every day, we do not often acknowledge just how 

much they contribute to the efficient running of our office. 

Today is the day when we can openly and officially express our 

gratitude to our administrative professionals. 

 

Today we also acknowledge that teamwork is essential and that 

no one person is more important than another. It takes a 

concerted effort for things to run smoothly in any office. 

 

On behalf of all my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I wish to express 

our gratitude and appreciation for the work of our 

administrative professionals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recognition of Choiceland Volunteers 

 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

this afternoon so that I can bring recognition to two of my 

constituents. Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of attending an 

evening of recognition in Choiceland, sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan housing authority, last Tuesday, April 18. 

 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

At this gala event, Mr. Speaker, Ronald Smith and Robert 

Walker, two Choiceland area farmers, were honoured for 10 

years of voluntary services, the Choiceland and District 

Housing Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two gentlemen have given tirelessly of their 

time in the last 10 years. Not only have they contributed time 

unselfishly at the board meetings, but have served hundreds of 

hours in ensuring that every local event sponsored by the local 

housing authority has run smoothly to the benefit of the local 

residents, and assisting whenever needed when an extra hand is 

required to maintain the housing complexes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is people such as Ronald and Robert whose 

unwavering efforts to help those who are in need makes us all 

proud to live in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, volunteerism is one of the backbones of our 

province. Volunteerism is a necessity to the survival of both 

rural and urban Saskatchewan. Without volunteers like Ronald 

Smith and Robert Walker, Saskatchewan would be a lesser 

place to live. And I am proud to know these two gentlemen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that everyone in this Assembly to please join 

me in recognizing Mr. Robert Walker and Mr. Ronald Smith, 

chairman and vice-chairman respectively of the Choiceland and 

District Housing Authority. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Parolees at Regina Community Correction Centre 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today my question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, 

there is great concern in the city of Regina and indeed across 

the province, with the news that violent offenders from Alberta 

are being sent to a halfway house here in Regina. Two of these 

parolees have recently been charged with armed robberies 

which occurred in this city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Oskana Centre is located right in the heart of 

Regina. It is the only central, federal community correctional 

centre for parolees from Alberta and Saskatchewan to go to 

because last summer the last community correctional centre in 

Alberta converted to a residential centre and can now refuse to 

take violent offenders. 

 

Mr. Minister, since Oskana became the only centralized CCC 

(community correctional centre) last summer, have you 

contacted the federal government about increasing pressure . . . 

about the increased pressures this is putting on our system, and 

about new concerns facing our community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me thank 

the member for his question. The member should be assured 

that all necessary precautions have been made to ensure the 

safety of the community here in Regina. 

 

The fact that Alberta doesn’t have adequate facilities says 

something I think about the approach that Alberta is taking to 

. . . for the provision of services to ensure that people can be 

attended to in the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of course is forever dealing with 

the federal government on matters of justice as we . . . as our 

jurisdictions overlap, and we’ll continue to do that. And I 

would, Mr. Speaker, just point out in passing, as we all know in 

the last election, Mr. Speaker, the party opposite campaigned on 

zero funding increases for Justice, Mr. Speaker . That is not the 

way we’ve approached things on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rather 

saddened by the minister’s flippant answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina citizens have been victimized in a string of 

armed robberies carried out by violent offenders from another 

province. Enforcement officials believe that the justice system 

in this province is busy enough with our own offenders — let 

alone those from another jurisdiction. 

 

They also believe that if a parolee is going to reoffend — and 

this is important — they are likely, they are more likely, to do 

so in a location where they have no links to the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a community correctional centre to help parolees 

reintegrate can be a benefit to society, but it is unfair that we be 

the only location for violent offenders coming out of the federal 

system in Alberta as well as Saskatchewan. And even though 

this may be considered a federal justice problem, when these 

people reoffend in our province, in this city, it becomes our 

problem as well. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, what has your department done to 

address the greater strain that accepting the responsibilities for 

these parolees has put on the Saskatchewan justice system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, let me just reiterate the kinds of commitments this 

government has made to the justice system and to the criminal 

justice system in particular; contrary, Mr. Speaker, to the zero 

commitment of the party opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a commitment of 200 police officers 

through the term of this government, Mr. Speaker, $16 million a 

year; zero from the party opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got major commitments to corrections. 

Another million dollars a year in that system, Mr. Speaker. 

Supports to families. Mr. Speaker, across the piece, this party, 

this government has stood up for the criminal justice system, 

stood up for the safety of Saskatchewan residents. We’ll 

continue to do so, unlike the party opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is giving a 

political stump speech when we’re concerned about crimes that 

are occurring here in Regina. 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, since the last ccc (community correction centre) in 

Alberta converted to a residential centre, the federal 

government has been attempting to re-establish another 

community correction centre in that province. But they keep 

running into massive opposition from the residents of 

neighbourhoods that they consider. The people there don’t want 

violent offenders in their neighbourhoods. 

 

And I think the people of Regina would probably say the same 

thing. It’s quite ironic that while our best and brightest young 

entrepreneurs head west to Alberta, we in turn take that 

province’s violent criminals, and at what cost to security and 

well-being of our own citizens and our justice system? 

 

Mr. Minister, will you — with haste and with diligence — work 

with your Alberta counterpart to lobby the federal government 

for an early establishment of a community correctional centre in 

Alberta to house their violent offenders and take pressure off 

the Oskana Centre and the community of Regina? Will you do 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite should realize that there are 

transfers of offenders across this country, from province to 

province. There are offenders from Saskatchewan who go to 

Alberta to serve their time, Mr. Speaker. This is not, this is not 

an unusual kind of occurrence, Mr. Speaker, and the member 

should not be generating uncertainty and fearmongering in the 

population at large, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are constantly discussions around the nature of housing 

criminals, Mr. Speaker. That will continue. The member can be 

assured of it. 

 

And the member can be assured and Saskatchewan residents 

can be assured that this government is committed to addressing 

the concerns of citizens’ safety and security. That’s why there 

are 200 new police officers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Relations in the Farm Implement Industry 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour. Madam Minister, there 

was a meeting last night in Humboldt of people who think your 

unfair labour laws are hurting the farm implement industry. The 

headline in the latest PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers 

Association) newsletter says it all: 

 

Annaheim today, Minot tomorrow. Doepker Industries in 

Annaheim is now thinking about moving to the US. Others 

may follow. Implement manufacturers say unions are being 

certified without a secret ballot and without employees 

hearing both sides of the issue. 

 

Madam Minister, what are you doing to fix your unfair labour 

laws, laws that may drive thousands of jobs out of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

start out first of all by adding a little bit of information to this 

point, and that’s that we’ve had the same labour laws since 

1944 in the province. So this is not a particularly new concept. 

 

But the other thing I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Department of Labour believes that labour peace is crucial for 

economic growth and development, and the fact of the matter is 

we have staff within the department who can assist both 

workers and employers in resolving disputes, mediating 

disputes, and to create a positive labour environment within an 

unionized environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party 

supports the workers’ right to join a union. However, workers 

should also have the right to be fully aware of the implications 

of this decision by hearing both sides of the issue. Right now 

employers are not even allowed to speak to employees during a 

certification drive. 

 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has given notice of a 

Bill entitled the freedom of speech in the workplace Act. This 

Bill will allow employers to speak to employees doing a union 

drive. They will still not be allowed to coerce employees in any 

way. 

 

Madam Minister, workers need to hear both sides of the issue in 

order to make an informed decision. Will you support this 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just point 

out a little bit of the workings of the Labour Relations Board. 

It’s a quasi-judicial body — 50 per cent of the representatives 

are employers who are recommended by the employer 

community, 50 per cent are employees who are recommended 

by the labour community. And together they look at the facts of 

any certification drive and they rule on whether it was 

conducted fairly. 

 

Now as to the matter of information to the workers, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly people are available at the department to 

inform people of their rights, both the employees and the 

employers. And again to insist . . . to assist with a peaceful and 

co-operative resolution in the common interest of economic 

growth. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the 

union at Doepker Industries was certified without a secret 

ballot. As you know, emotions in the workplace can run pretty 

high during a union drive. Workers may not feel they have the 

right to freely express their views. That right can only be 

protected through a secret ballot. 

 

Madam Minister, if a majority of workers vote in a secret ballot 

to join a union, then we fully support that decision. But workers 

deserve the right to that secret ballot. 

 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has given notice of a 

Bill entitled the democratic unionism Act. This Bill will ensure 

a worker’s right to a secret ballot. Will you support this 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, that 

the member opposite has made two allegations today. He’s 

implied that the Labour Relations Board is not a fair and 

unbiased body; he’s also implied that unions are not democratic 

bodies. And I would just assure the member that we have both a 

democratic process with a long-standing history since 1944. 

 

And I think people should be cautious about trashing the rights 

of people within an environment that certainly is an emotional 

one. And again, I offer our department’s services in helping to 

restore labour peace within that environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, you 

know that PIMA is very concerned about this issue. They have 

made a lengthy submission to your government detailing their 

concerns. 

 

In their submission PIMA says, employer free speech has been 

virtually extinguished. They cite numerous examples of unfair, 

harmful Labour Board rulings. Then they call on your 

government to take immediate action. 

 

Madam Minister, what action is your government taking to 

address these concerns, specifically the employers’ right to free 

speech and the employees’ right to a secret ballot? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’ll 

speak a little bit to the process. In a certification drive it’s my 

understanding that every worker must sign a card, that the 

signatures are verified; and at the hearing in front of the Labour 

Relations Board, both the employer and the employees have the 

ability to put forward unfair labour practices if there’s been any 

undue interference in the appropriate process. 

 

Again, and I affirm, Mr. Speaker, it’s been . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Sitting as close as I am to 

the hon. minister, I can hardly hear because of the noise from 

on both sides. Please allow the questions to be asked and the 

answers to be given. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And as to the PIMA matter, I’ve 

certainly indicated that I would be willing to meet with them 

and to look at their concerns. There may be a way that we may 

improve the communications around people’s rights in a 

bargaining environment. And you can always improve your 

ability to inform people of democratic process. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s in everybody’s interest 

to, instead of creating a tension, to look at how to resolve it. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

here’s what we’re asking for. We think the employers should 

have the right to free speech. We think the employers should 

have the right to hear both sides of the issue. And we think 

employees should have the right to a secret ballot. In other 

words, the same rights people have during an election. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you against basic democratic rights? 

People have the right to free speech and a secret ballot when 

they elect their government. Why do you take that right away 

from them in the workplace? 

 

Madam Minister, will you support the Saskatchewan Party 

legislation to ensure free speech and a secret ballot in the 

workplace? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll make a couple of comments, Mr. 

Speaker. One is that this is no different from the federal 

government’s laws in this regard. So both ourselves and the 

federal government have had these laws for a long time. And I 

suspect if the members opposite were interested in 

understanding this rather than in creating further conflict, that it 

would be easier to get through a response to this question. 

 

But I’ll just say that workers do have the individual right to sign 

their card, and that’s a private act when they sign that card. And 

we do believe that indicates the democratic intent of the worker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clawback of Financial Support from Farmers 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, it looks like you and your NDP are up to your old 

tricks again. First it was the Finance minister’s don’t ask, don’t 

tell strategy for the budget. Now it looks like the billion dollar 

agriculture package that you announced in February is phoney 

too. 

 

According to AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 

officials, most of the $260 million in new support that you 

promised in February will be clawed back for any producer who 

qualifies for AIDA in the year 2000. 

 

Mr. Premier, did you know on February 24, when you made 

your phoney announcement, that the one-time $260 million 

AIDA payment would be clawed back? Why did you 

intentionally mislead thousands of desperate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I’ll just remind the 

hon. member, that’s fairly strong language directed to another 

member. Kindly . . . Order, order, please. Order. Kindly direct 

your questions through the Chair. 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier 

why he didn’t inform the thousands of desperate farm families 

about the way the program worked. 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite and to the Assembly, that there could be 

nothing further from the truth in the member’s comment that 

anyone was misleading anyone. 

 

There is no one — no one — no one, Mr. Speaker, would not 

understand that if you get a cheque for $9,000, some taxpayers’ 

payment through their government, that it wouldn’t be counted 

as income. How could anything be more clear than if you get 

$9,000 from other taxpayers, that it would be counted as 

income? Maybe you don’t understand that, but most of us as 

farmers understand fully. 

 

This is why when Grant Devine had special farm payments, 

when Mr. Devine went out and got money from the federal 

government along with other taxpayers’ money, it was counted 

as income. And there is another thing that you may not 

understand but if farm income gets high enough, we’ll actually 

have to pay income tax as well. Another secret that you might 

not be aware of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — The side opposite, in case you have trouble 

hearing, the question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, most 

people dismiss your so-called billion dollar announcement in 

February as more hot air as it was. But farm families believe 

that at least $260 million was actually new financial assistance, 

and now they find out that you weren’t telling the truth. Even 

your old pal Dick Proctor . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask hon. members to 

kindly choose their words and their questions judiciously. 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Premier, but you didn’t explain the 

program fully. Even your old pal Dick Proctor, the NDP 

Member of Parliament for Regina, says that you misled the 

public. The National Farmers Union says it’s cruel to announce 

assistance for farmers in dire need and then later tell them the 

money will be clawed back. 

 

Mr. Premier, why did you mislead farm families into believing 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s direct 

allegations are not acceptable, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 

member opposite that her intent of accusing the government or 

the federal government of not telling farmers that the $9,000 

they get would not be income, speaks to that member opposite 

understanding of programs. 

 

Now if they get enough through this program that they’re not 

eligible for an aid program in another fund, why would anybody 

be surprised? Because the aid program is based on farm income. 

Now it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to understand that at a 

certain level you’re not going to be eligible for an aid program. 

 

And you know what? If we get really lucky — if we get really 

lucky and get a good crop this year and good prices — we 

won’t be eligible for any aid program. And wouldn’t that be a 

wonderful position to be in? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — I have another question for the Premier. I 

would like to point out that I’m not alone in not understanding 

the program. A great deal of farmers out there obviously do not 

understand the program because it wasn’t explained to them 

good enough. The NDP press release in February clearly states 

that there will be 260 million in new money for farm families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the chairman of the House of Commons 

Agriculture Committee says that the NDP’s secret clawback is a 

case of the government giving money with one hand and taking 

it away with another. 

 

Why did you hold a press conference, Mr. Premier, in February 

to announce a program that does not exist? Why did you claim 

that there would be $260 million new, one-time assistance for 

farmers when you knew that perhaps this was misleading? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 

member opposite that there could be nothing more clear than 

how the program would work. And I say to the member 

opposite it . . . she was involved in the protest to Ottawa in 

getting the money. Obviously when the 260 million was 

announced everyone, everyone would understand that that is 

new income for farmers. 

 

Now I say again that when it comes to the aid program — 

AIDA program —obviously the income that you receive under 

the new program will be counted as income. Everyone 

understands that. Just as if the price of wheat goes up — which 

I hope and pray it does — that will be counted as income and 

reduce even further the number of people who get the aid 

program. 

 

What would be more wonderful for farmers not to have to get 

any aid from their friends and neighbours through their tax 

programs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like the Premier to 

answer this question because it was the Premier who said there 

was a billion dollars — he said 260 million were new. That’s 

not accurate because the reduction in the AIDA program will 

reduce that package down. 

 

He’s not coming clean with the people of Saskatchewan. He’s 

not coming clean with the industry. Will he get up in his seat 

and explain why this package is smaller than he said it was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite, who seems to have a short memory of his 

own statements, that in the World Spectator on March 23, 1998 

— Moosomin World Spectator — the member opposite who 

asked the question said, and I quote: 

 

I don’t believe in making any special deals for farmers 

(any special deals). 

 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

Now why would you expect when farmers get payments that 

that money would be treated any differently in their accounting 

than it would be in any other area? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the member opposite that when we announced the billion 

dollars — and I want to do this slowly so the member can write 

it down — we said that there would be 260 million in the 

special program, 40 million in our budget which our Minister of 

Finance announced in the budget, 400 million in interest free 

and 300 million for 1999 AIDA. And that 300 million will be 

there. 

 

What they’re talking about is AIDA for future years. There is a 

billion, and if the member wrote down the numbers, he will add 

it up and get 1 billion. But understanding his Tory background, 

adding numbers is not one of his strengths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Commitments in the Throne Speech 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 

Finance. In his announcement this morning appointing Mr. 

Hartley Furtan to the A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in 

Public Policy, the Finance minister indicated this fulfilled a 

commitment in the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out some other commitments in 

the Throne Speech that haven’t been met, such as the 

establishment of a provincial action committee on the rural 

economy; such as the farm input cost monitoring program; such 

as finding ways to reduce high input costs facing farm 

businesses; such as a long-term safety net program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why have you not followed through on the rest of 

your commitments to agriculture that you made in your Throne 

Speech? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully 

when the budget was read and I listened to members of the 

agriculture community outside of the Assembly after the budget 

was read. 

 

With the changes to the tax on gasoline for farm use, with the 

changes of $25 million on land tax where the education portion 

of land tax will be rebated to farmers, with the announcement of 

a new cover crop, a new forage crop for the year 2001, farmers, 

in general, with the billion dollar payment of interest free in 

payments that they will receive in the year 2000, are going to be 

able to get their crops seeded. And that was our main intent. 

 

I understand the members opposite, especially the Leader of the 

Opposition who would not want to waste any taxpayers on 

subsidies, that we have come close to hitting that mark, and our 

projections are that there will be seeded in the province, about 

32 to 33 million acres this year. The job has been accomplished 

with a great deal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the commitments made in the 

Throne Speech were as shallow as the provincial budget itself. 

When the smoke cleared Saskatchewan people realized talk of 

tax cuts was just talk, and in reality this government is talking 

more of their own paycheque. 

 

It’s the same for our farm families. The promise of money by 

seeding time has come and gone. Many are already working the 

land, banking on the spring cash payment and hoping for an 

AIDA cheque down the road. But now they hear that this will 

be clawed back as well. Some of the promises made in the 

Throne Speech, specifically a long-term safety net program, 

would be very beneficial for the agricultural industry right now. 

 

Mr. Minister, when can we expect to see some serious initiative 

from this government to meet the other promises that you made 

in your Throne Speech? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that when it comes to our commitment to 

agriculture, I think nothing could be more clear. 

 

We worked out a program — $400 million with the federal 

government, interest free, for seeding the crop; $260 million in 

direct payment; $40 million in tax changes. And I say to the 

member opposite that when you talk about increases to 

agriculture, this province sees in this budget an increase of 17 

per cent. 

 

I want you to challenge . . . and challenge you to see what the 

Tories, your buddies in Nova Scotia, are doing with agriculture 

right now — right now. And I want to say to the Leader of the 

Opposition, who while he was in Ottawa, said . . . when the 

Liberals were cutting agriculture . . . that it wasn’t enough. He 

brought in a motion in the Ag committee to cut agriculture 

further. 

 

I say to the members opposite, this kind of hypocrisy will not 

go . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, I 

wish to table the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 

(Saskatchewan Branch) 31st Annual Report 1999. I so table. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’d 

like to ask for leave to make an announcement of special 

interest to the Assembly. 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Appointee to A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair 

in Public Policy 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this 

afternoon, the Premier referred to the fulfillment of one of this 

government’s Throne Speech commitments. That is the 

establishment of the A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in 

Public Policy. 

 

I’m pleased to rise today to formally announce the creation of 

the position and the appointment of its first occupant, Professor 

Hartley Furtan of the University of Saskatchewan, College of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier mentioned, this new position has 

been established to improve the government’s research 

capability by attracting recognized authorities in specific fields. 

As such, Professor Furtan will act as special adviser on 

agriculture to support the province at the next round of 

international trade talks. 

 

For many years Saskatchewan has argued that international 

trade subsidies are one of the biggest challenges we have to 

overcome on the agricultural front. We must continue to be well 

prepared to defend our farmers’ interests at international trade 

negotiations. Professor Furtan’s expertise and experience will 

be a tremendous asset to Saskatchewan in this regard. He is a 

very worthy first occupant of this new position. 

 

I’d like to note, Mr. Speaker, that family farming on the Prairies 

is more than just an abstract concept for Hartley Furtan. He was 

born and raised on a farm near Peebles, Saskatchewan. His 

academic training in agricultural economics will also allow him 

to contribute substantially to Saskatchewan’s agricultural policy 

for the 21st century, and his four-year tenure as deputy minister 

of Agriculture and Food here in Saskatchewan gives him a solid 

understanding of the current policy framework within which we 

operate, particularly as it relates to the federal government. 

With the able advice and assistance of Professor Furtan, we will 

continue to impress upon the federal government the effects of 

protectionist international trade policies on our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new research Chair position is a long-term 

initiative that will ensure Saskatchewan remains the leader and 

innovator in developing effective public policy responses to 

issues that concern all Canadians. 

 

The A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in Public Policy will 

provide a vehicle for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

access the expertise of leading Canadian professionals in 

academia and business. Located in the Department of Finance, 

occupants of this Chair will join the government for fixed 

periods of time in order to address policy issues of particular 

importance to Saskatchewan. Appointments will be made by the 

deputy minister of Finance, in consultation with the deputy 

minister to the Premier. 

 

The Speech from the Throne stated that the government would 

appoint an eminently qualified and respected special adviser on 

agriculture to support our province at the next round of trade 

talks and to help the federal government confront the 

protectionist policies of our trading partners. 

 

This research Chair will therefore be an integral part of the 

province’s trade strategy in 2000 and 2001. In future years, the 

research Chair will be used to provide research and policy 

advice on other important issues facing the province. For 

example, issues of public debt, of global economy, public 

health, public education, and many other challenges and 

opportunities which will require a similar study if we are to 

improve our ability to respond to change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the new economy, knowledge is the prime 

currency. That is why I am pleased to speak to this important 

initiative today which will help secure ability to attract the 

nation’s top public policy advisers and to increase our 

knowledge wealth for the 21st century. And it’s also why I’m 

pleased to formally name this prestigious position in honour of 

a most knowledgeable, distinguished, and accomplished civil 

servant, Dr. Albert Wesley Johnson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave I would 

like to respond to the minister’s statement if I could. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of 

the official opposition, wish to congratulate Dr. Furtan on being 

the first appointment to this very prestigious Chair of public 

policy. As the minister has commented, Professor Furtan’s 

background, his academic training, his expertise at the 

university, and especially as the deputy minister of Agriculture 

here in Saskatchewan, makes him a very worthy initial 

appointee. 

 

To have someone of Dr. Furtan’s ability focus on the current 

international trade distortions and the upcoming trade 

negotiations is certainly very timely. From the producers’ 

perspective and from the perspective of Saskatchewan 

agriculture, there is no other issue that requires more urgent 

solutions. And, Dr. Furtan, if you wish input during your tenure, 

I would mention that this side of the House certainly has a lot of 

expertise in rural agriculture and, sir, we’re available. 

 

The government should be commended, Mr. Speaker, for its 

initiative on the establishment of such a public policy Chair, 

and by naming this Chair in honour of the career of Dr. A.W. 

Johnson. It is indeed recognizing the contributions of a true 

Saskatchewan and a true Canadian statesman. 

 

And by implementing this A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in 

Public Policy as a long-term initiative, Saskatchewan should be 

able to address the many issues critical to this province by 

attracting distinguished and celebrated researchers. 

 

So indeed, knowledge is the commodity of our future. 

Congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 

Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendment Act, 

2000 be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for me 

to speak on Bill 28, The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 

Amendment Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems rather interesting that this particular piece 

of legislation is coming before the Assembly at this time. 

 

What this Bill does is allow the Board of Internal Economy to 

set the salaries of both the Children’s Advocate and the 

Provincial Ombudsman. This will be determined by the Board 

of Internal Economy. 

 

Another amendment is that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

has the authority to suspend the Children’s Advocate or the 

Ombudsman while the legislature is not in session on the 

grounds of incapacity to act, neglect of duty, misconduct, etc. 

 

One of the other amendments includes that both of these offices 

will be required to file separate annual reports illustrating that 

they are truly independent bodies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some good things happening here that 

will allow the Children’s Advocate and the Ombudsman to have 

access to whatever information they require in order to conduct 

an appropriate investigation into any of the complaints that they 

receive. 

 

One other provision will allow for the Ombudsman to waive the 

written requirement of complaints. There is some concerns with 

this that the Ombudsman’s office is currently so overwhelmed 

with cases that something may get lost in the shuffle. 

 

There are some concerns that have been raised regarding the 

Board of Internal Economy setting the salaries for these two 

offices — which my colleague from Cannington has already 

raised — such as why is it now necessary to change and who is 

setting the salary for the Children’s Advocate and the 

Ombudsman? 

 

The minister stated in his second reading speech that these two 

offices are completely independent of the government. And if 

this is the case, why do they want to allow a legislative 

committee to set their salaries? 

 

I stated earlier that I find it rather interesting that these 

amendments are coming at this time since the release of an 

absolutely scathing report from the Children’s Advocate on 

foster care in our province. 

I commend the Children’s Advocate for showing the people of 

our province just how much confusion there is with this 

Department of Social Services, especially when it comes to 

foster care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I’d like to go to that report of the 

Children’s Advocate just released, and just leave you with some 

quotes. And some of them are just absolutely ironic and just 

totally unbelievable. The one that really struck me was this one, 

and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We had a (child) in our care for two months and hadn’t 

received payment. When we called to ask about payment, 

the worker was relieved to know we had the baby, because 

they didn’t know where he was. The file had only a birth 

certificate in it — no other information. 

 

That is absolutely appalling and it should never happen in a 

province that is supposed to be civilized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some other quotes I’d like to leave this Assembly with, Mr. 

Speaker, on page 3 a Department of Social Services worker 

says, and I quote: 

 

Until this province decides that children are important, 

there will be no real change. 

 

Page 15, a foster parent says, and I quote: 

 

Since the Quill report, there has been a real emphasis on 

standards and making the paperwork prioritized, but there 

is no improvement in working with kids. 

 

Page 19, a quote from a youth formerly in care: 

 

The worst thing about being in care for me was that a 

whole bunch of people who really didn’t know me were 

making decisions about me that would affect me for the 

rest of my life. 

 

Page 30, a foster parent says: 

 

The kids from my home haven’t seen their worker in ten 

months. 

 

And on page 37 a physician says: 

 

A six year old boy was going into care for the third time in 

18 months. He wistfully asked if he “could stay longer this 

time” because every time he went home “someone hurts 

me.” 

 

(1445) 

 

Another few things, Mr. Speaker, that this report says is that 

children would like information that they can keep that 

documents their life such as pictures, report cards, and personal 

items, and their life’s books are sometimes empty or 

non-existent for children in care. And they want a record kept of 

the good times. And unfortunately for a lot of these kids, their 

good times are few and far between. 

 

And as I said with the baby that was lost there, there is a lack of 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

documentation on file; visits are not documented, nothing is 

documented. And in this one case, the only thing in the file was 

a birth certificate. 

 

Here’s what some of the other people have said, and these are 

quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had this worker who I didn’t think liked me, so when I 

got a new one, I was worried that she would read my file 

and not like me too. 

 

Sometimes when you get a new worker, they forget that 

your file is not really you; it’s just what you’ve done bad 

and what your other worker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like the hon. member to 

relate back to the legislation that’s being debated at hand. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I know 

that there are a lot of . . . is a lot of work to be done in the . . . 

with the Children’s Advocate through the Department of Social 

Services and stuff, and I can just go by what has happened in 

my own constituency. 

 

And I honestly believe that the special needs of some of these 

children need to be, need to be addressed whether it’s . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . This relates to Social Services, the 

Children’s Advocate. And maybe that’s why there isn’t much 

being done about it, because they don’t know what it relates to, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The special needs — whether they are fetal alcohol syndrome, 

mentally or physically challenged, or Social Services ethnic 

background. And I know just by the concerns brought forth by 

the people in my constituency of Estevan that the caseworkers 

are extremely busy, and when this happens cases of people 

allegedly abusing the systems, etc., aren’t looked into as 

quickly as they should be and this may lead to very costly 

situations, both economically and socially. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that a lot of people do realize that 

there are problems in the Social Services department. And with 

that being said, I can only imagine what is happening in other 

departments . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s right. That’s why this government’s 

putting forward this legislation. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Yes, that’s right. 

 

Since these amendments will allow the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to suspend the Children’s Advocate or Provincial 

Ombudsman when this Assembly is not in session, who will be 

determining whether or not they should be suspended, Mr. 

Speaker, and what will they base their decisions on? And who 

will be enforcing this? 

 

There are some serious concerns here which we can . . . which 

can be addressed in committee. And with that, Mr. Speaker, at 

this time, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 24 — The 

Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 2000 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to talk 

. . . discuss what I see in this Bill or what I don’t see in this Bill. 

 

I have . . . when the deputy minister or the Deputy Premier 

suggested that they were going to make amendments to this 

agricultural Act and they talked about doing financial assistance 

. . . in the financial assistant part of it, farmers get really, really 

nervous when they hear this, the opposite, the people opposite 

talk about financial discussion in the farm field. 

 

It’s a sad state of affairs because they don’t believe this 

government is about to do anything. And if they do, it will hurt 

them; it’ll hurt the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, producers have every right to be nervous 

whenever government starts thinking about making changes to 

agriculture. They have to wonder if this is going to be another 

thing forced down their throats without consultation. Just like 

the members opposite were doing with forced amalgamation. 

 

And I keep wondering, when we talk about forced 

amalgamation, what time and energies were spent doing that. 

Monies that were lost and cost the RMs (rural municipality). 

The Saskatchewan Party is proud to be part of that group that 

has shown leadership in regards to amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite think of themselves . . . 

think to themselves, why don’t the farmers trust us? All they 

have to think about is they cancelled the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) in 1992, took all their money, and haven’t 

replaced it with a single long-term farm aid package. 

 

We came up with . . . or they came up with the 

federal-provincial AIDA program that nobody fits into. We 

have a crop insurance policy, program in the province that . . . 

it’s interesting because in my constituency, the very west side 

against the Alberta border has had drought for three and four 

years, and neither AIDA fits that program because 70 per cent 

of nothing is still nothing; the crop insurance program doesn’t 

fit there either. 

 

It’s interesting that farmers get caught in acts of God. That’s 

their fault that acts of God . . . their premiums go up, their 

coverage goes down with crop insurance. It’s interesting that an 

act of God, which these farmers have no control over, affects 

their bottom line. 

 

I can understand if the premiums go up and coverage goes 

down when they have bad farming practices, but when they do 

this kind of thing with acts of God, it doesn’t make sense at all. 

 

I attended a number . . . in 1998, I attended an agricultural 

meeting in Neilburg, a drought assistant type of meeting, where 

the hon. minister of Agriculture at that time, the member from 

Watrous, attended. His line was that anything that had to do 

with agriculture was a federal jurisdiction and they really had 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

nothing . . . and they didn’t have any money for us. And there 

was hundreds of people there and they did not take lightly to 

what he said. 

 

And this AIDA program that they have come across with now 

and the one that we were arguing about in question period, 

where nobody knows for sure if there is any money and if there 

is, who’s going to get it. They did hand over some farm aid 

program, a small bit to a few farmers early on in November and 

September. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all they did was call an election in the middle of 

harvest — and we all know what happened there — and then 

forced the amalgamation issue. And they then wonder why we 

don’t trust them. 

 

The Bill also mentions the opportunity to provide funding for 

development of new food products and technology. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a good thing. But in the hands of the members 

opposite, my colleagues and I have to think about what hidden 

agenda there is. 

 

Because this government may talk about research and 

development, but in fact it is their policy that is driving our 

brightest minds out of Saskatchewan. This government likes to 

brag about what they do for farmers and post-secondary 

education. So why do they leave our country? It’s because this 

government is destroying Saskatchewan with their high taxes 

and unfriendly business climate. 

 

Because of that, people leave. They leave cities. They leave 

towns. And they leave farms. And I personally have had a son 

leave our farm. He farmed with us for 15 years, and now has 

left the farm and is working elsewhere. 

 

I would also like to, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also mention 

that in this legislation dealing . . . the minister talks about 

dealing with a piece of legislation. And I quote from a small 

section: 

 

the minister may, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

(a) acquire, by purchase or otherwise, personal property, 

including securities; 

 

I have no problem with the word purchase. But I do have a 

problem with the word otherwise. 

 

What does otherwise mean? Does it mean they can come to my 

farm and take my tractor? Does it mean they can take my land? 

I mean they talk about taking securities — what are securities? 

 

And they did take away my GRIP program — my contract. I’m 

sure just this particular clause leaves concern and need for 

further study. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more study required on this Bill. So 

with that, I move adjournment of debate on this Bill. Thank 

you. 

 

Debate Adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 1 — The 

Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address this 

Bill a little bit today if I may. 

 

This is an Act that deals with farm financial stability. 

Everywhere I go, and the people I talk to, when you mention 

this government and its practices with dealing with agriculture, 

people roll their eyes and they know that the members opposite, 

what they have done to the farming industry in this province. So 

far, they’ve built a coffin and now are driving in the nails. 

 

The most recent example of this, Mr. Speaker, is the whole 

debate surrounding forced amalgamation. There is no doubt 

whatsoever that this government follows through with its plan 

of top to bottom restructuring that will signal the end of life in 

the rural areas. So when you talk about farm financial stability 

with the members opposite, maybe the term should be farm 

financial instability. 

 

But as the people of Saskatchewan know, Mr. Speaker, people 

know which side of the House shows true leadership in all 

instances — this side of the House, the Saskatchewan Party. 

Many farmers came to the NDP government when the farm 

crisis started. But what happened? The door was slammed in 

their face. Farmers held rallies, staged protests. But what did the 

members opposite do? Nothing — nothing at all. 

 

Saskatchewan Party stepped up to the plate. We picked up the 

ball that the NDP fumbled away. Saskatchewan Party suggested 

many things — an all party meeting, and a trip to Ottawa, 

assistance programs. Still this NDP government did not listen. 

They were too busy finding how to expand the PST and drive 

people out of the province. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, finally the government admitted — yes, 

yes, the NDP admitted to the farmers of this province — their 

failure to deal with agriculture. They admitted to nine years of 

turning a blind eye to Saskatchewan agriculture. And what did 

it get us? AIDA — whoops. So when you mention the farm 

financial stability, this government has a terrible record. I 

mentioned it earlier — farm financial instability is what we 

should be talking about. 

 

Then the members opposite decided the . . . then the members 

opposite decided, the hon. Premier decided, well let’s get rid of 

these farmers; let’s call an election in the middle of harvest. 

That will fix them. Well September 16 rolled around, and for 

the members opposite let’s review what happened. 

 

Eric Upshall, gone. Judy Bradley, gone. Bye-bye, Bernie 

Wiens. So long, Andrew Renaud. Farewell, Larry Ward. The 

list goes on, Mr. Speaker. There was a huge farm vote turnout 

— 60 per cent of the people voted against this administration. 

So that’s a message that was sent on the farm financial 

instability. 

 

(1500) 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Something else I would like to deal with, the farm financial 

instability, something that just came out in the paper today, Mr. 

Speaker. When farmers, unlike the members opposite, or people 

that are on a wage where they can budget for year round 

because they know exactly at the end of the month what’s going 

to be coming in, what’s going to be going out — they can 

budget for the car payments, their house payments, insurance 

payments, their pet food. The only adjustment they might have 

had to make this year is when the PST was put on pet food so 

next month they would have to have adjusted that a little bit. 

 

But farmers . . . from month to month these can change. I’ll just 

read this today out of the paper which is going to probably 

change some farmers that were maybe counting a little extra 

money are going to have to be doing with a little less. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll just read something out of The 

Leader-Post. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers who receive a payment out of the 

$260 million farm-aid package announced in February will 

qualify for less money under the 2000 income disaster 

program. 

 

So that means when they . . . so their financial stability is going 

to be dropping now a little bit. They’re going to have a little bit 

planning; it’s going to be a little harder. 

 

According to federal and provincial agriculture officials, 

farmers who receive a cheque this spring will have to count 

it as income if they apply for the income assistance 

program — which could reduce the size of their overall 

payment. 

 

(Well) That’s not . . . (sitting so) well with farmers who 

were led to believe it was additional money, said Darrin 

Qualman of the National Farmers Union. 

 

“For the farmers who need this money it’s cruel to 

announce money then tell them that one program cancels 

out the other . . . 

 

“They end up clawing it back from the farmers that need it 

most,” he said. 

 

“That’s an odd way to pay out money that’s supposed to 

benefit farm families.” 

 

Farmers are expected to receive on average between 

$4,000 and $5,000 under the Canadian-Saskatchewan 

Adjustment Program (CSAP) next month. 

 

When the money was announced in Ottawa by Prime 

Minister Jean Chretien, Saskatchewan Premier . . . and 

Manitoba Premier . . . it was billed as additional money for 

farmers in the two provinces hit hardest by the farm 

income crisis. 

 

Ottawa put in $240 million, with the provinces topping up 

the program to a total of $400 million. Saskatchewan . . . 

(supposedly was to) receive $300 million and Manitoba 

$100 million. 

 

. . . deputy agriculture critic for the Saskatchewan Party 

and a Watrous-area farmer, said the province had a 

responsibility to outline all of the details of the program to 

farmers, since it is administering the program. 

 

“It’s looking more and more like a shell game,” she said. 

 

Hal Cushon, a provincial agriculture department official, 

admitted the fact the extra money may hurt future pay-outs 

wasn’t widely known among farmers, but can’t be avoided 

because of the way the Agricultural Income Disaster 

Assistance (AIDA) program was originally structured. 

 

“Is it fair or not? It’s the way the programs are designed 

because . . . (It’s the way the programs are designed 

because they are followed a special way) that AIDA has to 

follow,” he said. 

 

If the one-time payment was excluded, Cushon said the 

U.S. could use that as an excuse to launch trade actions 

against Canada such as limiting grain imports. 

 

“There will be people who argue whether that results in the 

most useful program for farmers, but it certainly doesn’t 

raise any questions about whether it’s acceptable under 

trade rules,” . . . 

 

A spokesman for (the federal government) said any effect 

on farmer’s 2000 payments would be minimal. 

 

But I don’t know what he calls minimal. For some of them it 

might be a third, it might be a quarter. I don’t know — maybe 

he calls that minimal. I’m not sure. But I can go on more of that 

article if you want but if not . . . 

 

But the people of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

in fact all the province sent this government a clear message 

September 16. That the election the Premier called in the 

middle of harvest to keep farmers away from voting in while 

the farm population, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they came out in 

droves to vote against this government and everything it stands 

for and how it has failed in helping producers. Almost every 

rural MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) gone, and 

you know what’s going to happen in the next election, which 

probably isn’t too far away judging how things have been since 

the coalition was formed. 

 

But that just goes to show you how the people of this province 

are viewing anything that’s coming from the government side 

on the financial stability. If they’re going to bring it, we need 

programs, we need long-range programs. We see no 

commitment from the side on the government. There were 

questions today raised again from their budget if they’re going 

to follow through with these programs, how are they going to 

follow through? 

 

The people out there want to know how they can budget with 

their crops. I mean you can have a bin of canola right now 

worth $6,000; a month from now it can be worth $4,500. 

You’ve lost $1,500. You may budget that $1,500 towards fuel 

expense. All of a sudden it’s gone. So now you’ve got to look 

somewhere else, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that money. It makes 

it very hard. 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

And I hope this Act will deal with this. But so far looking 

through it, I know that it’s . . . I hope it addresses the problem. 

But I know it needs a lot more work, and I think with some 

input from our side maybe we can make this a good Bill. But I 

would like to quote a . . . make some other talk about it before I 

adjourn the debate. 

 

We know we need some long . . . we need something long-term 

that we can bank on; that the farmers can go to the bank, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s a little bit like GRIP. I’m not saying it has 

to be GRIP, but that gave us some sort of stability, some 

financial stability, and right now we haven’t seen anything 

come forth. 

 

I just hope that the Minister of Agriculture is working on it, but 

unfortunately hope is not a real common word used these days 

in the agriculture sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I hope he is. I don’t think he’s working 

hard enough and we’re going to make sure that he keeps on this. 

 

There doesn’t seem to be a lot of hope in the agriculture sector 

although we all hope that he’s working on some sort of a 

long-term safety net that can get us through the real valleys. 

The peaks are easy to manage because we can do certain things 

on the farm that allow us to manage. 

 

But when you go through a valley like we’ve hit, and we’ve hit 

a long, hard valley, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s an extended 

valley that we’ve hit, and we’ve seen absolutely nothing 

coming out of the federal government or provincial 

government, perhaps this provincial government figures that 

crop insurance that we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, that you know an 

awful lot about, but the crop insurance program we have isn’t 

quite sufficient, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The farmers need more — 

more programs. We need long term, something that will help 

us. 

 

On my farm, myself, I do take crop insurance but it’s only 

because it’s an absolute must, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think I 

should. It certainly isn’t because of the benefits that’s going to 

help me out through the real valleys that we see in agriculture. 

 

But when the members hollered all we talk about bad prices, 

well they are bad and they have been bad and they’re going to 

stay . . . unfortunately, I think they are going to be bad. That’s 

why we need to be looking at this. This government over there 

needs to be looking at programs so that they can . . . so they can 

get through, so everything can be on a level playing field for 

farmers. 

 

A lot of members opposite don’t know what it’s like, basically 

going day by day, not knowing what you . . . don’t know what, 

don’t know what it’s like when you never know from day to 

day how your income’s going to vary. How it’s . . . the world 

prices, how all their . . . when the weather affects stuff, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I mean you can have a good crop coming, you 

can plan for something, and all of a sudden weather will destroy 

it. And then things are tough, then you’re back to budgeting, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we talk about the cattle industry, all the other 

industries that need to be stable to make a strong provincial 

agriculture province, which this is. It depends a lot on 

agriculture, this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It needs a strong 

agriculture sector. It needs a government that is willing, 

committed to be always addressing the problems that are 

coming up, that are facing this province at any given day, and 

working all the time and working hard at it. Which I don’t think 

this government has worked as hard as they could be on that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I hope they will keep working hard on it. And we will keep 

. . . this side of the House will always keep pushing them 

towards making sure that farmers have financial stability. 

Which members . . . if you’re working for a wage, you have 

that. Like say you have that, you have that right, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how you can plan for years ahead on your children’s 

college education, put money aside. Like say for car payments, 

your grocery payments, anything like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And when you’re in the agriculture sector, they really don’t 

have that. 

 

On looking over this Bill . . . And I’d like to read just a little bit 

about it for the members opposite just so they know that, if 

some of them have looked at it, some of the things they are 

amending. 

 

Well section 50 is to be amended: 

 

Subsection 50(3) is amended: 

 

(a) in subclause (a)(i) by adding “for the same 

commodity” after “loan”; and 

 

(b) subclause (b)(i) by adding “for that some 

commodity” after “loan”. 

 

Section 52 is to be amended. 

 

The following subsection is added after subsection 

52(5): 

 

“(6) No producer who has entered into a producer 

agreement with a producer association shall sell a 

commodity belonging to the producer association other 

than in the name of the producer association”. 

 

Section 54: 

 

7(1) Subsection 54(3) is amended by striking out 

“carrying out his or her duties as a provincial supervisor” 

and substituting “inspecting or removing a commodity 

with respect to which a producer association has obtained a 

guaranteed loan, or for any other purpose related to the 

duties of the provincial supervisor pursuant to this Act or 

the regulations”. 

 

(2) Subsection 54(4) is amended by striking out “the 

place or premises mentioned in subsection (1)” and 

substituting “and search the place or premises mentioned 

in subsection (1) for the purpose of inspecting or removing 

a commodity with respect to which a producer association 

has obtained a guaranteed loan, or for any other purpose 

related to the duties of the provincial supervisor pursuant 

to this Act or regulations”. 

 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

Now this clause, I don’t really understand it. I’ve tried to get a 

hold of the minister, but they haven’t got back to me yet about 

this. Does that mean that they can come at any time without 

your permission and inspect your grain, your cattle, or any 

commodity you have on there? Or can they just take it if they 

feel you haven’t complied with the rules? Is there appeal 

process we don’t know? 

 

There’s lots of good questions about this that need to be 

answered, that need to be carried on, that need to be checked 

out on that. A lot of producers are a little worried about this. 

Does that mean they can come on your property without your 

permission if you do get a loan through the government? What 

rights does a producer have to protect himself in case of 

bankruptcy? 

 

And also the government side. Are they going to hire inspectors 

to check out on these loans? What kind of credit, or what kind 

of applications are you going to be filling out to get these loans? 

And what will you be putting down as security? Will it be land 

or equipment, or . . . That’s a lot of the questions that producers 

have asked me on this subsection, and I don’t know if the 

members opposite have a lot of the answers on it. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that before they vote on this 

Bill, they should read it. Like one member says here, read it, 

look at it, examine it, debate it. 

 

There’s another section, 57, that is amended: 

 

“. . . by adding “or any other person” after “. . . 

(mentioned) producers”. 

 

So does that mean by adding “any other person” after 

producers, does that mean, does that include your family 

members? Does that mean that any business partners, if you’re 

combined with anybody, does that mean that they can maybe 

put a lien against all your property, everything, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

Another section: 

 

The following section is added after section 60: 

 

“Provincial supervisor may act where guarantee 

unduly at risk 

60.1(1) Where a producer association that has received a 

guaranteed loan is inactive, and where, in the opinion of 

the provincial supervisor, the guarantee on the 

guaranteed loan is unduly at risk, the provincial 

supervisor may exercise any or all of the following 

powers or function of the producer association: 

 

(a) marketing the commodities; 

 

(b) confirming inventory; 

 

(c) removing or selling commodities pursuant to a 

producer agreement; 

 

(d) recovering commodities from third parties; 

 

(e) doing any other act or thing necessary, incidental 

or conducive to exercising the powers and functions 

mentioned in clauses (a) to (d). 

 

(2) For the purpose of exercising any power or function 

mentioned in subsection (1), the provincial supervisor may 

apply to a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench for any 

order mentioned in subsection (3). 

 

(3) On hearing an application pursuant to (the) subsection 

(2), the judge may make any order that he or she considers 

appropriate, including: 

 

(a) an order prohibiting a person in possession of a 

commodity from selling or otherwise disposing of that 

commodity; 

 

(b) an order directing the sale of a commodity and the 

payment of the proceeds from the sale of that 

commodity into court, pending the issuance of an 

order pursuant to clause (c); 

 

(c) an order determining the entitlement to a 

commodity or to the proceeds from the sale of the 

commodity”. 

 

(1515) 

 

Getting back to the provincial supervisor, is that going to be an 

appointee job? It doesn’t say if it’s going to be tendered out or 

if they even have one already; what his role is going to be, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in filling out. What is his powers? Will he 

have the same powers as a judge, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

These are a lot of the questions that producers ask me when 

they look at these Bills, because they wonder the power, 

because most people worry about government coming in unduly 

and being unfair to people and taking property away from them, 

being . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, taking over their lives, 

and arrogant, and just a number of other things that people are 

worried about in government, especially when it comes to 

farmers. They’re an independent people; cattle producers are 

very independent. 

 

They get very worried when they go to loans for government 

that they’re giving up a lot of their rights that you don’t give up 

under when you get a bank loan. It seems like when you go to 

the government for loans, it seems like they want basically your 

whole farm as security. And maybe even your kids’ future and 

maybe even to sign away your life almost — I’ve heard a lot of 

producers tell me on that end of it. 

 

Getting back to the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which what we’re 

talking about today, Section 61 is amended also in this Bill. 

 

(a) by adding the following clause after clause (a): 

 

“(a.01) governing producer agreements between two or 

more member producers and the producer association”; 

 

(b) by adding the following clause after clause (j): 

 

“(j.1) prescribing pursuant to section 53 the method of 

replacing or identifying commodities that are . . . subject 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

of a producer agreement”; 

 

 (c) by adding the following clauses after clause (n): 

 

“(n.1) authorizing producer associations to deduct any 

amount owing to the association by a producer or any 

(other) expenses incurred by the association with respect 

to the producer from: 

 

(i) the proceeds of sale of a commodity; or 

 

(ii) a refund of the producer’s contributions to the 

assurance fund; 

 

I know that maybe some members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, don’t 

like me reading these Bills, but these are what we’re supposed 

to be debating. And maybe some of the members opposite don’t 

have them. There’s also producers right now that are watching 

TV that hear this reading these clauses. 

 

I know when I speak, many of my constituents like to tune in 

the TV. And so this way, when I’m reading the Bill and the 

clauses that are altered, they can contact my office or contact 

here. That is the idea, isn’t it, for us to be open — an open, 

accountable government like that government has said lots that 

we should be. And that we are for sure on this side of the 

House, but we like to be open and accessible to people. 

 

So I like the people, my constituents when a Bill . . . and this 

doesn’t affect . . . because I come from a rural constituency, it 

does affect them. And I like to take the liberty of reading a Bill 

a lot of times for the people that are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

are watching the TV. 

 

And I believe that they deserve that right. That is a fundamental 

right of . . . that’s why we’re here — to inform the people of 

what’s coming up, what the changes are, so then they can 

contact us. And I hope the members opposite, when they do 

Bills, I hope they contact their constituents, to visit them, to see 

how it affects their lives. Because you have to remember that 

we’re here just . . . we’re just here as representatives, we’re just 

here as representatives of the people. And so we want to inform 

the people of what’s going on. 

 

But getting back to the Bill, getting back to this farm financial 

stability Bill, Mr. Speaker. The people out there are leery 

because, I mean, of the GRIP contract. We can go back to that. 

They thought that was something. They thought that was 

brought in . . . they thought that was going to be a long-term, 

forever and ever thing, something that was supposed to give 

them financial stability. That they thought that was in there 

basically written in stone. What happened? It got tore up. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why a lot of people are nervous 

about that. Like say the GRIP was that was supposed to give 

them some financial . . . and a lot of people said that it even 

might have been flawed a little bit; it was a good program. It 

was something that was a carry-on from year to year to year to 

year. Something that you could plan — plan on. That you knew 

that a certain level, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of income was going 

to be coming in. 

 

Another one is the program for the early ’70s — wheat 

stabilization, the western grain stabilization plan. That was 

another plan that was brought in, was in for a number of years, 

where producers paid in a little bit off every wheat cheque — 3 

per cent, I believe, that was paid in every year. And then 

through the lean years, they could take it out. And that program 

was taken away from them. 

 

And I think we need programs on that. When you talk about 

The Farm Financial Stability Act, we need programs like that 

because that is what farm financial stability Acts should be 

dealing with, is long-range programs that give the farm families 

stability. Because that’s all they want out there. It’s the same as 

any other person that goes to work every day, knowing at the 

end of the day what they’ve earned; what they’ve worked that 

day. When a person goes for eight hours of work, he knows at 

the end of the day what his take-home pay is — how much 

money he’s going to make. For a farmer, a lot of these at the 

end of the day do not know that. And it makes it very hard to 

. . . 

 

But to us on this side, this is a very serious Bill because it deals 

with all my constituents out there. The majority of my 

constituents are in the agriculture sector and when you talk to 

them, all they talk about is: how prices are low; the future — 

am I going to be farming next year; will there be land for my 

sons to farm; I farmed this from my dad all my life — am I 

going to be able to carry on farming? That worries them a lot. 

And I think it’s something this government has to address and I 

don’t know if this Bill really addresses all of that. I think it 

needs some more things. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s still a lot of studies still needed on this 

Bill and a lot of input which we’re willing to help the 

government on that side to work that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

have a lot of good ideas on this side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All 

we need is the government on the other side to listen to them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s still a lot of study, like I said before, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, needed on this Bill. But as you can tell by 

things I’ve talked about, I would like to adjourn debate on this 

Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 — The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to speak on Bill 

No. 2, The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999. And 

there are a number of concerns I would like to bring forward 

today starting with the letter to the editor in The Western 

Producer from March 2 issue. And I’ll read parts of this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

This cattle ID system was brought in with very little notice 

to producers. I learned of it in January, and other producers 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

I’ve talked to know little, if anything, about it. Must I join 

every association to cast a vote not to “fix what ain’t 

broke.” Leave the cattle industry alone. 

 

A tag for $1, come on, look how much (the) affordable gun 

registry is over budget. It won’t be long until we (will) . . . 

need a “cow acquisition permit” to deal . . . cattle. Maybe 

even a cow safety test will be taken before one gets a 

license. Will we need a license, or a permit book, because 

quota’s are a coming. How can more rules, regulations, and 

fees heaped on cow/calf producers be vital to the future of 

the cattle industry? 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

. . . An article in the February 2nd issue of the The 

StarPhoenix said a cow was found with Tuberculosis when 

slaughtered. That means it was tracked down with the 

resources we have now. But hang on, what if that cow was 

bought and sold a dozen times and lost it’s tag half of those 

times? The new owners would just retag it so it would be 

sold again and the original owner would be lost in the 

shuffle of tags. But even worse, what if the cow kept it’s 

original tag and somewhere between owners #2 and #12 it 

was abused or picked up a disease? 

 

And in the letter to the editor, it goes on. But that basically is 

the concern of one producer. 

 

I’d also like quote from an article in The Western Producer 

April 6, 2000, on a plan to introduce cattle ID (identification): 

 

Cost is one reason. While each tag (of the Canadian Cattle 

Identification Agency program) costs $1, it adds up to . . . 

and $5.76 million for Canadian beef producers. 

 

“That’s a lot of money taken out of producers’ pockets,”. . . 

 

So there’s some concern there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Many 

livestock producers have concerns with the direction the 

government is taking in regards to Bill No. 2 and have serious 

questions about animal identification and what we’re seeing is 

the possibility of ear tags. The unfortunate part of that is anyone 

who has been involved in the livestock industry through the 

past years knows we still haven’t come up with a good sound 

program. We’re wondering about a system that has tags that do 

not get lost. There are a lot of issues with the producers 

regarding this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention the worry some 

farmers have about this government that are indeed justified 

when you hear about how this NDP administration has almost 

destroyed rural Saskatchewan. We worry about how this 

program could potentially give with one hand and take with the 

other. That’s something the members opposite have gotten done 

to a science over the past nine years . . . gotten down to a 

science, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially with news worrying 

about the recent farm aid program. 

 

An Ag Canada official says farmers who get money this spring 

from one-time payment will receive less from the income 

disaster program in 2000. That’s very disheartening to hear. 

 

Now I know many of the members opposite don’t know much 

about farming and agriculture. But one thing they do understand 

is less money — less money for farmers. The members opposite 

brag about how they help rural people when in fact they are out 

to get rid of the family farm. 

 

Here’s a quote on this most recent development: 

 

Clearly this is an example of federal and provincial 

governments leading farmers to think they were getting 

more help than they are. The premiers and the Prime 

Minister were not really up front about this. 

 

And do you know who said this? Dick Proctor, one of the 

federal cousins to the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how should the farmers trust this government 

when their own people say such things? 

 

I’d like to go on, Mr. Speaker, concerning The Animal 

Identification Amendment Act, 1999. And it’s generally 

accepted by many producers that the government has been 

pushing way too fast. They’ve set up deadlines, the producers 

are facing deadlines. And they are not informed well of what 

the whole program is all about. And they are unaware of what 

the costs are going to be. And, Mr. Speaker, the producers of 

this province just need more time to adjust, to learn what is 

expected of them, and to help make changes to this Act. 

 

Of course cost is always a concern in any industry and it’s no 

different in the livestock industry. It’s just not the price of the 

tag that’s involved here. When cattle producers buy cattle or 

bring cattle in from the range, they generally run them into a 

chute and give them their shots and brands and vaccinations, 

implants and tags at that time. Now this process is very stressful 

on the animals, and producers try to do as little of this as 

possible but still get the proper health precautions made with 

the vaccinations and so on. 

 

Now with this system of tagging, the way I understand it, when 

it is enacted, feedlots in this province will have to purchase tags 

and run the cattle through the chute in order to tag them to be 

within the rules of this program. And that’s an extra stress on 

the animals — loss of weight gain, and potential loss of life in 

some cases. The little that you do with these animals, the better. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I understand that after that, the producers at the farm level 

will have to tag their animals before they can take it to market. 

And again that’s extra stress on the animals. And even the day 

before they move their animals to a feedlot or to a market, they 

will have to run these animals through and make sure that they 

have these tags on. 

 

Now in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, branding has been 

basically the only legal identification that livestock have on 

them. And I think it’s generally accepted that it’s not as humane 

as possible, but that’s the only way of legally identifying 

ownership in this province at this time. Not only it’s a legal 

problem, but it’s generally accepted that packing plants wish 

animals were not branded because the brand scars the hide and 

they lose value when they’re trying to sell the hides to their 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

suppliers. 

 

Now tagging is a better way but it’s not foolproof like a brand. 

Of course there’s also tattooing that could be done, but that’s a 

very cumbersome way of identifying animals and it just would 

not be very efficient at all in dealing with cattle in large 

numbers. Hopefully with technology, electronic ID will be 

made more animal- and producer-friendly. And we hope in the 

future that that’s the way that animals can be identified. 

 

But we have to always take into all the factors, we have to take 

into consideration the consumer, not only the consumer in the 

province of Saskatchewan but also in the country and with our 

trading partners around the world. And there are some of our 

trading customers that are uneasy about health considerations in 

livestock, and the consumers in our country and around the 

world must be informed and be made to feel comfortable with 

our products coming out of cattle . . . coming out of Canada. 

 

And as in every case, the customer’s always right and we must 

protect our export markets. Now I’ve been in the cattle industry 

all of my life, and at the end of the day it’s what the customer 

wants and needs. And if that’s what our trading customers and 

our consumers in this country want — is a better way of 

identifying our livestock — then we must go in that direction. 

 

And I also believe it’s a very practical way of identifying 

animals and protecting our animals and our industry from health 

problems. There’s many diseases around the world. Hoof and 

mouth disease is one of the obvious ones that come up. But 

there are others that are . . . that possibly can enter our herds. 

Tuberculosis is one of them. And we must have a way of 

tracking where these animals come from if these animals show 

up with any of these diseases. 

 

And I believe that some form of tagging system must be 

brought into place — or identification, really more than a 

tagging issue. 

 

The Canadian Cattlemen’s Association is in favour of a 

national-wide ID program. Saskatchewan cattle feeders are also 

in favour of this. And recently talking to the Saskatchewan 

cattle feeders, they have told me that the Canadian Cattlemen’s 

Association and the cattle feeders association, are . . . will come 

out and do information meetings and talk to the public and talk 

to the livestock producers concerning this issue, and with the 

intent of informing everyone about how the program could 

work or should work and make it more palatable to everybody 

concerned. 

 

And I believe education is always the way to go. And right now 

the producers of this province, and country I might add, are not 

comfortable with this process, and I believe there must be a 

much better way of informing our producers and our citizens of 

this country concerning this issue. 

 

And before we go and start setting deadlines and enforcing new 

rules and regulations, I believe that we must do a much better 

job of doing this education process and allow our associations 

to do this. They are very good at it and they know the right 

people to talk to and go from there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would like to review this Bill 

somewhat more carefully and make sure all farmers’ concerns 

are looked after. And at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move 

to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 18 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000, be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a privilege 

. . . or I take this opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to review 

the amendment to The Public Employees Pension Plan Act. 

 

There’s a number of . . . From first looking at the Bill, it seems 

fairly straightforward; there seems to be some fairly routine 

amendments. But then when you look at it a little bit more 

closely, I think there are some things here that we have to be 

somewhat careful with, particularly with the record that this 

government has in dealing with the pension plans for 

government employees. And I’ll be expanding on that 

somewhat later in my discussion of this Bill. 

 

I listened with interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Minister 

of Finance introduced the Bill. I found it very interesting to hear 

that there was approximately 35,000 people that are presently 

under the pension plan. And this plan has assets of over $2 

billion which is, you know, quite a large sum of money. And I 

think it’s very important, when we amend a plan such as this, 

that we be very careful as to what the amendments are, what 

they entail, how they affect people, and those sorts of things. 

 

Also I certainly didn’t realize that there was 98 participating 

employers that contributed to the plan, and therefore any 

amendments would have fairly wide-ranging effects on quite a 

number of agencies and departments within government. 

 

Briefly, to summarize the changes as I see them; I see a number 

of things that this Bill does. It speaks to the voluntary funds that 

employees can put into the pension plan, and it deals with some 

of the provisions upon retirement or an employee moving on to 

another line of employment and perhaps wanting to withdraw 

the voluntary contributions. It talks about lowering the 

retirement age and also mentions things about . . . or improves 

the capability of employees to transfer pension funds from one 

pension plan to another. 

 

And as I said on the onset of my speech, that I think these 

aspects, if taken at face value, seem to be improvements to the 

plan. But, as in anything, I think there are some concerns that 

we have to look at. 

 

It mentions about remittance of premiums, premiums to the 

plan, on a shortened time frame. I guess I’d have to wonder 

how this would affect employers. I believe the minister 

mentioned . . . or it’s mentioned in the explanatory notes that 

many of the employers are already on the shortened time frame 

for remitting premiums. I would like to see evidence of that; 

talk to some of the people directly affected to see if that perhaps 

is a hardship, if that would act to the cost of doing business and 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

which ultimately gets passed onto the taxpayer. 

 

The minister talked about flexibility in the plan, particularly 

with regards to the voluntary funds, the contributions that an 

employee makes to the plan. And he mentioned in his 

introduction remarks that monies that were voluntarily 

contributed to the pension plan can be . . . after July 1, 2001 

will be able to be taken out of the pension plan and put into 

registered retirement savings bonds and a locked-in retirement 

account or a life income account or a locked-in retirement 

income fund. It seems to me that these provisions provide a 

certain amount of flexibility but I’m wondering if they could 

. . . if the options that an employee has to transfer those funds, if 

they wish to do so, whether there could be more flexibility. 

 

I’m not sure what Revenue Canada’s rulings in this matter are, 

and I think that area should be looked into; and I would hope 

that the minister would explore all possibilities in those areas. 

Many people nowadays have self-directed RRSPs (registered 

retirement savings plans) where they make the decisions as to 

what type of investments or what type of securities that they 

wish to invest their money in and those sorts of things. And it 

just seems to me that some of these provisions under voluntarily 

withdrawals are somewhat restrictive, and I would urge the 

minister to explore all the opportunities. 

 

One of the provisions of this amendment is to reduce the 

retirement age from the present 55 to age 50. I look at this with 

somewhat of mixed feelings. I realize that in today’s society 

people often have one or more, two or three careers in their 

lifetime and so on, and that perhaps by reducing the retirement 

age to 50 from 55 offers employees more flexibility and that 

sort of thing. 

 

But it seems to me that there’s a cost associated with it, and not 

only a cost to the pension plan — and which may or may not be 

a fact because of the lower pension entitlements if you retired at 

an earlier age — but it seems to me there’s a greater cost to 

society when we’re putting people who have a lot of ability and 

capabilities and a lot of years to contribute, putting them out to 

pasture such . . . in retirement. And I think we have to look at 

that whole issue, and see if that actually is the right way to go. 

 

As I mentioned, the minister spoke a lot about flexibility of the 

plan and making things a lot more . . . a lot easier for people 

entering the pension plan and exiting the pension plan and those 

sorts of things. But any time this government deals with 

people’s pensions, they like to present themselves as friends of 

labour, friends of government employees. 

 

And yet very recently I had a number of constituents come 

forward with an issue that they’re dealing with over pension . . . 

with this very issue of pension, and that has to do with some 

amendments that were made to the pension plan back in 1981. 

Apparently at that time under the Blakeney government, there 

was some amendments made to allow people who worked on a 

part-time basis for various agencies of government, departments 

of government, to allow them to join the plan and buy back 

service for previous years and that sort of thing. 

 

And according to the people that talked to me, and I did talk to 

representatives of SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees’ Union), the government of the day — 

which was the Allan Blakeney government of that time — 

didn’t do a very good job of informing their employees that 

they were now eligible for some of these pension benefits. And 

so either they didn’t tell them or they gave them the wrong 

information. 

 

But the net effect of the whole thing was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

was that these employees didn’t participate in the pension plan. 

Some years later down the road, they were made aware of this 

and now they would like to buy back their service. 

 

So what does this government do in this effect to remedy the 

situation? They don’t sit down with the union and say, okay 

how can we fix this matter? No. What do they do? They say it’s 

the union’s fault, and they forced this matter into the courts. 

 

I’m told that there’s approximately 240 to 250 employees 

affected by this change. It’s not a large number. I don’t think it 

would entail a large number of dollars, but it would make quite 

a difference to those employees that are affected by it. 

 

And I would urge the government to . . . rather than drag this 

issue out through the courts as long as possible and make life 

difficult for their own employees — people who have served 

them well — I would urge them to settle this matter so that 

those people who are approaching retirement age would have 

those added benefits. Most of these people were part-time 

people, people who haven’t had long years of service. So a year 

or two would make quite a difference when it comes to 

retirement and that sort of thing. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would . . . as I said initially, on first 

glance of this Bill it seems to be a fairly routine Bill. But given 

some of the history and some of the things that have come to 

light in recent days, I would think that this Bill deserves further 

study. And therefore I would move to adjourn the debate. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1545) 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the debate on the proposed motion by 

the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment 

Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s a 

privilege to be able to participate in the debate this afternoon on 

The Film Employment Tax Credit Act, Bill No. 14. 

 

Just be way of a very quick summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because we’ve dealt with a wide range of topics this afternoon 

already. The film employment tax credit was introduced in our 

province in 1998 as a way to grow the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In a nutshell, film producers receive a tax credit from the 

Saskatchewan government for employing Saskatchewan people 

on their productions. The theory is that this will cause more 

television and film production to be shot here in the province. 



April 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

And it’s true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the film industry is one 

where there is a lot of competition, not only between our 

provinces here in Canada but of course around the world in 

various places that are vying to be locations for film and 

television production. 

 

Americans have taken a great interest in our province indeed, 

and other Canadian locations, primarily due to a fairly 

reasonable cost of labour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and of course 

the exchange rate which not only benefits the film industry in 

our province but benefits so many other industries as we are an 

export-dependent province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

heartening to realize that with Acts, Bills like this and with 

other words that we hear from the government, they too are 

beginning to realize the importance of trade to our economy. 

 

For a good number of years now the members on the 

government side of the House have become pro free traders, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. They once derided free trade; they were 

bitter opponents of the Free Trade Agreement and the free trade 

debate during the late 1980s. They decried it as the end of 

Canada as we knew it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It would be the end 

of the Dominion as we knew it. And now they are completely in 

favour of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re in favour of free 

trade because they know how important it is for our province to 

be able to compete around the world and to rely on export 

markets as is the case with the film industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tax credit is to encourage filmmakers 

to come to Saskatchewan instead of going to other provinces or 

other locales around the world that have similar incentives. And 

the tax credit seems to be paying off. It seems to be paying off, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s fairly early to tell at this point, but 

film production has doubled to just over $50 million annually in 

our province. And there’s no doubt about it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that that is good news. 

 

I think it’s worth noting though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

same principles, the very same principles at work in . . . with 

respect to the film tax credit, can also be made to work in 

favour of any other industry in our province — any other 

industry which we want to grow in our province. And I guess 

that’s the issue that the official opposition would want to bring 

to the government’s attention. 

 

Here you have a great example of a tax credit, or in other words 

lower taxes working in an industry. And we have a wonderful 

opportunity to expand that same principle to the other industries 

of our economy that could also use a tax credit. 

 

In the election, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party was the 

only party that was proposing to do something about the 8 per 

cent small business tax that we have in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall: — And there wasn’t really word one from the 

members on the other side of the House during the election on 

that. 

 

I just encourage them to use the same principles that they are 

prepared to laud that are at work in this film tax credit and let 

that . . . let those principles go to work on behalf of other 

sectors in our economy, indeed on behalf of every single 

business sector in our economy if we do something with the 

small business tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you too from personal experience in my life. Before I 

was elected, I was an economic development officer for the city 

of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. And that was our primary . . . 

that was the main tool that we used in terms of trying to attract 

. . . not only attract new business, Mr. Speaker, but actually to 

try to facilitate the growth and the expansion of existing 

businesses in our city. 

 

We understood that businesses in our community wanted to pay 

as little tax as possible. They’re concerned about the bottom 

line as they should be . . . both new businesses looking for a 

location and those businesses who are wanting to expand their 

business. And it’s interesting to note that the city of Swift 

Current for the last six years has been able to hold the line on its 

municipal tax rate, Mr. Speaker. And yet the total revenue to 

the city of Swift Current has grown by quite significant 

amounts, Mr. Speaker, so much so that it can afford much more 

aggressive capital programs. It can continue to offer the kind of 

services it wants as a local government, and it’s been able to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, by holding the line, by avoiding tax 

increases. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that these members 

opposite could learn a little bit from the city council of the city 

of Swift Current, both the current council and previous councils 

that have proven if you can run a fiscally stewardly operation, if 

you can hold the line on tax increases and in fact avoid them, 

and even in the last budget provide a bit of tax relief to your 

commercial sector, you can actually expand the tax base, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s something that the government didn’t understand 

during the election and they still don’t understand it. 

 

It’s been proven across our country and around the world. It’s 

certainly been proven in my community that you can actually 

keep taxes down. You can actually cut taxes and in the long 

term you’re going to be attracting business. You’re going to be 

encouraging business to expand. Those businesses pay the 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, and you wind up with more tax money than 

you had before you started a program of either tax cuts or at 

least holding the taxes down. 

 

And here we are talking about a Bill where the government 

seems to have understood that principle. But sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, we need them to understand that the principle applies 

to every other sector of the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most successful tax incentives that we 

employed as a city of Swift Current was the oil and gas 

incentive. It was a tax incentive we tried to use to attract the oil 

and gas industry to our community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s no doubt about it, that since the 1950s the oil 

industry has played a major role in the economy of the city of 

Swift Current and the surrounding area. The problem has been, 

however, that when the price of oil starts to flatten out or even 

come down and it remains low for any sustained period of time, 

the oil companies generally . . . the service companies generally 

may not have that deep roots in our community and may be able 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2000 

to move back to southeast Alberta. 

 

In fact, many of those companies service our oil and gas 

industries while just maintaining their permanent operations in 

southeast Alberta. And so we’ve tried to develop an oil and gas 

incentive program that would provide some land tax incentive 

to oil- and gas-related industries that would locate in the city of 

Swift Current in a more permanent way. 

 

We identified a certain area of the city where we were going to 

do that. It’s called Sidney Light Industrial Park on the west side 

of the city where generally the oil and gas companies like to be. 

And we offered fairly low-cost land to oil and gas service 

companies and a three-year tax incentive. 

 

And as it turns out, within about . . . within several months 

actually, Mr. Speaker, 9 of the 10 lots were sold and the 

businesses had, had located there. 

 

And the hon. member for Regina Victoria I think is wondering 

how this ties to the Bill. And the sad reality, Mr. Speaker, is that 

they haven’t figured out how tax incentives in other industries, 

in other sectors of our economy can work as well as they appear 

to be working in the film sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the point of the official opposition on this Bill. Let 

the principles that work with respect to the film tax credit go to 

work on behalf of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, businessmen 

and women in every sector of the economy. 

 

In the case of the oil and case industries, as I, as I was 

mentioning earlier, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of new 

jobs created. In fact the tax incentive was contingent on there 

being new jobs. Very similar to this particular program where 

the Saskatchewan film tax credit requires people to hire 

Saskatchewan people before they can enjoy the credit, so too 

did the oil and gas incentive program that I speak of attach any 

benefit of the program — in terms of tax relief or even 

affordable land — to the creation of new jobs in the city of 

Swift Current. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that program has worked extremely well. 

And of course after three years, all of those businesses who are 

. . . which are new to the city of Swift Current will be paying 

property taxes, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be paying the full 

municipal property tax; they’ll be paying the full school tax, 

Mr. Speaker. And they will be employing people who will live 

in Saskatchewan . . . in Swift Current homes and pay taxes 

there. They will employ people whose kids will be enrolled in 

our schools, and who will also pay school tax on their private 

residence. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that this Bill employs the 

same principles that I’m speaking of in terms of tax incentives 

that actually will grow your tax base and your economy, we 

certainly, we certainly support that. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the, that the province of 

Saskatchewan has the second-highest small-business corporate 

income tax rate in the Dominion at 8 per cent. That’s behind 

only the province of Quebec which is about 8.9 per cent, and 

the province of Ontario is currently 8 per cent but slated to fall 

to 4.7 per cent within the next six years — by 2006, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so while we have some much-needed tax relief for this new 

and burgeoning industry, the film industry, there is an issue I 

think that we should be dealing with — when we talk about 

Bills like this — with respect to other industries. Our 

neighbouring province to the west has a business tax rate at 6 

per cent; British Columbia is 5.5 per cent, and Manitoba is 7. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a fairly basic principle of business — of 

either small, medium, or large business — that you have to 

compete with your closest competitor, your closest neighbour. 

 

Well in our case clearly our closest competitor is Alberta. They 

have a 6 per cent small-business tax rate; we have 8. The next 

closest is Manitoba — I’m speaking of where I’m in, in Swift 

Current — Manitoba’s at 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. I remind you 

again, we’re at 8. And British Columbia is at 5.5, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’re at 8 per cent. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the point that we’re trying to make with 

respect to this particular Bill is that we need to offer the same 

sort of tax competitiveness for every other industry as we do, as 

we are talking about with this particular Bill with respect to the 

film industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was only a . . . there was only one party in 

the last provincial election that was talking about the 

small-business sector and I’m sure the film industry comes 

under that umbrella. Everybody in the election campaign, Mr. 

Speaker, was paying lip service to the small-business sector. 

They were all saying, especially on that side of the House, that 

the small-business sector was the most important engine of our 

economy. 

 

But, much after that, Mr. Speaker, there was precious little in 

the platform of either of the parties that now sit to your right 

hand. The only party that was talking about small-business in a 

meaningful way, Mr. Speaker, was the Saskatchewan Party. 

And the good news, Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan 

Party will continue to talk about small-business. We’ll continue 

to talk about tax competitiveness. We’ll continue to talk about 

tax relief for small-business men and women who are creating 

jobs as they are creating in the film industry with similar tax 

relief. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks and the 

encouragement for the government to apply the principles that 

we’re talking about in terms of the film tax credit to other 

sectors of the economy; I would now move that the debate be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:59 p.m. 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Elhard .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 857 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 857 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 857 

  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Eagles ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Wall...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 

  Bakken ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 858 

  McMorris ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 858 

  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 858 

  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 858 

  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 858 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 859 

  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

  Addley.................................................................................................................................................................................................. 860 

  Harpauer ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 860 

  Jones .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 860 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 860 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 First Nations Annual Winter Games 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 861 

 First Nations Winter Games  

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

 Gardiner Dam Terminal 

  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 861 

 Prince Albert Business Awards 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

 Pasqua Regional Park Wins Award 

  Kwiatkowski ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

 Administrative Professionals’ Day 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

 Recognition of Choiceland Volunteers 

  Wiberg ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 862 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Parolees at Regina Community Correction Centre 

  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 

  Axworthy............................................................................................................................................................................................. 863 

 Labour Relations in the Farm Implement Industry 

  Weekes ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 864 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 864 

 Clawback of Financial Support from Farmers 

  Harpauer ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 865 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 866 

  Hermanson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 866 

 Commitments in the Throne Speech 

  Stewart ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 867 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

 



 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Appointee to A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in Public Policy 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 868 

  Wakefield ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 868 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendment Act, 2000 

  Eagles ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 869 

 Bill No. 24 — The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 2000 

  Peters ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 870 

 Bill No. 1 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1999 

  Brkich .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 871 

 Bill No. 2 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 1999 

  Weekes ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 875 

 Bill No. 18 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2000 

  Hart ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

 Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 

  Wall ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 878 

 

 


