





























































Hansard: June 22, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2069 
 June 22, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are opposed 
to forced municipal amalgamation. And their prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Watson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today begging the government to retain Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Lanigan and 
Leroy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of their hospitals. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Allan and Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to present a petition 
reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by the good folks 
from the community of Allan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand on behalf of citizens deeply concerned about health care 

and rightly so. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Allan and Elstow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here today asking for a total smoking ban in public places. The 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by people throughout the city of Regina 
and one person from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the crisis in health care. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And it is signed by residents of Watson, Foam Lake, Saskatoon, 
and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
collected by the youth of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the citizens of Allan and Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from those who are wanting to have a total ban on smoking in 
all public places. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by people from Regina, Moose Jaw, Lumsden, 
and Balgonie. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to save our 
hospitals. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from the good town of Allan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition with 
citizens concerned about hospital closures and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners on this are from the good community of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon in regards to the disappointing highways in this 
province. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Paddockwood. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone services in the districts 
of Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
And the signatures to the petition come from Govan, 
Strasbourg, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Semans, Humboldt, 
and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with possible hospital 
closures. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Allan and Colonsay. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

The provision of cellular service in Lake Alma; 
 
The passage of comprehensive tobacco control legislation; 
 
Ensuring the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
A ban on smoking in public places and workplaces; and 
 
The restoration of the Paddockwood access road. 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to the rest of this House, 26 students in the 
west gallery. They’re grade 4 students from the Dr. Brass 
Elementary School in Yorkton. 
 
And on behalf of their MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), Clay Serby, I would like to welcome them to this 
House — oh sorry, I’m not supposed to name him; strike that 
— on behalf of the member from Yorkton. 
 
And I would like to especially welcome the teacher, Ms. Jan 
White, and chaperones Corinne Langley, Brenda Beisel, and 
Rhonda Ward. 
 
I’d ask everybody to join in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly two great young people who work at Starbucks in 
Regina. They are Rhett Bokitch and Theresa Holt and they are 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every morning when I’m in Regina I go to Starbucks. Rhett and 
Theresa and their co-workers with their cheerful greetings, 
warm smiles, and upbeat moods make my day brighter. And 
they make me realize anew why I wanted to be an MLA and 
why the decisions we make in the legislature are so important. 
They make me realize that these decisions must be made to give 
hope and opportunity to people who live in Saskatchewan, to 
make it a better place for young people who will want to stay 
and work here and who will have a bright future. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that most members of the 
Assembly also love Starbucks. Please help me to warmly 
welcome my special friends from Starbucks — Theresa and 
Rhett. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly three members sitting in the west 
gallery — Mr. Gary Kot, Mr. Gunnar Passmore, and Mr. John 
Pederson — all members of the construction trades unions, Mr. 
Speaker, that are here to watch today’s proceedings. 
 
And I’d like you all to join me in welcoming them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege this afternoon to welcome 32 students from 
Melfort from the Burke School. They’re here with their teachers 
Mrs. Atamanchuk, Mrs. Burningham, Mr. Skjerven, and Mr. 
Zary. 
 
And they’ve had the opportunity to meet briefly this afternoon 
and are having a full day in Regina at the IMAX cinema, and as 

well the museum this afternoon. It’s not all that often we get 
people from Melfort here in Regina, and it’s always a great 
pleasure to welcome them here. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the students and 
teachers from Burke School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, at your gallery, we have 
three special guests from Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, they’re from 
the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation. I would like to ask 
them to stand as I name them. Up there we have Bob Hand, 
who is the president and CEO (chief executive officer); Gerry 
Malone, vice-president of marketing; and Steven Kendall, the 
manager of resources development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and all members, fishing is an important part of 
our economy in this province. I would like you all to give them 
a special welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join my colleague from Cumberland, and to you and through 
you to introduce a couple other guests also with our guests from 
Manitoba. 
 
And I’m sure glad the Minister of Justice is not here . . . Oh, he 
just arrived, maybe I’ll have him close his ears. But the two 
people that are joining our visitors from Manitoba are Andrew 
Bouvier who’s a board member of the Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation. And Andrew drives quite fast. I rode 
with him one day from Saskatoon, back to Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
we made it in record time. That’s one of the reasons why we 
asked the Minister of Justice not to pay much attention to this. 
 
But the other guy was Jim Favel, who’s also from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, who’s also on the board. And I served with both 
these gentlemen on the council. And while Andrew was fast on 
the highway, Jim was quite slow in long-distance running. 
Because being that he is an avid runner, I beat him quite handily 
in a long-distance run we had several years ago. 
 
So we have the slow and the fast version of Ile-a-la-Crosse 
folks, and I want to ask you all to welcome these gentlemen to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Swift Current Dialysis Satellite Unit Opens 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I have good news for southern Saskatchewan and good 
health care news for Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. The 
official opening of the Swift Current Dialysis Satellite Unit took 
place this morning. 
 
This means that dialysis patients in southwest Saskatchewan 
will have life-saving treatment closer to home because of the 
new renal satellite program at the Swift Current Regional 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

Hospital. This dialysis satellite unit will enable patients to stay 
closer to home and closer to their family members while 
receiving treatment. And it will also take some of the pressure 
off the Saskatoon and Regina dialysis units. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government knows that Saskatchewan’s 
vast geography and sparsely populated areas call for a different 
approach to providing health care. And with the innovative 
thinking and creative initiative, we are meeting the challenge of 
providing health equally to all citizens of the province. 
 
I want to congratulate the people of southwest Saskatchewan 
and their new program, Mr. Speaker . . . on their new program. 
And I also want to thank the Swift Current Health District and 
the Minister of Health and her department who were partners in 
the initiative. The minister attended the opening this morning 
and I understand it was a fantastic event. 
 
Congratulations to all of those involved. This project is proof 
positive that this government is committed to delivering 
first-class health care to all the citizens of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Undertake History Research Project 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week I had the pleasure to attend an event in my constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers honouring our forebears. 
 
The grade 6 students of Christopher Lake School, assisted by 
their teacher, Ms. Patty Herriot, and assistant teacher, Ms. 
Cindy Schultz, conducted a research project on the history of 
the Christopher Lake and Paddockwood districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students discovered an incredulous anomaly. 
These two districts through the course of three armed conflicts 
sent a disproportional amount of volunteers to represent Canada 
in comparison to other communities in our country. 
 
In recognition of this demonstration of local commitment to the 
preservation of democracy these grade 6 students took it upon 
themselves to name three roads in the RMs (rural municipality) 
of Lakeland and Paddockwood: Memory Lane, Mr. Speaker, to 
honour all those who came to the area to create a new life for 
themselves and their children; Veterans Road to honour all 
those who nobly served overseas in the three conflicts; and 
Remembrance Road, Mr. Speaker, in honour of those who paid 
the supreme sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these students and their teachers for this 
memorable project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

FarmGro Organic Foods Opens 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
studying the style of the member from Regina Dewdney and I 
think I’ve got it right. So here we go — more good news for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

This morning just east of Regina, FarmGro Organic Foods, one 
of the finest plants in the world, officially began its production. 
 
It is a $12 million flour mill and grains processing plant. 
FarmGro’s goal is to become the largest producer of organic 
wheat flours in North America, and we’re confident it will 
succeed. 
 
The market for organic food products has grown significantly in 
the past few years, and the trend shows no sign of letting up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this new project means jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. FarmGro will employ 18 to 25 new 
workers. Its initial milling capacity will be 16,000 tonnes to be 
sold nationally and internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news in several ways. It will 
encourage diversity in our agricultural industry, it will develop 
more organic farming, and it will lead to private entrepreneurs 
labelling and selling retail organic food products. 
 
It’s a good deal, Mr. Speaker, which will make Saskatchewan a 
leader in the organic food processing industry. 
 
I congratulate president, Gerry Liski, CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation), the partners, Bob Balfour and Fred Soofi, and the 
many other private and public investors in FarmGro. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condition of Historical Highway Sites 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of this province are rapidly realizing that this government is 
either unwilling or unable to provide the services or perform the 
functions that their citizens expect of a government. 
 
A case in point, Mr. Speaker, is the numerous points of interest 
along our highways that are overgrown by weeds and grass, 
becoming unsightly and uninteresting to passing motorists. 
Citizens of this you do it province are maintaining these sites 
themselves. 
 
One such person is Mr. Ken Doucett of Lipton who is 
maintaining a historic site along Highway No. 35. 
 
Mr. Doucett has cut the grass, planted trees, and built a picnic 
table in the last two years. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he has done so 
much grass cutting that he has worn out his lawn mower. 
 
When Mr. Doucett contacted the Department of Highways and 
the Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing for 
assistance with this project, he was told that none was available 
— basically, you do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of this government’s 
attitude — fix your own highways, maintain your own historic 
sites. What’s next — provide your own policing, teach your 
own children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

Oil and Gas Agreement Between the Universities 
of Regina and the Ukraine 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The member from Regina Sherwood and I 
were pleased to be present at the University of Regina today to 
take part in a very important and exciting event. 
 
A letter of intent has been signed today by our Minister of 
Energy and Mines and Dr. Pakrayko representing the 
Ivano-Frankivsk State Technical University of Oil and Gas of 
Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast in Ukraine. 
 
The agreement will promote joint educational and research 
activities in the area of oil and gas technology and development. 
 
Under the agreement, the two universities will develop an 
educational exchange project focused on the management and 
technical aspects of the energy sectors in both countries. This 
will include specialized study programs at the University of 
Regina for Ukrainian national government energy officials, 
faculty exchanges between the two universities, and study 
programs for senior students from the Ukrainian university. 
 
The University of Regina has an impressive history of 
promoting international instruction, research, and service. 
Various program opportunities are offered with institutions all 
over the world including China, Japan, Thailand, France, 
England, Korea, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Argentina, India, 
Australia, Ghana, and the United States. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing about the academic 
exchanges, and I’m confident that this project will benefit both 
Ukraine and Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways Leading to Greenwater Provincial Park 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to remind 
all members of the House about this government’s dismal 
record when it comes to highways, and the impact this is having 
on tourism in Saskatchewan. 
 
This urban-based government refuses to acknowledge that rural 
Saskatchewan needs help. This is also the same urban-based 
government that says tourism is an important part of this 
province’s economy. 
 
It’s interesting to note that they’re not getting the connection 
here. We have many provincial and regional parks in this 
province, all of them situated in the rural sector. Urban people 
are now just finding out how bad these roads are. 
 
I received a copy of a letter from a gentleman who is extremely 
concerned about Highway 38, the main road leading into 
Greenwater Provincial Park. It’s in such terrible condition that 
tourists are now avoiding it, which means the park itself is not 
being accessed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Greenwater Park is a beautiful spot. The problem 
is you can’t get there. Not from the south on Highway No. 38, 
where after the last rain the road was impassable. Not on 
Highway 349, where there was construction — but prior to the 

last election when the NDP (New Democratic Party) lost the 
seat, they stopped constructing it. And that’s on the other end 
where junction . . . from the junction they redid the highway last 
year but No. 23 is now being reverted back to gravel because 
it’s so terrible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the truth is you can’t get there from here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these roads are what ties our communities 
together. They are the only means by which people can travel 
from one place to another, and they are also the only way in and 
out of the province. 
 
The government has a responsibility for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Your time has expired. 
 

Second Annual Field Day at Western 
Beef Development Centre 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to inform 
you and members of the Legislative Assembly that the Western 
Beef Development Centre will hold its second annual field day 
for Saskatchewan producers at the Termuende Research Farm at 
Lanigan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Western Beef Development Centre at the U of 
S (University of Saskatchewan) is a success story in 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry. 
 
The Beef Development Centre was established in 1997 to 
conduct practical and applied research, and undertake 
demonstration work that would enhance the economic viability 
of Saskatchewan’s beef industry. 
 
The associated Termuende Research Farm at Lanigan was 
opened in 1998 as the research facility for the Beef 
Development Centre. 
 
Producers and the public are welcome to drop into the farm at 
any time. There’s a full-time manager working at the farm 
which has a year-round herd of 300 beef cows. 
 
The research projects conducted by the Beef Development 
Centre provides production information to producers. 
 
The projects include a series of forage demonstrations, a water 
quality study, economic studies, and a development of an 
information management system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Beef Development Centre and the Termuende 
farm are important to Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry. 
These research centres help diversify the agricultural industry 
and to keep Saskatchewan producers at the leading edge in the 
world marketplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first field day was held at the Termuende farm 
last year and it proved to be very successful. We are confident 
today’s event will even more successful than last year. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Role of Public Accounts Committee 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this morning I was part 
of a meeting of the Public Accounts Committee of the legislature. 
That’s the committee your government argued just two years ago 
was the best place to investigate the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
The NDP member for Saskatoon Southeast and the NDP member 
for Regina Coronation Park both said the Public Accounts 
Committee was the only place to investigate Channel Lake. 
 
But this morning these same NDP members said that even 
attempting to ask these questions of the Provincial Auditor in the 
Public Accounts Committee amounts to McCarthyism — 
McCarthyism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you share that view? Is it the NDP’s position that 
asking the Provincial Auditor for his opinions on the 
misappropriation of $360,000 in taxpayers’ money is 
McCarthyism? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, precisely what we should be 
doing is seeking the report and recommendations of the 
Provincial Auditor, and that is precisely what the member 
opposite is trying to prevent. 
 
There are rules of the Public Accounts Committee set forth by 
this House, Mr. Speaker. There’s an order of reference and the 
order of reference says that the Public Accounts Committee is 
to give the Provincial Auditor the opportunity to make a report 
and recommendations and that report will then be considered by 
the committee. 
 
What this member is doing, Mr. Speaker, is grandstanding in 
. . . because the Provincial Auditor has not issued his report on 
this matter. He has not had the opportunity to make 
recommendations and contrary to the rules of the committee 
that member is trying to prevent the Provincial Auditor and the 
Public Accounts Committee from doing the work that it is 
mandated to do by this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, it was the Provincial Auditor who made 
the judgment that the former CEO of SIGA(Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) improperly retained $360,000 in 
taxpayers’ money. It was the NDP government that judged the 
whole SIGA file should be sent to the Department of Justice. It 
was the NDP Gaming minister who insisted that Mr. Dutch 
Lerat be fired as Chair and CEO of SIGA. It was the NDP 
Gaming minister who agreed to rescind the motion rescinding 
Mr. Lerat’s salary increase. 
 
We agree with these actions. But they are not our actions and 
they are not our judgments. This morning in Public Accounts, 
we were simply trying to get some clarification. 
 

Mr. Premier, why did your NDP MLAs stonewall our attempts 
this morning to ask legitimate, appropriate, important questions 
of the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it is the job of the Public 
Accounts Committee to make sure that the rules are followed 
and respected. And the Public Accounts Committee, of all 
committees, Mr. Speaker, should follow the rules itself. And 
that’s what the government members of the committee are 
trying to do. 
 
I would refer the member to the order of reference adopted by 
this legislature, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the order of reference 
adopted by this House for the Public Accounts Committee 
states that the Public Accounts Committee is to: 
 

Review the Public Accounts of the Province of 
Saskatchewan (the public accounts, not a motion of the 
member) and the issues raised in the annual report of the 
Provincial Auditor which have been referred to the 
Committee. 
 

The report of the Provincial Auditor has not come out yet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And my point would be this: that if these members cannot 
respect the rules of the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 
Speaker, then it means that they have learned nothing from the 
1980s when the Public Accounts Committee didn’t even meet 
and when the rules were not respected. They have learned 
nothing from the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would say this: how can the people of the province trust a 
group of people who won’t even respect the rules of the 
legislature in the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the NDP member for Regina Coronation Park 
described our attempts to ask the Provincial Auditor legitimate 
questions about SIGA as McCarthyism. The NDP member from 
Saskatoon Southeast said we were on a witch hunt. 
 
Mr. Premier, would you explain that? What is wrong with 
asking the auditor why he believes the former SIGA CEO was 
inappropriately retaining taxpayer dollars when he used SIGA 
credit cards and debit cards. 
 
Is it McCarthyism or a witch hunt to ask the Provincial Auditor 
about his publicly stated concerns about the SIGA board motion 
to increase Mr. Lerat’s salary by $360,000. 
 
Mr. Premier, these are timely and legitimate questions that are 
appropriate for the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Why is the NDP stonewalling the Public Accounts Committee 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

when you yourself promised a full and open investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we will get the report of the 
Provincial Auditor. That’s what we want to get. And we will 
give the Provincial Auditor the opportunity to make 
recommendations. That’s what the rules require; that’s what 
will be done. 
 
The question here is, why does this member want the Public 
Accounts Committee to proceed without giving the Provincial 
Auditor the opportunity to complete his audit, make his report, 
and make his recommendations. 
 
It is not this side of the House that’s trying to prevent the 
Provincial Auditor from doing his job, Mr. Speaker, it is that 
member and that side of the House that are trying to prevent the 
Provincial Auditor from doing his job. And we’re not going to 
permit that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Premier. This morning the Provincial Auditor 
participated in the meeting of the Public Accounts Committee. 
So the Saskatchewan Party attempted to seek further 
clarification from the Provincial Auditor on the information he 
provided in his June 14 letter. Why? Because the Public 
Accounts Committee is the only forum in which MLAs have 
the opportunity to ask the Provincial Auditor questions. 
 
Mr. Premier, why did the NDP stonewall our attempts this 
morning to ask the Provincial Auditor legitimate questions 
about his — his — concerns about the misuse of $360,000 of 
taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member again, 
the Public Accounts Committee will deal with the report of the 
Provincial Auditor, but the Public Accounts Committee will 
give the Provincial Auditor the opportunity to make a report 
and to make recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are not going to permit the members opposite to usurp the 
function of the Provincial Auditor. We’re going to follow the 
rules as set out by this House. And when the rules . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the reason why we got into 
trouble in the 1980s and racked up a $15 billion debt is because 
there was no respect for the legislature; there was no respect for 
the Public Accounts Committee; there was no accountability; 
there was no compliance with the rules. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a new era now. We’re in a new 
century. We’re going to keep the books balanced because we’re 
going to follow correct process and procedure, and we’re going 
to respect the rules. And we’re going to respect the Provincial 
Auditor, even over the objection of the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

First Nations Fund 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the First Nations 
fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, for three years FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) has refused to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
audit the First Nations fund. The First Nations fund has 
received over $22 million over the past three years. That money 
comes exclusively from gambling revenue — from Casino 
Regina and from SIGA. 
 
Mr. Minister, the First Nations fund is required by law — and I 
repeat — by law to open its books to the Provincial Auditor. 
Why are you allowing them to defy the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d like to say to the member opposite, 
because this question has come to the floor of the Assembly on 
a number of occasions, from the member from Estevan and now 
from the member from Saltcoats, and I’ve said all along, Mr. 
Speaker, and I say again to the House today, that this account is 
audited on an annual basis by the firm of KPMG and they’ve 
been doing that, Mr. Speaker, for the past five years. 
 
The KPMG has reported on an annual basis that the account is 
in fine standing and that there’s not been any sort of anomalies 
within the account, and we continue to respect the work of the 
private auditor as it provides its work on the fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, the Provincial Auditor found the problems in SIGA. 
What we’re asking him to have the same opportunity to look at 
the books of the other fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister of municipal government 
needs to take a lesson from the minister of Gaming. In one 
week, the minister of Gaming forced FSIN and SIGA to comply 
with government directives. Yet for three years, you’ve done 
nothing. For three years you’ve sat by while the trustees of the 
First Nations fund openly defy the law. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to step in like the minister of 
Gaming did and force the trustees of the First Nations fund to 
comply with the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that when he quotes the process, that what he should 
be doing is he should be quoting the process correctly. Because 
the process and what happened with the entities fund was 
clearly . . . or the SIGA fund was that it was found by KPMG. 
They’re the people who found it, not the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that you should pay attention 
to that process because they’re exactly the same auditing firm 
that do the auditing on the First Nations fund. 
 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

And I say to the member opposite that obviously the private 
audit system is working today because it found the anomalies 
within the . . . with the associated entities fund. And I say to the 
member opposite that they . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — SIGA. SIGA fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Or within the SIGA fund. If there are some 
anomalies that would be in the First Nations fund, it would be 
found by KPMG. 
 
I say to the member opposite that in fact this process is working 
and that we will continue to work with First Nations to try to 
enhance that relationship and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the spring 1999 report, the Provincial Auditor said he was 
concerned with several expenses in the First Nations fund’s 
financial statement — distribution to the First Nations of 6.2 
million; National Assembly travel subsidy of 138,000; and 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Commission, 131,000. 
 
The auditor said that he is unable to report whether the fund’s 
financial statements are reliable and whether the trustees had 
adequate rules and procedures to safeguard and control public 
money, or whether the fund lost any public money from fraud, 
default, or mistake of any person. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are exactly the same issues the Provincial 
Auditor is now investigating with SIGA. Mr. Minister, in the 
light of recent events at SIGA, isn’t it time you opened the 
books of the First Nations fund to the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I don’t understand his attack on the 
auditing firm of KPMG. Now why is it that you’re attacking the 
auditing firm of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Please, hon. members. I 
cannot control the quality of the questions or the quality of the 
answers, but I ask for your co-operation in helping me to 
control that both the questions and answers be heard. The 
acoustics here are such that it does make it difficult, so please, I 
ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite that why is it that in fact the 
opposition is attacking the work of KPMG, because today 
KPMG do work across this country, in this province. They do 
work for private industry, they do work for various levels of 
government, they do work for all the health districts in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and they do work in the . . . as it relates 
to the First Nations funds both for SIGA and First Nations. 
 
And I say to the member opposite clearly the process is 
working. When it was identified that there was a problem with 
the SIGA fund, KPMG identified it, the minister acted very 

quickly, and today the process is working its way through the 
system. And I say to the member opposite that we have respect 
for the work of KPMG. 
 
I’ve said on previous other occasions that in fact I’ve met with 
Mr. Bellegarde. We’re working in a process today to expand in 
the way in which that audit . . . that account will be audited into 
the future. And we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
says the Gaming minister acted quickly. That’s exactly what 
we’re asking you to do. Three years you’ve done nothing — 
now it’s time to act, Mr. Minister. 
 
Neither the Saskatchewan Party nor the Provincial Auditor is 
accusing the First Nations fund of any wrongdoing. What the 
auditor is saying is proper safeguards need to be in place in 
order to prevent a similar situation to the current problems at 
SIGA. 
 
In his 1999 Spring Report the auditor identified nearly six and a 
half million dollars of First Nations fund expenses that he is 
concerned about. And he says he has no way of knowing 
whether this money was spent properly because the trustees are 
not allowing him to look at the books. 
 
Mr. Minister, those trustees are required to open the books to 
the Provincial Auditor. You are responsible for the First 
Nations fund. Why don’t you step in, force them to obey the 
law — like the Gaming minister did? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I’ve done for the 
member opposite, and previously to the member from Estevan, 
when I talked about this particular issue — that in fact we have 
respect for the process today. And we know that the process has 
been working. 
 
And it’s just been identified in the last few days, Mr. Speaker, 
that the way in which the audit is performed today by KPMG, 
with that particular organization, is working. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, why is it that you’re 
attacking this particular fund again? Because it is clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that this particular organization, the auditing 
organization, has done a credible and honourable job in making 
sure that the accounting system in this province for First 
Nations people is well preserved and cared for. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, why is it that you’re 
choosing this particular organization to draft your line of 
questioning along, when in fact this auditing firm does a 
tremendous amount of work for other organizations across the 
province? Why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to read you a quote from the Provincial Auditor’s ’99 
report. I quote: 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

Neither the Legislative Assembly nor the Department has 
received any assurance from the appointed auditor whether 
the Trustees of the Fund had adequate rules and procedure 
to safeguard and control the Fund’s assets and have 
complied with legislative authority. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

As we have been denied access to the Fund’s accounts and 
have been refused access (refused access) to KPMG’s files 
. . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I just ask all members to 
please co-operate. Just to remind the member to kindly direct 
your question through the Chair. There’s good reason under 
parliamentary rules. Hon. member for Saltcoats, proceed with 
your question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
repeat the last part of the quote: 
 

As we have been denied access to the fund’s accounts and 
have been refused access to KPMG’s files, we are unable 
to provide assurance to the Legislative Assembly and the 
department. 

 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to act — just like the Gaming minister 
did. Take some action. You’re responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that when I answered the same question to the member 
from Estevan about three or four weeks ago, or a month ago, I 
said that in fact I had had a discussion with Mr. Bellegarde. 
 
And the discussion that I had with Mr. Bellegarde is that he is 
going to be pursuing, through his organization, expansion of the 
auditing process in the province as it relates to the First Nations 
fund; as well as he’s going to be . . . we’re going to be 
proceeding on a variety of other ways in terms of making the 
information solely accountable to the system — both to this 
organization, both to the Legislative Assembly, and both to the 
First Nations chiefs. 
 
That’s the process of which we’re going to be following over 
the next little while, and Mr. Bellegarde has advised us that he 
will be working with us to provide that leadership into the 
future. That will be the direction that we take, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Population Decrease 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier. Mr. Speaker, as you know the Premier has never 
been one to let facts stand in the way of a good argument and 
yesterday was no exception. The Premier called Saskatchewan 
the fastest growing province in Canada. The fastest growing 
province in Canada — what a joke. 
 
Mr. Premier, StatsCanada has just released new population 
figures showing Saskatchewan is the fastest shrinking province 

in Canada thanks to your NDP government. Over the past year 
Saskatchewan’s population fell by 1,600 people. Mr. Premier, 
Saskatchewan isn’t growing — we’re losing people. 
 
Mr. Premier, why is Saskatchewan losing so many people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all on facts, I would like to point out what his 
leader actually said yesterday. And I quote from Hansard. The 
facts according to your leader is, “The fact is that in the last 12 
months, 16,000 people have left Saskatchewan . . .” confirming 
once again the fact that we have the Leader of the Opposition 
here and we have the facts over there, and rarely do the two 
collide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to put a few facts on the table. The facts that 
matter is July 1 is Statistics Canada Day in which the 
population for all of the provinces is assessed. And each and 
every year Saskatchewan has grown, and since 1991 we have 
grown by 25,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it quite 
interesting that the minister would stand up and be so proud that 
we didn’t lose 16,000 people, only 1,600 people. Good 
argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as on Monday in Wood River, this NDP 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Hon. members, this is your time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP 
government is dead last. Saskatchewan has lost 1,600 people in 
the last year, the largest population drop of any province in 
Canada. That’s that NDP’s record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other provinces have gained population. Look at Manitoba. 
They gained 6,000 people last year, Mr. Speaker. In Alberta — 
the chosen land, they keep calling it — 11,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker. Meanwhile the NDP has lost 1,600 in our province. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to admit that high taxes, lousy 
highways, failing health care, and ridiculous labour laws are 
causing our population to drop? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I rest my case. When 
you have the members opposite saying, so what’s a decimal 
point here or there . . . (inaudible) . . . runs between a billion or 
10 billion, you know that they have learned nothing since the 
1980s. It’s exactly that kind of thinking that got us into the mess 
that we inherited. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite, I would say look at 
some of the facts that we do know for sure: 14,600 more people 
working in this province in May relative to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
That’s a fact. 
 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

Twenty-five thousand increase in population since 1991, unlike 
in the ’80s when people fled the province at about 20,000 a 
year. That’s a fact. 
 
Let’s look at wholesale trade: an increase of 23 per cent, leading 
all of Canada. That’s a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the facts, look to this side of the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The minister can make a joke about the 
decimal point but what she has to realize is, there is a negative 
in front of that 1,600 people. That’s 1,600 people less, Mr. 
Speaker, thanks to the NDP and Liberal partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people like their NDP old buddy Ned Shillington 
— Ned had had enough of this province and he packed his bags 
and where’d he go? Calgary. 
 
Sixteen hundred people, Mr. Premier. That’s almost the entire 
town of Shaunavon disappearing out of this province every 
year, thanks to this NDP-Liberal coalition. Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m sitting close to the member 
who’s asking the question. I can hardly hear him. Members 
from both sides, please allow the question to be heard. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’ll try and raise my voice a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the Premier of the province: your record is dismal; you’ve 
lost 1,600 people; you’ve introduced ridiculous legislation such 
as the labour legislation. 
 
When are you and your Liberal friends going to realize we’re 
losing far too many people to support this province and what we 
need in this province? What are you doing to take steps to 
increase the population so it’s a positive sign in front of 1,600 
instead of a negative sign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, there are two themes 
that come from that side of the House. First of all they can’t get 
their facts straight. Secondly, they feed on Alberta envy. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you know, the people of this province should 
be proud of the fact there are 14,600 more people working now 
than before — than a year ago. 
 
The people of this province should be proud of the fact that we 
led all of Canada in wholesale trade. And the people of this 
province should be proud of the fact that we have the largest 
income tax cuts in the province’s history to grow this province 
into the future. 
 
They may envy Alberta, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the House 
we’re proud of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 70 – The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 
Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’éducation (élimination de la taxe professionnelle) 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1 I’ll invite the hon. minister 
responsible to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This afternoon I 
have with me Mr. Michael Littlewood seated to my left, is the 
executive director of school administration; to my right is Mr. 
Gordon Hubbard, who is the manager of advisory services with 
Municipal Affairs; directly behind me is Mr. John Wolfenberg, 
who is a special project person with Municipal Affairs; and 
behind Gordon is Gordon Zakreski, who is the industrial 
consultant with Municipal Affairs. Those are my officials, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
members from Municipal Affairs. 
 
I don’t have too many questions on this at all. I do want to take 
an opportunity though — in the last provincial election when 
we campaigned around this province on eliminating tax and 
eliminating personal income tax especially, but even we also 
talked about the elimination of business tax, we’re certainly 
happy to see that you took some of our advice and followed 
along with a number of the ideas that we had presented in the 
last campaign. I think you’d have to admit that they were some 
of the better ideas, and I’m glad you’re following along with 
them. 
 
This Bill appears to be a consequential amendment made 
necessary by the decision to eliminate the business tax 
assessment. 
 
And I guess it was discussed the other night in another Bill that 
we had talked about. Is that correct? Like it was pretty much 
discussed the other night on a municipal Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that’s correct. 
We had the discussion as well the other night when we were in 
the committee. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Chair, with that I think most of the 
. . . any problems or any questions that we had in that area have 
been answered. So I have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1430) 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. 
Again this Bill talking about tax credit, I guess for film 
employment. Again we are certainly in agreement any time we 
can start reducing taxes for people. And I think that’s the whole 
point of this, is to grow and foster the film industry. 
 
And it is really interesting that, you know, we’ll see how this 
does, and hopefully the government will take up what has 
happened in the film industry, because we think it should be 
going in the right direction; then put it across the board so that, 
you know, there is a tax break for everybody and not just 
picking winners and losers such as the film industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you briefly explain the changes that you are 
making, especially the changes in the residency requirement to 
receive a tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The employees 
may declare themselves . . . and I just might read this because I 
think it would be best that way to be in the record. And it would 
read this way. The employees may declare themselves. The 
amendment of residency requirement is suggested to allow 
flexibility for applicants declaring employees in Saskatchewan 
residents . . . as Saskatchewan residents. 
 
The employee may declare themselves a Saskatchewan resident 
the year before production according to the last tax return, and 
declare themselves a new Saskatchewan resident based on the 
next taxation year. This will allow applicants to declare most of 
their employees at the completion of the production of the 
balance if . . . and the balance of the employee’s new residence 
at the conclusion of the tax year. 
 
This change in definition is required to amend the residency 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. How 
will the changes of residency requirements improve upon this 
tax credit system in terms of job creation for permanent 
Saskatchewan residents? How will it improve in the job 
creation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, they don’t have to wait until the 
end of tax year. They can declare themselves the year before. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, could you give me some of the 
monetary details of this tax credit? What are we looking at as 
far as the dollars and cents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The estimated 
tax credit for 1998 was 4.9 million; the tax credit payout for ’98 
was 3.49 million. 
 
For 1999, the estimated tax credit was 3.3. We can’t provide 
you yet with the actual amount because the 32 productions, 
there’s no final certifications yet have been . . . have not yet 
arrived. 
 

And for 2000, we’re projecting that the tax credits, the 
estimated tax credit will be about 886,000; but we don’t have 
their nine initial applications, but the estimates are still out in 
terms of the other projects. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, you’re relaxing some of the 
auditing requirements under this Act. Can you tell me what 
changes there are and why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, the changes that are 
coming about is that a full audit is cost prohibitive for some of 
the smaller productions. 
 
As you may know, in other provinces the film tax production 
development agencies use a three-tiered system where 
productions under 20 . . . 200,000, simply sign an affidavit. 
Those between 200 and 5,000 are required to do a full review 
engagement, and those over 500,000 required to do a full audit. 
 
And implementation of the three-tiered system would 
harmonize the Saskatchewan process with that of other . . . with 
other provinces. And that’s the direction that we’re going now. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One final question to the minister regarding 
obviously this Bill. If it is seen that it does increase the film 
industry and businesses, is government looking at spreading it 
out further and wider to other areas? 
 
Because of course as I mentioned at the start, that we really, we 
really hesitate when you start picking winners and losers, 
picking the film industry and not this, or whatever. And what 
are the government’s plans? Do you plan on spreading it out 
over a number of different areas in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. He asks a 
very important question. Because, as he may or may not know, 
there has been requests as well from the recording industry and 
certainly from the publishing, from the publishing industry, and 
also the visual. 
 
And what we’re doing is we’re examining that process today. 
We know how successful the tax credit benefit has been in the 
area that we’re talking about today. We’re examining it with the 
other, with the other three areas and hope that we might be able 
to have a more definitive response over the next year for you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Local Improvements 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Seeing no shuffle of officials, same officials, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The same officials. 
 
The Chair: — Okay, thank you. The same officials. Before I 
call clause 1, why is the member for Swift Current on his feet? 
 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

Mr. Wall: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the 
minister and the member for indulging some introduction of 
guests. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the east gallery today is a very special group 
from Swift Current, Saskatchewan, my hometown. There’s 35 
students there from Oman School. 
 
And I can tell you from first-hand experience, Mr. Chairman, 
that Oman School is the very best elementary school in the city 
of Swift Current. It’s where my daughter attends. She’s in grade 
one there. We’re very fortunate to have just an excellent group 
of teachers, and a great parent advisory board. 
 
And 35 grade 5 students have joined us here for just a very brief 
time to have a look inside the chambers. They’re joined by 
teachers Mr. Franz and Mrs. Mann. Also chaperoning the group 
today — Mr. Bigelou, Mrs. Gates, Mrs. Thiessen, Mrs. Parsons, 
and Mrs. Mead. 
 
And it is a privilege to have this group here from Oman School 
in Swift Current. And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Local Improvements 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Minister, I want to welcome your officials here today. I 
really have very few questions on this Bill, Mr. Minister. I was 
wondering, though — it seems to be fairly simple, 
straightforward amendments that we’re dealing with — if you 
maybe could just give us a quick review of what you’re actually 
doing here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, the 
member from Saltcoats is correct that these are primarily 
housekeeping items, which really what we’re doing here is 
bringing the appeal process in line with the assessment process. 
 
And really the housekeeping areas of the amendments are to do 
about four or five things, but the three most significant ones are 
to improve the appeal rights of landowners, make the local 
boards of revision more accountable for decisions, and I think 
finally, improve the . . . and provide a consistent approach to 
handling the appeals. 
 
And by and large, they’re fairly minor changes that we’re 
making to the legislation which would help us then with 
bringing the appeal process in line, which is what I’ve said, 

with the assessment process. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Thunder Creek on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to introduce to you and all 
members of this Hon. Assembly, 12 grade 4 to 7 students from 
the Beau Soleil School in Gravelbourg, accompanied by their 
teachers Liza Bégin, José Deschênes . . . that was 
Bégin-Cossette, José Deschênes, and Julie Léger. 
 
I understand that they’ve had a tour of the building, and I’ll be 
meeting with them later. I understand that the tour was 
conducted in French. And I’m sure I’m proud, as I’m sure all 
members of this Assembly are, that we’re able to provide that 
service to them in French. 
 
And I hope that they’ve had an educational tour, and I look 
forward to meeting with them in a couple of minutes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, Mr. 
Minister, we just have a few questions on this Bill. 
 
The first one being though, telephone lines are being now 
considered an essential public service. Can you maybe tell me 
how this designation affects municipal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The response is 
that what this would do is really make it easier for the 
municipalities and the utilities to operate in a more, I might say, 
conciliatory fashion, as we do today with the SaskPower and as 
we do with the TransGas or Energy. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, the appeal process has been altered as it 
pertains to local development appeal boards and the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. Could you briefly summarize 
the changes and why it was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board and the municipalities were 
really asking for more flexibility to the process. And through 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

our consultations, in order to provide that kind of flexibility, the 
changes here are reflective in how that might of course 
accommodate the municipal structure plus also the Municipal 
Board. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, I believe it was possibly in the second reading speech 
I heard you say that these amendments will bring about greater 
consultation in the North with the creation of northern planning 
districts. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you outline the mandate and powers of the 
planning districts and tell us who will serve on them and how 
they will be appointed, etc.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair to the member. The membership 
on the committees will be the individuals who are from the 
North of course, and they will be representative of remote 
communities and resort villages in the northern part of the 
province. And their job by and large will be to be advisory to 
the department on municipal zoning, primarily, and the 
establishment of different zoning areas within the North. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 
all the questions I have right now, Mr. Minister. We want to 
take this opportunity to thank your officials and thank you for 
the answers to our questions. 
 
(1445) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, on completion of our work, I 
want to thank my officials for their assistance in putting 
together these Bills, and also to thank the opposition members 
for their questions. These amendments are, although they are 
basically housekeeping, they have come to us through the 
municipal structure and through the municipalities. And that 
your assistance in helping us get these Bills through the House 
are most important to the municipalities and our municipal 
leaders. So I thank you, Mr. Chair, and to my officials. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Mentally Disordered 
Persons Amendment Act, 1999 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, on 
my right, Andrea Seale, who’s Crown counsel in legislative 
services in Department of Justice. Behind me is Aurelia Beach 
who is the program consultant with community care branch of 
the Department of Health; and to her right, is Ron Kruzeniski, 
Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel), who’s the Public Trustee for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. And 
once again, hello to the minister and welcome to his officials. 
We have a few questions on this Bill for Committee of the 
Whole, and I’ll look forward to receiving the answers. 
 
I guess to start with, I understand there has been considerable 
consultation that preceded the drafting of this Bill, with groups 
such as . . . I think it was the chief psychiatrists and . . . but just 
many of the professionals involved in the industry. And you’ve 
had of course, as is evidenced by the officials with you today, 
some support from across government from other departments. 
 
But I wonder if you could highlight for the members of the 
committee, how many cases recently and perhaps just over the 
last couple of years is your department aware of, where it has 
been proven, I guess where it has been proven that financial 
abuse has taken place. Specifically as it applies to someone who 
has been declared incompetent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question. While there are not specific statistics dealing with the 
numbers of mentally disordered persons who are subject of 
various forms of abuse, of financial abuse set in this context, 
there are certainly more than we would hope for — something 
like 25 per cent of the 175 a year that the Public Trustee looks 
into. 
 
And in that event, obviously more time is spent ensuring that 
the mentally disordered person is protected as much as possible, 
and that of course requires extra resources within the Public 
Trustee office. But every step is taken to ensure that the 
potential for that abuse is removed, and in general the Public 
Trustee would take over the affairs of the mentally disordered 
person. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, it strikes 
me that a lot of what’s in this Act is meant not only to try to 
prevent this kind of abuse but also to improve the process, and I 
don’t if streamline is the right word, but make some 
improvements in the process that people have access to. 
 
And I wonder if you can in the course of drafting the Bill, if you 
can highlight for the members of the committee the length of 
time that it takes to have the exam done. Because that’s clearly 
an important stage of the Bill where a competency exam is 
administered again on the individual in question. 
 
And in light of the fact that we’re seemingly trying to sort of 
speed up the process and prevent that window for abuse, could 
you highlight if . . . what is the approximate time for an exam? 
Is there a waiting period for example? I’m just not sure. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
two young men who are very interested in politics in 
Saskatchewan. They have been to the youth parliament and 
have been here a couple of times to observe the proceedings. 
 
Seated in the west gallery are Tanner Morrison and Kelsey 
Rose. Kelsey is also resident in my constituency. And we’d like 
to welcome them here and hope that they find the proceedings 
enlightening and interesting. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Mentally Disordered 
Persons Amendment Act, 1999 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the question was how long 
does a competency evaluation take and is there any delay. The 
matter is properly within the jurisdiction of a judge, and so a 
judge could decide . . . could ensure that an order would be 
made by a certain time. But I’m informed that this rarely takes 
any longer than a week under any circumstances. 
 
Mr. Wall: — For someone whose competency is still not yet 
determined or is perhaps still in question even after an exam has 
taken place, what rights does an individual have to simply 
refuse to undergo an exam? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asked, Mr. Chair, what 
. . . the extent to which an individual who’s been ordered to 
subject . . . has been ordered to have a competency test can, I 
think, resist that. And in fact if a judge decides on the basis, on 
the balance of evidence presented that a competency assessment 
should take place, then it will take place. 
 
So there is not the opportunity for a person to say that they do 
not want their competency assessed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, has the 
department analyzed the new process that will be enacted as a 
result of this piece of legislation as to cost? Will there be any 
increased cost as a result of the new process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s actually quite rare 
that the matter would go to the Court of Queen’s Bench now, 
and even more rare that it would likely go to the Court of 
Appeal. Costs are minimal now. It’s not anticipated that there 
are any significant costs here at all. 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, the Minister of Justice has 
a House . . . amendment, rather, to clause 1, and I’ll recognize 
the minister to move the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
House: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Mentally Disordered Persons Amendment Act, 1999” and 
substituting “The Mentally Disordered Persons 
Amendment Act, 2000”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Regina Northeast 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave for the introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to join 
with my colleague from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in 
welcoming our young guests seated in the west gallery. A 
special welcome to Tanner Morrison who has been a very 
valuable addition to my executive association. And I welcome 
Tanner here and I want to thank him for coming down here 
today, and I hope you enjoy the proceedings here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Committee members, the Chair would ask leave 
to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, committee members. I really would 
be remiss if I didn’t acknowledge Tanner’s presence here. 
Because if the universe unfolds the way we’re hoping it will, 
Tanner will be our number two son’s brother-in-law. So special 
welcome, Tanner; good to see you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Justice to introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my right I’d 
ask the Assembly to welcome Darcy McGovern, who’s been 
here a number of times, from legislative services in the 
Department of Justice; and to my left Al Dwyer, who is the 
registrar of the consumer protection branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees, and 
once again welcome to the officials here today. 
 
The minister will know, and we’ve had a discussion . . . In fact 
shortly after I received my current duties in terms of being 
Justice critic, we had a good meeting in his office, and we 
talked about the fact that I would be approaching those duties 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

from the perspective of someone who has no professional 
training in the law. And so we have had, as a result of that fact, 
to seek outside input on a lot of these Bills. 
 
But often, in addition to that input that we received, we can 
bring to bear perhaps a more laymen’s view of issues, and this 
particular Bill, I think, is one where I’ll probably ask some 
questions that almost everybody would ask because they’re 
fairly topical. 
 
For example, I think the whole issue of evidence and what’s 
admissible and what’s reliable is very topical. We’ve have seen 
some very celebrated trials dealing with evidence that was a 
number of decades old. 
 
And in addition to that, this Bill of course deals with electronic 
documents as evidence. And we’ve also seen, Mr. Minister and 
Mr. Chair, a lot of, I guess, current affairs happening lately 
around the reliability of electronic documents and computer 
viruses and bugs. 
 
We don’t have as many questions on this particular statute, Mr. 
Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that comes from not 
being a lawyer. It either comes from not being a lawyer or not 
paying attention — it’s one of the two. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I sincerely hope that it wasn’t that the 
Chair called the wrong Bill. We are on Bill No. 16 of 
1999-2000, An Act to amend miscellaneous consumer 
protection statutes. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I don’t blame the chairman. I can, however, I can 
only blame myself and I’m very happy that the carpets in this 
venerable institution are red, Mr. Chairman. I might be able to 
hide in them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, once again thank you for your officials . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it is. Thanks to your officials 
again and welcome them here. 
 
Some questions with respect to An Act to amend miscellaneous 
consumer protection statutes. I wonder, Minister, could you 
explain the current process by which a claimant can receive 
payment for an outstanding bond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question 
during The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 2000, I’d 
say . . . the process is relatively straightforward although it has a 
number of steps. But I think the main point the member is 
getting at is that in early 1999, January 25, the Court of Queen’s 
Bench really directed that a payment to a person, as a result of a 
bond being forfeited, would only take place after that person 
had obtained judgment from the court which generated a long 
. . . I mean, a much different process than it being the case 
before, which was a much less formal process whereby the 
registrar, who upon receiving a complaint from a consumer, 
would have the branch — the consumer protection branch — 
investigate. 
 
And if it revealed that the complaint was valid and a financial 
loss had been experienced by the consumer and remained 
unsatisfied after the consumer trying to receive payment from 
the business, the bond of that business was forfeited and the 

registrar then prepared a recommendation to cabinet to direct 
the way in which the bonds were proceeded with. 
 
And so it was a process that didn’t require the intervention of a 
court. It didn’t require the claimant — the person, the consumer 
— to go to court to enforce his or her claim. But as I said, in 
early 1999, the Queen’s Bench . . . the Court of Queen’s Bench 
required the consumer to actually go through that process. And 
so the purpose behind the statute is to go back to the old process 
which was less formal, less expensive and plainly quite a lot 
quicker. 
 
So in the process that we would have before January 25, and the 
process we will have now, involves the registrar doing an 
investigation, assessing that the consumer’s complaint is a 
legitimate one requiring the forfeiture of the bond by the 
business in question and then ensuring that the monies are paid 
over to the aggrieved consumer. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in the case of 
bonds, the registrar’s decision can be appealed. And I wonder 
why is there is a need for that, I guess. Has there been a lot of 
discrepancies in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, I 
should indicate that this is very rare that a decision of the 
registrar be appealed, but it in fact was what generated the 
involvement of the Court of Queen’s Bench early in 1999. 
 
But I think the member would agree that it’s an appropriate 
aspect of due process to ensure that a business who feels . . . 
which feels that the registrar’s decision is improper in some 
way should be able to appeal to a court to ensure that the 
decisions are made in a proper way in accordance with the law 
and in accordance with the procedures that are laid down. 
 
So it’s a check in a sense, a check really providing access to a 
court in the event that the business in dissatisfied with the 
registrar’s decision. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well why was there a need then, Minister, to 
substitute the registrar from the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
as the decision-maker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
Mr. Chair. This change puts us more . . . puts us in line with the 
provinces either side of us, and really properly recognizes that it 
is the registrar who is the professional official, conducts the 
investigation and makes the decision as to whether or not the 
bonds should be forfeited and the consumer compensated. 
 
Previously, that matter . . . the decision of the registrar went to 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council to cabinet, but as you can 
imagine it would be almost . . . it would be rare, if ever, that the 
cabinet would attempt to second-guess the professional official. 
 
So it really recognizes that cabinet’s scrutiny would not add 
anything to the decision of the registrar. 
 
Clause 1 agreed. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

The committee agreed to report the Bill 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
new official and I guess the remaining previous official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in the event that you’re not 
yet sick of him — Darcy McGovern is here again from 
legislative services, and to my left — and I’m sure you’re not 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Somebody is, I heard from the 
background. And to my left, John Baker who is the executive 
director of law enforcement services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 
do have a few questions with respect to this because I can tell 
you that policing is a big issue for many of the communities 
that we represent, for many of those councils. And I think 
there’s some questions both germane to the Bill and just 
generally about policing in rural areas that we would like to ask. 
And I wonder, to set the tone, Minister, if you would just 
outline the . . . and I know that in part, you share some 
responsibility in this with the Minister of Municipal 
Government, but could you please just outline for the members 
of the committee, the funding arrangements and the population 
threshold for funding arrangements for police in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In general terms first, the member will 
know that he left . . . I’m not supposed to say that. But the member 
will know that there is a federal-provincial agreement dealing with 
the police services which is really where the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) as our provincial police force, comes 
into play. 
 
And then there’s the provincial-municipal agreement which 
provides for funding to municipalities, depending upon their size. 
Those who have a size of . . . a population of less than 500 do not 
receive any assistance, and then the dollars vary depending upon 
the size of the population of the municipality. 
 
Does the member want to know some specific details? Yes? And 
the most recent agreement was made in . . . started in January 1, 
1999. So urban communities with a population of between 1,500 
and 5,000 now have expenditures of 4,000 . . . I guess it’s . . . 
 
(1515) 
 
So the urban communities with a population of between 1,500 
and 5,000, their contribution to their police service would be 
$4.356 million, which would be about 39 per cent of the total 
cost. 
 
Urban communities with more than 500 population with a 
RCMP detachment would be paying about 18 per cent of the 
cost. 
 
Communities with a population of more than 500 without a 
detachment would be paying 4 per cent of the cost; and urbans 
with fewer than 500 with a detachment would be paying 3,000 
. . . 3 per cent of the costs. And those urban communities with 
fewer than 500 people without a detachment would be paying 8 

per cent of the cost. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have a 
specific situation in the town of Cudworth. And the population 
of Cudworth is about 750 people. 
 
And the mayor there is requesting some financial assistance of 
course, based on their per capita population. It seems that, you 
know, any amount would help if we could just assist them with 
some sort of help as per their population. 
 
They understand, Mr. Minister, that cities are getting some help 
with funding for municipal police forces. And they’re 
wondering why then that communities the size of Cudworth 
cannot get that same sort of assistance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member will know that 
the arrangements with municipalities regarding police services 
can be discussed at great length at . . . by a task force made up 
of municipal officials, representatives from . . . including 
representatives from urban and rural municipalities, and that the 
formula was one which arose out of that task force. 
 
And I’ve met with the mayor of Cudworth and — on I think a 
couple of occasions — and discussed this matter with him. And 
he knows, and indeed other communities in similar situations 
know, that the appropriate way to express their . . . or an 
appropriate place to express their concerns would be with the 
task force which in a consultative way developed the process 
and the formula in the first place. And it would be useful, I 
think, if that process was followed. 
 
But I would say that in specific response to the member’s 
question that the funding arrangements, which ensure that the 
RCMP are the police force for the vast majority of the province, 
involve a pooling, and so consequently the resources available 
to any individual detachment would ensure that they were 
covering appropriately the population within that area. 
 
And that would include, for example, the town of Cudworth in 
that . . . for that detachment. In the event that the town wishes to 
go above and beyond that police service from the RCMP, then 
it’s a matter for the community itself. It’s a matter for the 
citizens and for the town council. Should they decide to have 
their own police force, Mr. Chair, that is a matter for them and a 
matter for them to fund. 
 
And it’s the RCMP’s view that the service provided from its 
detachment to the town of Cudworth and other towns in similar 
situations is adequate to meet their needs. I know that is not the 
view of the town, and as I say — I repeat — the issue then is for 
the town to fund its own extra police service. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you were 
absolutely correct — there is one and a half positions right now; 
police positions that are trying very hard to take care of an area 
surrounding Cudworth, and the police are asking for assistance. 
There’s no doubt there’s . . . They just don’t have enough 
manpower there go around to take care of what they need to. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it seems like the municipal government 
there is already paying $76,000 for their policing as is. And 
that’s a great deal of money, especially these days when your 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

very own government has cut funding to municipalities and cut 
funding for all kinds of services, and services in the rural area, 
especially where rural areas, as you well know, are getting hit 
very hard by your government. 
 
So it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that when you look at the 
amount of funding that the municipality is already putting 
forward in the amount of $76,000, that’s a great burden on 
them. Certainly the request by the mayor of Cudworth seems to 
me to be a very reasonable request whereby the burden on 
municipal taxpayers would be lessened. And he’s just simply 
asking for the same consideration that cities get as far as 
municipal police funding goes. 
 
So I recognize what you’re saying about the task force, but I 
also recognize that somehow the rural areas got the short end of 
the stick here obviously. And I think it would be most 
appropriate for you as minister to try to work out some sort of a 
formula that would assist the rural communities with their 
policing needs in a much more . . . I guess a much fairer fashion 
is what I’m trying to say. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
I’m aware that this is a difficulty for towns like Cudworth. But 
in consultation with the RCMP — and I’ve urged the mayor of 
Cudworth to talk to the local RCMP detachment — it’s the 
RCMP’s view that there are more than enough police officers in 
the detachment to address the concerns of Cudworth, and 
consequently that the RCMP detachment can provide the 
services that Cudworth needs. 
 
And in fact the RCMP does respond to calls from Cudworth, in 
particular when the one member for the town of Cudworth in 
the capacity as a police officer is not on duty. Plainly with a 
one-member force that would be two-thirds of the time and 
probably some time at the weekend. So the RCMP does operate 
within the town of Cudworth as well. 
 
But the crux of the matter really here is that the RCMP informs 
us that there are adequate resources, in fact, more than adequate 
resources in the detachment to service the surrounding area 
including the town of Cudworth. The town of Cudworth doesn’t 
agree. 
 
And the view we have taken is that the RCMP’s assessment is 
an accurate one and if the town wishes to have more police 
services than is regarded as adequate by the RCMP, then it 
really is a matter for its own taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, in reviewing the Bill and 
in reviewing your remarks for your second reading speech you 
highlighted, quite rightly, the provisions in this Bill that allow 
the cabinet to permit authorities such as RMs and First Nations 
to establish a police service. And you went on to highlight the 
File Hills Agency which is the first First Nations force of its 
kind. And you also commended it for the work that it’s doing. 
 
And I wonder if you could expand on that a little bit, the 
success that they have had, and the rationale for wanting to 
expand the opportunity for this to RMs and First Nations. And 
who has been calling for this? 
 
For example, has SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) been interested in it? Because they’re 
mentioned specifically. And I would assume the FSIN has been 
consulted, but maybe you could elaborate a little bit on that 
consultation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first with regards to 
municipal police forces, indeed as the member indicates SARM 
was consulted and supports the changes which are being 
suggested. 
 
And at present those changes really deal with only two rural 
municipalities, that of Corman Park and Vanscoy. Those police 
services will now be formally separate police services although, 
as the member will know, the scope of their authority is 
somewhat limited really to enforcing liquor and traffic laws and 
bylaws. 
 
But I know from a ride along I had not very long ago with Cst. 
Waslowski from Corman Park, that the kind of work that that 
police service does — and I take it probably similar in Vanscoy 
— is very much a community kind of police service, checking 
on people who are away from home, and in fact doing the kind 
of community work that we all think is useful. 
 
With regards to File Hills, this is indeed an exciting 
development for the province. The first First Nations police 
service in the province, which is I think a major . . . an 
important development. 
 
So this will . . . this agreement and the Act will permit us to 
enforce . . . or to make an agreement and to pursue that 
agreement which will provide for a three-year transition period 
for File Hills Agency to move from the RCMP 100 per cent to 
100 per cent First Nations police service. 
 
It’s a transitional arrangement which ensures, first of all, 
smooth development. It ensures that the expertise of the RCMP 
is taken into the police service at File Hills and ensures that the 
File Hills Agency First Nations police service will be indeed a 
professional and effective police service. 
 
It should also be pointed out that the police service, and any 
others which we may come to agreement on, will derive their 
authority from the provincial police Act, and will in fact be 
administered in terms of disciplinary measures and so on by the 
police commission. 
 
So we have a province-wide process of ensuring the 
effectiveness of the police service; indeed, ensuring that that 
police service at File Hills is administered under the same 
quality and standards, guidelines, as any other police service in 
the province. 
 
And it is indeed an important development for not only File 
Hills, but for the province as a whole. And yesterday as we 
know, we were all celebrating National Aboriginal Day. This is 
indeed an important event to celebrate as well. And we look 
forward to further developments in the years ahead. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
had mentioned you had a ride along, and we were wondering — 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

a number of the members on this side — whether that was 
voluntary or was that a forced ride along that you had there? 
 
Mr. Minister, the member for Swift Current just had to step out 
for a second, will be back right away, but another question that 
he was wondering about, could you touch on the training that 
these police officers would have? And you’ve touched a bit on 
it but could you touch on the type of training and how they will 
be trained, and where, and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I assure the member that it 
was entirely voluntary on my part. Whether it was voluntary on 
Constable Waslowski’s part, I’m not so sure. 
 
The independent police services, the municipal police service, 
which will include Corman Park and Vanscoy, and indeed File 
Hills Agency First Nations police service as well, will go 
through the police college here in Regina in exactly the same 
way as any other municipal police service will do. 
 
And indeed Corman Park is already utilizing the police college 
in this way. And indeed, at a recent graduation, one of the new 
police officers graduating from the police college was from 
Corman Park. 
 
So I think the main point here is that the quality of training for 
municipal police forces will be exactly the same whether 
they’re from Corman Park, Vanscoy, File Hills Agency, 
Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and so on. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, this is a, you know it’s a . . . these 
represent amendments but they’re fairly, fairly substantive 
amendments. And I wonder if you could tell members of the 
committee whether or not your department had discussions 
recently — or may perhaps in the drafting of this legislation or 
related directly to this legislation — in terms of a provincial 
police force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks, Mr. Chair, whether 
we considered, in the process of developing this legislation, a 
stand-alone provincial police service. I think that’s what the 
point of the question was. 
 
This was looked into about a year and a half ago, and the 
increased costs that this would entail was estimated at that time 
to be about $36 million a year above and beyond what we 
would now be paying for the RCMP. 
 
And there are a number of advantages, I think the member will 
agree, with the RCMP being our provincial police force, not to 
mention the history and tradition and the connection with 
Regina: the important economic and indeed community aspect 
of the RCMP’s presence here in Regina with the training 
academy and the depot and so on; and the fact that it is a 
nationwide police force which enables those who . . . those 
professional police officers in it to have significant career 
options. 
 
And we have, I think . . . I think everyone in the province would 
agree, have received really terrific service from the RCMP, and 
it is a police service that we all are justly proud of. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I would 

agree. The city of Swift Current has been fortunate for the last 
number of years to have a city detachment as well as a rural 
detachment of the mounted police. And I note with interest that 
your department was looking at the potential of a provincial 
police force and I guess, though, I wouldn’t mind moving on to 
some of the other smaller communities in Saskatchewan who 
have municipal police forces. 
 
And one specific concern they have that I wonder if you could 
address in context of committee deliberations on The Police 
Amendment Act is as it relates to special constables. Because 
there are a number of single detachment . . . single member 
detachment or single member, I guess, municipal forces in the 
province. 
 
Luseland, Watson, Churchbridge, Cudworth and Caronport are 
the ones that I would like to put forward to you today, Mr. 
Minister. And for them, the special constable program which 
most police forces, municipal and the RCMP, at least in Swift 
Current, they laud this program as an excellent way to provide 
additional support for the police detachments. 
 
That particular program would be unavailable to these 
departments because of provisions, as I understand it, that 
would simply limit special constables to those situations where 
they can be under the direct supervision of the . . . a police force 
from that force, from that detachment. 
 
That’s my understanding. And if I’m wrong, then please correct 
me, but that’s my understanding. 
 
So therefore those municipalities that perhaps most require 
some relief or some support that a special constable could 
provide, like these that only have one member, they are unable 
of course to access the special constable program as a result of 
that, Minister. 
 
And I wonder if you’ve had discussions with the RCMP 
because you detail the situation where the town of Cudworth, 
the single member that . . . the police member . . . the police 
officer for that community simply can’t be on duty 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week. And so the RCMP co-operate in that 
respect and provide policing there. 
 
I wonder has any discussions ever been had with the RCMP to 
have the special constable program . . . some co-operation with 
respect to the special constable program to ease the burden on 
these municipalities that have chosen to have municipal forces, 
and are paying for it as you outlined. They’re paying for the 
whole shot. Has there been any discussion with them or 
consideration of expanding the special constable program to 
those communities? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, while the minister consults with 
his officials, I wonder if I could ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the east gallery 
there are 34 grade 5 students from Oman School. We’ve already 
had a visit from about 35 grade 5 students from Oman School 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

here today. And although the members here will have heard me 
say it before, the students didn’t. I can say, Mr. Chairman, with 
surety that Oman School is the best elementary school in Swift 
Current. It’s where my daughter goes. She’s in grade 1. 
 
It has a great group of teachers and a wonderful parent advisory 
board and great activities for the kids as well as providing an 
excellent education. And so they are joined in the gallery by 
their teacher, Dallas Kolb, and several other chaperones, many 
of whom I know. 
 
But I’ll single out one and possibly embarrass her because she 
was a colleague of mine when I worked for the city of Swift 
Current, and her name is Bonnie Poushay. She’s here with her 
daughter, Amy, and also a very good friend, Danielle Ershall, is 
up there. 
 
But anyway I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with 
me in welcoming this grade 5 group of kids from Oman School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 31  The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank the 
member for giving me a little bit more time with my officials. 
 
The member may be aware . . . members may or may not be 
aware that there are about 225 RCMP auxiliary constables who 
essentially do this work because they want to assist in policing 
and providing safety and security to their communities and 
about half a dozen in municipal police forces. 
 
So we have a significant number of people who are assisting 
police services across the province and providing services to 
our communities. They usually have some training, but not as 
much training as a police officer would. And they are 
appointed, as the member suggests, as special constables with 
quite limited powers and the requirement that — and this is 
really the point of the member’s question I think — the 
requirement that they work under the direct supervision of a 
fully trained regular police officer. They don’t carry guns, but 
they essentially act in conjunction with the officer they are in 
the car with or in the community with. 
 
One of the problems of allowing an auxiliary constable to 
operate other than in the direct supervision, under the direct 
supervision of a fully trained regular police officer is the risk 
both to that auxiliary constable and to the community at large as 
a result of not being trained for all eventualities. And it’s a 
concern of ours that we don’t put those auxiliary constables or 
the community at risk as a result of having those auxiliary 
officers in the community on their own. 
 
But I would say, and the member will be familiar with 
Davidson I expect, where there is a person employed by the 
town who is really more like a security guard who spends time 
in the community and provides some extra . . . both sense of 
security and, I imagine. real security to that community as well. 
But that person is not a police officer but is more like, I 

suppose, an old-style town watchperson. 
 
So we have the concern that we have . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, I don’t think they were persons back then; they were all 
men back then. 
 
So that is our concern about safety and security of both the 
auxiliary police officers and the community. 
 
But I’d say that we are more than open to explore any 
possibilities, any kind of ideas that would assist both 
communities and the police service. And I can say that the 
auxiliary police officer, the auxiliary constable program is one 
which both the RCMP and the municipal services regard highly 
and see as very useful, both for the auxiliary constable 
themselves and for the community at large. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I would 
encourage the minister to do that. I appreciate the fact that he’s 
indicated he’s going to be open to perhaps expanding the 
program. Because I agree. Everything that I’ve heard from all 
sides is that the special constable program is one that can work. 
And to me it can fill a gap in some of these communities that 
perhaps need a situation like you’ve detailed in Davidson but 
would like to maybe upgrade to a special constable. So I 
encourage you to do that. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, as a final question, I wonder if I could just 
briefly return to a line of questioning I think that the member 
from Saltcoats assisted me with, with respect to this Act 
allowing First Nations people to develop their forces. And 
forgive me, I don’t know if you touched on this in your answer 
— I don’t think you did — but what do you believe the uptake 
will be of that? What kind of input have you had from the First 
Nations community of the province in terms of their interest in 
doing their own policing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — We’ve had some interest from other 
First Nations other than File Hills Agency, Mr. Chair, and this 
is to be welcomed. As I’m sure the member is aware there are a 
number of options for First Nations either to have an RCMP 
service stationed in their community, in their First Nations, or 
to move towards this kind of independent police service. And of 
course many also are merely served from a detachment 
off-reserve. 
 
But we are interested in ensuring that the File Hills Agency 
police service moves along smoothly. They’re plainly to be 
commended for their collaborative approach with the RCMP 
and with Sask Justice. I think this is very important in their 
move towards, really, a very professional and effective police 
service in their community. 
 
We want to ensure that that model is one which works 
effectively in File Hills Agency’s First Nations territory and 
would welcome consideration from other First Nations once we 
ensure that the File Hills Agency police service works as we 
anticipate it will. 
 
So we would see other First Nations communities requesting 
the same kind of police service as File Hills Agency, and we 
look forward to File Hills police service being a top-notch 
police service, as we expect it will be, and to expanding that 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

program then into other First Nations. 
 
(1545) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I do so move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 
No. 31 be reported without amendment, and in the process can I 
thank my officials for being here today and for all the work they 
do. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’ll invite the Hon. Minister of Justice to introduce 
his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. To my right I’d ask 
the members to welcome Brent Prenevost from legislative 
services in the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, and may I say through you to the 
members of the committee, it’s about time we got to this Bill, 
Mr. Chairman. We wanted to talk about this a little bit earlier in 
the day, but we were thwarted in our attempt to talk about it 
earlier, and we’ll talk about it now, I guess. 
 
We have a number of questions on this particular Bill. And as I 
was relating to the minister at some length, at some 
considerable length, was that the approach that I think anybody 
would take to this Bill when they just looked at the title — I 
don’t think you have to be a lawyer for people to come up with 
some questions — just by looking at the title of this Bill based 
on what has happened here in Saskatchewan and what’s been in 
the news, both with respect to evidence and how old evidence 
was recently admitted into a case and was the source of some 
discussion, public and otherwise. 
 
And also what’s been topical of late is computer viruses and 
computer bugs. That’s also been a topic that people have talked 
about and we’ve also sort of witnessed their ability to destroy 
bugs . . . computer bug’s ability to destroy documents and really 
entire programs on computer. 
 
So there’s some obvious questions that come as a result of both 
of those two topics, Mr. Minister, and I wonder if you could 
answer for members of the committee some of the following 
questions along that line. 
 
Is it possible that any of the computer . . . computer records 
produced as evidence could be compromised by a virus or bug 
or by some other means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the question, I think, is an 
interesting one. It goes, I think, beyond the piece of legislation 
before us. 
 

But it’s, I think, important to relate that when a piece of 
evidence is presented to a court, the court . . . the judge 
essentially will ascertain the validity of that piece of evidence. 
 
And if there are any questions about whether it was 
compromised in any way — just as if it were a piece of paper, 
there might be questions regarding whether or not that piece of 
paper was forged or obtained under duress or whatever — so 
the court then would ascertain the efficacy of the evidence 
before it, whether it be on a piece of paper or whether it be a 
computer record. 
 
So it would be a matter for the judge to decide. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. And that sort of begs a 
follow-up question; I understand it’s beyond the scope of the 
Bill. 
 
But it’s one thing, I think, for a court to be able to make that 
determination based on evidence that might be presented on 
paper, or physical evidence of some nature. But there is a whole 
level of expertise and a whole level of skill and ability that is 
required of anybody who’s going to determine the legitimacy of 
electronic evidence, or basically computer-based evidence, if 
indeed we know that that kind of evidence could be subject to 
tampering; and we know that there’s very, very talented people 
in the world who are able to, in very innovative and creative 
ways, manipulate electronic documents through hacking. 
 
And I guess that’s the question. I understand that the judge 
would . . . that the court would be required to determine the 
legitimacy of this evidence. But will the court not need a whole 
level of expertise in order to do that in the case of electronic 
evidence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well indeed it is an important question 
and will become ever more important as more and more 
business is done electronically. 
 
The Bill actually does talk about how a person who wishes to 
sustain the integrity of a document can do so, in section 29.4. 
And essentially what is required here to show that the electronic 
record is efficacious is to show that the system was working 
well at all material times. For example subsection (a), 
subsection (b): 
 

that the . . . record was recorded and stored by a . . . 
(person) who is adverse in interest to the party seeking to 
introduce it; 
 

And that it was stored . . . recorded and stored in the usual and 
ordinary course of business. 
 
So there are some guidelines to both the person who is 
concerned about the integrity of the electronic record and a 
court in terms of ascertaining whether or not it does have the 
required integrity. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you’re quite rightly 
sort of highlighting section 29.4 of this particular Act. 
 
But, you know, it’s a fairly general reference to safeguarding 
electronic evidence and, of course, there are some very specific 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

technical computer terms that perhaps are part of regulations. 
I’m not sure, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 
 
But I wonder if you’d comment on that. On what detail the 
department has looked at in this regard. For example, in the 
various firewalling, the various computer security, the various 
security measures that information services people can 
undertake for computer systems — has all of this been 
contemplated? 
 
Because I would imagine that there is nothing more serious, 
especially for one who’s been accused perhaps and is looking to 
exonerate themselves, or for others who are looking for justice, 
there would be nothing more important than the security of that 
evidence. 
 
And so I wonder if it comes in the regulations or if your 
department has detailed in its work exactly the security 
perimeters that will be taking the security standards that must 
be met by any computer system that will house electronic 
evidence with respect to firewalling and other information 
services, security measures that you’d be able to take. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member’s question I think is best 
addressed in the following way. The amendment to The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act is about rules and regulations 
regarding the introduction of evidence before a court. 
 
And as we’ve discussed, there are suggestions or provisions in 
the Act providing for how a person might show that the record 
which . . . the electronic record they’re presenting is the product 
of a system which does not compromise that record’s integrity. 
There are some provisions also dealing with the standards 
which have to be met in order for the electronic record to be 
admissible in section 29.5. 
 
So the Bill is about rules relating to the introduction of 
evidence. The point the member raises is a really important one. 
How . . . I mean what we do to ensure that these records are in 
fact reliable and they are obtained and stored in a reliable way? 
 
And this raises really similar questions with regards to written 
pieces of evidence, too. The same matter might arise. How do 
we ensure that a written piece of paper has not been altered or 
forged, that it in fact represents what the person putting it 
forward claims it represents? 
 
These are matters too which are of importance with regards to 
electronic records. I think the member rightly points out that 
because of the nature of electronic records these things are 
much more open to potential abuse. 
 
But the person who wishes to put forward a record, computer 
record, and claim its integrity and use it as evidence, is of 
course going to have to have a process in place which he or she 
can substantiate as being valid and proper. And so it’s in that 
person’s interest to ensure that’s the case. 
 
In the event that somebody wishes to say no, that is not an 
appropriate record, that there’s something . . . it’s been 
tampered with in some way — and just as would be the case 
with a piece of paper — they would have to bring evidence to 
show that this was at least a potential . . . a problem and in 

doing so would presumably use the standards provisions here 
and the integrity provisions here to show that no, they weren’t 
stored in the proper way. No, they weren’t obtained in the 
normal course of business and perhaps that they were collected 
by someone who has a personal interest in insuring that those 
documents are what they say they are rather than an 
independent kind of . . . an independent record. 
 
So I think the response here is that this is about admissibility. 
Questions about reliable systems are for those who are 
attempting to bring forward the evidence as being reliable. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
guess this is probably more of a comment than it is a question. 
And it will be the last one on this Bill. 
 
But I guess as it relates to section 29.4 and subsection (a) says: 
 

by evidence that supports a finding that at all material 
times the computer system or other similar device was 
operating properly or, if it was not, the fact of its not 
operating properly did not affect the integrity of the 
electronic record . . . 

 
And to me that’s coming very close to, I think, where we need 
to be. But as we get further in — and you mentioned it in one of 
your answers — we get further into a world where this will be 
the norm rather than the exception — and I’m sure that day is 
coming — I’m suggesting that the regulations for this Act or 
some provision of the Department of Justice should probably 
set a standard. Because who’s going to make that decision, 
Minister? Who is going to make . . . who is going to be able to 
determine that the computer system was operating properly? 
 
I think that the Bill would be better served . . . or if in the regs 
or if in the department requirements the onus wasn’t on whether 
or not the computer system was operating properly but on a 
minimum system. What’s your basic system? 
 
Because there’s certain systems that can be compromised 
extremely easy. And I’m not a computer wizard, but I know that 
a lot of systems can be compromised by people who want to do 
that — very easily — when others cannot, if they have suitable 
management information systems, security measures taken. 
 
And so I guess that would be a final comment, that at some 
point whether it’s in the regs or in the requirements, that less 
onus be placed on someone who may not have the ability to 
determine if the computer was operating correctly; but rather 
that they be able to demonstrate they were storing this evidence 
or this electronic information on a system that met some basic 
requirement of information service security. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member again raises an interesting 
question and one which I’m sure will affect the confidence with 
which people approach evidence of this sort. 
 
But again I’d say that this is a Bill which serves merely to 
support the use of electronic information in an age which is 
changing quickly. And in fact, one of the reasons why it’s 
difficult to set down specific standards is because of that fast 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

pace of change. 
 
There are, as the member will note, files which can’t be 
changed. And I think it’s proper to say that the business 
community is responding to these challenges in a significant 
way by developing, for example, files that can’t be changed. By 
developing safeguards, for example, with regards to the safety 
and security of credit cards and so on. 
 
So in order for the electronic commerce to work effectively, 
fully effectively, all these things will be addressed, have to be 
addressed. And indeed it seems to me the business community 
is responding fairly quickly to that. The member’s question 
remains, and we will be of course watching carefully the way in 
which this process works. 
 
I would say that provinces across the country have worked 
together on these questions, accepting that things are moving 
quickly, and the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, which is 
the body which coordinates or attempts to coordinate wherever 
possible legislation across the country, has been working on 
this. And indeed this is a product of that work. 
 
So each province is facing the same kinds of challenges, and 
this is the result. New Brunswick I understand has legislation 
which is similar. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, just before you call the clauses, 
I wonder if I could just thank the minister again, and all of his 
officials who have come here today to discuss these four or five 
Bills, thank you. And I know we will be doing this again soon. 
Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, may I also thank Brent 
Prenevost for his help here and in fact on a continuing basis, 
and thank the member for his kind comments and for his 
interesting questions. We have many challenges ahead in this 
area of electronic commerce. 
 
And I would move that we report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Centre 
of the Arts Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Labour to 
introduce the officials that have joined her. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Larry Chaykowski, the executive director of finance 
administration and facilities for Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing. And seated beside me is John-Paul Elson, the chair of 
the board of directors of the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. 
 
And may I have leave to introduce guests as well? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As well in your gallery, Mr. Chair, I’d 
just like to introduce Andy Tahn who is the senior policy 
analyst at the program policy development review branch of 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing and Mr. Jerry Senko 
who is the operations manager of the Saskatchewan Centre of 
the Arts. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 79  The Saskatchewan Centre 
of the Arts Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I welcome the 
officials here today. I don’t have a lot of questions on this Bill 
but there are a few that I would like to . . . just some 
clarification on I guess. From my understanding there hadn’t 
really been anything done in the Act for 30 years. So it’s 
probably very timely and it’s been driven really from the 
centre’s board that there needed to be some changes so . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . pardon me . . . three zero — one zero 
that is. 
 
So I guess first of all, is the board, it’s really downsizing? It’s 
going from 50 board members, correct? It’s down to 12? Could 
you . . . I’m not familiar with the process of who is on the board 
and how that whole process where they’re appointed and how is 
that whole process . . . how will the 12 be named I guess or 
appointed or how does that work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for the question. Mr. Chair, 
the board . . . really what these changes do is bring it into line 
with practice. We haven’t really had 50 sitting members for 
quite some time. But what we do is we solicit names from 
around the community. 
 
Sometimes board members will bring forward names of people 
who have an interest in serving the Centre of the Arts. At times 
organizations who use the Centre of the Arts will bring forward 
names. And basically it’s just a process of seeing who might be 
interested in serving and we do reach out a bit to see if we can 
find names from centres outside Regina that make use of the 
centre as well, but certainly any one who might have a name to 
suggest of someone who would be interested in the cultural 
activities of the centre. 
 
We certainly consider the background and try to put together a 
mix of people with the regional skill-sets, interests, etc., and as 
well as we try to achieve gender balance in the appointment of 
the board. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Another question 
regarding . . . it talks about setting up a couple of funds, one for 
capital and one for programming, and of course the board I 
guess then would be responsible. 
 
But how does . . . how is that all going to work? And can 
money be transferred from one to the other if there’s a shortfall, 
or needs . . . How does that . . . Is there going to be transferring? 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

How’s that working? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just wanted to make sure I had it all 
right, Mr. Chair. And certainly the . . . one of the reasons why 
we’ve set the practices up in this way is donors like to be sure 
that when they make a donation for capital, that that is in fact 
what their donation is going towards. So the funds are distinct 
and separate, and movement does not occur between the funds. 
 
And in regards to investment of funds, the normal investment 
policies of the government are followed in any investment of 
funds. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, then 
that investment of funds, the normal government policy . . . so 
it’s really not up to the centre board, or how is that . . . who is 
going to do the investment of funds? I just, maybe some 
clarification on government policy on how that works. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Financial Administration Act of 
the government, Mr. Chair, lays out the regulations regarding 
how money can be invested. And that would be, I guess, the 
source of direction for any use of the funds. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think that pretty much covers off most of 
the questions I had. It was going to be very brief. So I’d like to 
thank the officials for their short stint and assistance. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the 
member opposite, both for his supportive comments during 
second reading of this Act and as well for recognizing the value 
of the Centre of the Arts. And as well to thank the officials for 
coming today. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you both. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just before we 
start, I’m going to ask leave just to introduce guests who are 
here for the Committee of the Whole today. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
would like to introduce to the Assembly and ask other members 
to welcome, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Dennis Paddock 
who is the director . . . executive director, I should say, and 
registrar of APEGS (Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan). And seated beside him is Bob 
McDonald, director of membership services for APEGS, who, 
as I indicated, are here to join us for the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
And I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Engineering and Geoscience 
Professions Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before we get underway I’d like to 
invite the hon. Minister of Highways to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sure, thank you very much. Seated 
immediately to my left is Susan Amrud with the Department of 
Justice. Behind me and to my left is Carl Neggers who is the 
assistant deputy minister of policy. And directly behind me is 
Dave Abbey from the Department of Transportation, a 
legislation officer. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1615) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I also would 
like to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Paddock and 
Mr. McDonald. It’s been a pleasure working with them. And I 
certainly hope that they’ll achieve what they and their 
association wants out of this today. 
 
I’d like to welcome the officials. I can guarantee that you’ll be 
here for only a short time. This should be quite quick and 
painless, as I think we all agree that for the most part this Bill is 
what everybody wants — all the parties. 
 
If I could start, Mr. Minister, would you for the record briefly 
summarize what this Bill will do — what amendments, what the 
amendments are about, and why they’re being changed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sure. First of all it updates the 
description of the scope of practice of professional engineering. 
And it also allows the Association of Professional Engineers 
and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan to recognize engineers and 
geoscientists registered in other provinces and territories of 
Canada in compliance with the agreement on internal trade. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
Act was first passed in 1996. I guess my question is why did the 
department wait this long when it was clear that the engineering 
profession wanted these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There were other groups who were, who 
are affected by this legislation, and there will actually be 
proclamation of consequential amendments in other Acts as a 
result of this. And we were allowing time to find consensus 
between APEGS and other affected groups. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My final question, I 
think, unless something arises out of this answer. 
 
When will this Bill be reviewed again? Will this be an ongoing, 
on an ongoing basis? Will you be meeting with the professional 
groups affected by these proposed amendments to ensure that 
they are pleased with its effectiveness? 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well I hope we’re flexible. It’s an 
ongoing relationship. It will be reviewed on an ongoing basis, 
but there isn’t . . . if you’re asking specifically is there a set time 
as to when this would be, come up and be reviewed again, there 
isn’t any specified time at all. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to the 
department officials. That’s all that I have. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
take the opportunity as well to thank our officials and the 
affected organizations by this . . . who are affected by this 
legislation, I should say. And also for the questions from the 
member opposite and probably more specifically, the 
opposition party generally who has worked with the affected 
organizations in helping us find an amicable resolution to the 
concerns that were raised by all the affected groups. So my 
thanks to everyone involved. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — I’m not sure if there’s any change in the 
officials, but if there is I’d invite the minister to introduce the 
new officials who have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The only change, Mr. Chair, is the 
official seated directly behind me, Mr. John Hobbs, with the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the 
minister and his officials for the time they’re gong to give us 
this afternoon, for their attendance here today. And since this 
Act covers a variety of changes, The Highways and 
Transportation Act generally, I think we will cover a wide 
variety of topics actually this afternoon. 
 
And I think what I’ll do is just . . . we’ll go through it in the 
order in which they are presented in Bill No. 49 per se. In 
clause 2(v), it’s amended by adding the words: 
 

but does include a designated trail within the meaning of 
The Snowmobile Act or any other trail or path for which a 
permit is required . . . 

 
Now that designation leads me to ask, you know, what 
circumstances or specific concerns have given rise to this 
particular change. And could you, Mr. Minister, cite a specific 
example of why it’s necessary to make this change and how it 
will benefit the people of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, specifically one example 
would be that we’ve had requests from the snowmobile clubs, 
as an example, to use the ditches. And the purpose of this 
amendment is to clarify that the department’s legal 

responsibilities would be the roadway as opposed to the ditches. 
Now that’s of course barring any situation that would obviously 
be the responsibility of the department specifically. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So can I assume from your response, Mr. 
Minister, that liability is the only consideration, or is safety of 
the general public also being taken into consideration here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It is primarily to clarify the 
department’s responsibility and liability. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In this regard, have there ever been any 
representations made to the department, Mr. Minister, 
concerning issues of safety? And I’m talking about travelling 
safety on the highways. 
 
I was just mentioning to my colleague how on a stormy night I 
was driving home and all of a sudden a set of headlights 
appeared to me, coming toward me, frankly. And in the poor 
visibility of the blowing snow and so forth, I wasn’t sure that I 
was actually going to be on the road; the headlights were on the 
wrong side of the road. 
 
Well, as I got close enough to the situation I realized it was two 
snowmobiles in the ditch. And you know, had I been a little less 
conscientious as a driver, I may have made some bad 
assumptions about where I was located on the road. 
 
Has that kind of a concern ever been raised with the department 
in terms of safety of, not the operators of the snowmobiles so 
much, but in terms of the driving public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The concern that the member identifies 
is not technically a part of this process, but it certainly is a 
concern that’s been raised to the department on a number of 
occasions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. My colleague 
just raised an issue with me — being much more familiar with 
snowmobiling and having been a snowmobile dealer and 
probably an active participant — that snowmobiles themselves 
are licensed under the highways Act, as I understand it. There is 
liability insurance, I assume, that would go with that. 
 
If they’re already paying for that type of coverage and the 
privilege of operating a snowmobile, would it not extend to the 
realm of freedom to operate in the ditches and maybe not 
excuse the government, frankly, from liability in using the 
ditches for that purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You may have a follow-up question, but 
just . . . snowmobiles are licensed under The Snowmobile Act, 
not under this specific legislation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the intent of my question I guess 
is to say if snowmobiles are legitimately licensed, and I assume 
that there are insurance provisions as part of that licensing Act, 
and if they are legal entities, for all intents and purposes having 
been licensed by the government, why should they not have the 
same privilege of protection in terms of using the ditches? Why 
should they be exempted . . . or why should the government be 
exempted from any liability in that respect? 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

If operating the snowmobiles in the ditches is part of the 
privilege of having a licensed snowmobile, why would the 
government consider itself exempt from that liability? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I apologize to the member for taking so 
long but you’ve asked a very good question. This is fairly 
technical, so I’m going to simply read from what’s been 
provided for me so I don’t do it wrong here. 
 
There’s several points. The amendment does not alter our 
responsibility and liability to the users of public highways. And 
secondly, the department does not have a mandate to provide 
the public with what are essentially recreational purposes. And 
lastly, the purpose of the amendment is to ensure that these 
recreational purposes and the liability that can arise does not 
force the Department of Highways and Transportation to divert 
its resources from highways to those recreational purposes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, as a follow-up then, can I 
assume the department will take the same view of this with 
relationship to dirt bikes, motorcycles that might end up 
travelling in the ditch for some reason, farm machinery that 
might operate in the ditch, any similar types of examples. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer is yes. And I’m just told, as 
an example, the Trans Canada Trail would be another example 
of that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’d like to move on to the next section if we 
could. Section 4 has been amended in a couple of instances 
here. And in section 4 . . . I think it’s (1)(g), it says that we have 
an addition here. It’s added after the clause 4(1)(g). And I’m 
curious, having read this addition several times, is this solely to 
facilitate voluntary arrangements with municipalities, or is it the 
thin edge of the wedge, preparatory maybe to wholesale 
downloading at some point? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Chair 
of Committees, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to members and to 
colleagues, a group of citizens from the Ukraine who I just met 
a few minutes ago when I was in the Legislative Library. 
 
They are a group that are connected with the Canada-Ukraine 
forage project and they’re from across Ukraine. I know one of 
the individuals is from an area not too far from where we’re 
from. 
 
But anyway, I’d just like all of us here to welcome them this 
afternoon. Bitaemo. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There is nothing forced here or any thin 
edge of the wedge for any way, shape, or form. This is entirely 
on a consensual basis, and also applies to First Nations reserves 
as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think at some point or other in our 
conversations in this House or privately, you have referred to 
situations where you have discussed these types of 
arrangements with other municipalities throughout the province, 
or Indian bands. 
 
Can you give me some examples of where this type of 
arrangement has worked, where it’s been successfully 
concluded, and some of the other areas you might want to 
pursue? Have you got ongoing negotiations happening with 
other municipalities or bands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — One example that we have would be 
near Lampman where the department wishes to transfer 
responsibility for a portion of Highway No. 361 as a new route 
that has been built. The adjoining municipalities have all agreed 
to the transfer, and the existing rural . . . municipal legislation 
makes them responsible for roads that are not designated as 
provincial highways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, as part of the explanation that 
came with the Bill itself, it talks about the amendment also 
contemplating agreements between the minister and private 
companies on transportation issues. Are you looking to 
privatize more of the transportation system? What have you got 
in mind when you describe these types of agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In this amendment there is no agenda 
for privatization. But an example would be where a shortline 
railway has been created under the . . . as a corporation. That’s 
where it would apply. 
 
And also, I understand, it could apply as well where authority 
for the management of a local airport is now under the . . . also 
under the umbrella of a corporation and is managing and 
operating a local airport. That’s where this amendment would 
apply. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you mentioned an 
agreement involving several communities in the Lampman area. 
I don’t know if I missed it or if you didn’t tell me, but can you 
be more detailed about the substantive nature of that agreement. 
What does it involve precisely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If the member’s willing, we would 
undertake to provide the details of that agreement. We don’t 
have it here. All I can tell you is we understand that all of the 
local governments are in agreement in wanting this to take 
place. 
 
We can provide the details for you, but we don’t have them here 
today . . . if that’s okay. 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, moving on to clause 4(1)(h), 
according to this Bill, that clause is repealed entirely and is 
substituted with a new clause. And I’d like to ask how this one 
is substantially different from the clause that was removed. 
What is included in this particular clause that makes it 
specifically different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t know whether this will answer 
specifically what the member is asking, but let me try this. The 
revised clause is needed as public improvements like airports 
and railways are devolving into private hands which gives rise 
to new forms of partnerships between the department and the 
owners and operators, and that cannot currently be 
accommodated under the existing provision. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, can I take from your comments 
then that you’re trying to adjust the legislation to accommodate 
what has happened, not to anticipate future changes. Is that the 
intent here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Essentially the answer to your question 
is yes. We’re trying to anticipate changes that are occurring. It’s 
not being driven by the legislation. We’re trying to adapt the 
legislation to accommodate the changes that are taking place 
and that we anticipate taking place into the future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. I note that 
one of the officials is not properly attired as compared to the 
last time that he was in the Assembly. And perhaps the next 
time he could be here in the proper garb again. My question . . . 
and I’ll allow the official to explain that to the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to go back to clause 4(1) that my 
colleague was addressing earlier. I wonder if you could explain 
why this change is necessary. This is the change that allows the 
government to download its responsibilities onto the 
municipalities or onto Indian bands. Why do you feel this 
clause is necessary to have in the Act, and what are you 
changing it from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The amendment only allows for 
agreements that are entirely consensual. And so under the old 
legislation even if there was an agreement between the 
department and/or the example you used, a First Nation, even if 
there was an agreement, the old Act wouldn’t allow for that 
agreement to take place. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Why do you feel it’s necessary to make 
that change, Mr. Minister? And I note you refer to First 
Nations, but the Bill itself says Indian band. Perhaps you can 
explain why the difference in terminology if you want to. It’s 
not important. It still doesn’t explain though why you feel it’s 
necessary to have this in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all in response to your first 
question, there’s no distinction at all from the legislation 
perspective about whether it’s First Nations or Indian bands. So 
I’m meaning exactly the same thing in saying that. 
 
The rationale for this is as transportation is evolving quickly 

across this province and across this country, we think we need 
to adapt. As an example in the province here we’ve created, in 
partnership with local governments, nine different area 
transportation planning committees. And those committees need 
to be able to have the flexibility to come up with unique 
arrangements around transportation that best suit the needs of 
their particular area or region. And we think this amendment 
that you’re questioning us about provides one little piece of 
assistance to them in that regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I share my 
colleague’s concern that this is simply opening up the door to 
allow the province to download its responsibilities onto the 
municipalities. Yes, today it may very well be on a voluntary 
basis. But we have certainly seen this government operate in a 
manner that it could quickly change that opinion and download 
these without having the municipalities voluntarily accepting 
that responsibility. 
 
We have seen your government deem certain things to have 
happened. We have seen them change contracts. Even though at 
the time of the change of the contract it was clearly against the 
law, it didn’t stop you from doing so. You went ahead and did it 
and then retroactively brought forward legislation to make the 
breaking of that law legal. 
 
So I don’t think that your assurance that this is voluntary is any 
comfort to any municipality across this province. If you want to 
enter into a contract with the municipality to provide services 
for a particular piece of road or provide some sort of 
maintenance or any other type of service, you can certainly do 
so, I believe, under the current legislation. But to be able to 
download that responsibility in its entirety onto that 
municipality, I don’t think is acceptable, Mr. Minister. 
 
You currently have the ability to absorb highways into the 
highway system . . . roads into the highway system for 
municipalities. Is there any legislation in place today that would 
allow you to download or to transfer responsibility of a 
particular piece of road without this clause being changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, let me reiterate that this 
amendment speaks only to consensual arrangements where it’s 
entirely voluntary. 
 
If that were to change in any way, it would have to come back 
to the Assembly for a legislative change for it not to be 
volunteer. So it would have to come back to this Assembly if 
there were any other arrangements other than voluntary or 
consensual arrangements. 
 
With respect to the second part of your question, we’re not 
aware of any situation where legislation would allow for it to be 
downloaded without agreement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What is the legislation in place then, Mr. 
Minister, for the Department of Highways to take over a piece 
of road from a municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If you’re asking, does the province have 
the jurisdiction to take over roads, the answer is yes, but that’s 
not what this legislation is about. 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes I 
recognize that that piece of legislation is not being discussed 
today. But if you have that legislation in place to be able to take 
over a municipal road into the highway system, is that strictly a 
one-way valve in that case? Or does that particular piece of 
legislation allow for the transfer back from the Department of 
Highways to a municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s the purpose of this legislation — 
is to allow where there is agreement to transfer back to Indian 
bands or to a municipality. 
 
As an example — maybe I can be clear by using an example — 
in working with local governments, if as an example we wanted 
to create a heavy haul route to take heavy vehicles off of a thin 
membrane surface road, we could work with municipalities to 
describe a route, and with it, could come some of the funding 
that would ordinarily be used in the thin membrane surface 
road. But all of these would be separate agreements and 
arrangements, and they would have to be all entirely voluntary 
and consensual. 
 
But that’s the purpose of the legislation. And it’s not, under 
current legislation, it is not . . . there is no ability for the 
province to transfer any routes, even when voluntary, back to 
local governments or to Indian bands. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From your 
example that you gave though, it sounded to me like in that case 
the road would already be in the hands of the municipality, and 
you would be entering into an agreement with them to designate 
a particular road or series of roads as a heavy haul road that you 
could in turn transfer some financial resources to maintaining 
from the provincial side to aid both your thin membrane surface 
that you’re trying to protect and to compensate the 
municipalities for those services. 
 
There is no . . . This Act then would not be necessary in my 
opinion because that clause talks about — or at least this clause 
would not be necessary — because it talks about the transfer to 
the municipality of responsibilities respecting maintenance, 
direction, management, or control. 
 
So why in your example would there be a need for this 
particular clause? Could you not simply enter into a contract 
with the municipalities to provide some additional supports for 
those heavy-haul roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Every situation will be unique and that’s 
why we’re trying to design legislation that will be very flexible 
in anticipation of even further changes in transportation. You 
are correct in describing the scenario that would allow for us to 
provide funding, as an example, to local governments on their 
own roads where we’re trying to reroute heavy hauls, and we 
might come to that sort of arrangement. 
 
But if I wasn’t clear enough in my explanation, I was 
specifically talking about roads that are currently under the 
jurisdiction of . . . under the jurisdiction of the provincial 
system, that we would come to some arrangement — if they so 
wanted locally — to provide the roads for them and transfer 
ownership of the roads to them. Or in fact, I think in fact we 
could probably even exchange roads in some cases, if it was 

desirable for the local governments or the Indian bands if that 
was an arrangement that was mutually acceptable. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I look at 
my own constituency and I don’t know of a single highway that 
any municipality would want to transfer . . . want to gain 
control of because they simply are not in the shape that anybody 
would want to take over the responsibilities of them. No. 9, 
perhaps. 
 
No 9, although it’s getting choppy, it’s certainly not getting full 
of potholes. And most of No. 18 is in good shape in our 
constituency. Although once you get further west of my 
colleague’s constituency, No. 18 is . . . well in your own terms, 
it’s fit to be turned back to gravel. Some of it already has been. 
 
But I certainly do have a number of highways in my 
constituency, Mr. Minister, that are in terrible shape and have 
been basically abandoned by the Department of Highways. And 
No. 8 is the prime example, Mr. Speaker, from the border at the 
US (United States) all the way to Moosomin. 
 
(1700) 
 
I was down to a Memorial Day service in Sherwood, North 
Dakota, which is right across the border from No. 8. The best 
highway in western North Dakota comes through Sherwood — 
they have six inches of pavement on that road. And you cross 
the border, and if you don’t have a four-wheel drive, you can’t 
drive on the road. 
 
And people come up two miles and turn off and go onto the 
grids because that’s the first access they have off of that 
highway. And it’s simply atrocious, Mr. Minister. People want 
to go from Minot and the northern part of North Dakota up to 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park. You hear a lot . . . you used 
to hear a lot of advertising on Minot for the waterslides. People 
simply can’t get there any more. And it really makes it difficult 
for the people up at Moose Mountain Provincial Park to operate 
their businesses when half of their traffic can no longer make it 
there. 
 
And it’s not just No. 8. We have 361, 318, 47, 48. They’re all, 
Mr. Minister — and you know it very well — in terrible shape, 
just like every other highway around this province. 
 
We’re turning into a new millennium. We’re going into a new 
century. But unfortunately our highway system is also doing 
that, but we’re turning back to the 19th century. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think it’s incumbent on you to approach 
the Minister of Finance to do what needs to be done to rectify 
that problem in this province. That’s your responsibility, Mr. 
Minister, and I’m asking you to live up to that responsibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll just respond very briefly to say that 
we recognize the pressures on our infrastructure and on our road 
system, especially in the last few years, with the incredible 
changes in the traffic patterns and traffic flows. 
 
That’s largely why we’ve brought this legislation forward with 
some of the amendments, to I think be more adaptive and 
receptive to the changes that are currently taking place and the 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

changes that we anticipate taking place. And that’s why, exactly 
why, we’ve got this legislation before the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
noticed that the transportation partnerships fund is a big part of 
the amendments in this particular Act. And having reviewed the 
Act itself, I notice that there’s not much new in terms of the 
name here — transportation partnerships fund — but I do notice 
that the entire section has been rewritten. 
 
And when I got to the explanatory notes, it indicated that there 
were only two new provisions in this section — one saying that 
money will go into the fund if directed so by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, and secondly, a portion of money being 
repaid by shortline railway companies would also go into this 
fund. 
 
Now if we only had those two additions to this particular 
section, why was it necessary to rewrite the whole section? 
What was accomplished by that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Largely, I’m told, it was a cleanup of 
the wording. It was very awkward to read and understand. And 
I’m told that the new amendment therefore does completely 
rewrite it as you describe it. And it’s just simply to clean up the 
wording, primarily. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to delve a little further 
into this section of the rewrite then. 
 
Section (a) refers to monies that go into the transportation 
partnerships fund and it says, money “received by the minister 
pursuant to transportation partnership agreements;” specifically, 
as the first item there. 
 
Would you be able to give us an example of one or two of those 
agreements that generate funds for this particular fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have a number of agreements with 
the mining industry and with the forest industry. 
 
And if I can describe briefly the way the agreements work is we 
would, in an arrangement or agreement with a specific 
company, in exchange for allowing them to carry overweights 
or weights over the regular permitted amount, and without 
having to permit them each time, we would agree to an amount 
of efficiency gains that they would receive as a result of 
allowing them to go overweight. And then 50 per cent of those 
efficiency gains would be retained by the company, and 50 per 
cent of those efficiency gains would be paid into the 
transportation partnerships fund. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to follow up that particular example then. I know that you 
have conducted those kind of agreements with companies such 
as Federated Co-operatives, and I believe Sask Wheat Pool has 
a similar kind of agreement. Let me go to maybe a smaller type 
of situation that I’m wondering whether the department is 
interested in entertaining and what would happen. 
 
It’s been brought to my attention that there’s a gentleman in this 
province who has a trailer that he uses to haul hay. And because 
the most common form of hay hauling now is in the form of 

round bales, there’s dimension requirements and safety 
requirements that are associated with hauling that particular 
commodity. 
 
This particular individual has designed a solid form of support 
at the back end of his trailer and because of the shape of the 
bale, of course the support has to be rounded similarly. My 
understanding is, though, that because part of the curvature of 
that support extends a foot or so behind the end of the trailer, 
he’s been deemed illegal to haul. But if I understand correctly 
also, he is saying that if he pays the Department of Highways 5 
cents a kilometre he will be allowed to drive that particular unit 
on Saskatchewan roads. 
 
Is that what you would consider to be a transportation 
agreement? Is that the kind of example that would fall under the 
purview of these types of arrangements? Or would that be 
deemed something else? 
 
This individual frankly is very unhappy that he’s being asked to 
pay that fee to allow him to operate. And I’m wondering if the 
department looks on that as just a normal way to conduct 
business, or whether it’s not leveraging him, frankly, to allow 
him to conduct his business the way it needs to be done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think there will always be anomalies. 
And I think the case of . . . the example that you provide is a bit 
of an unusual example. 
 
But the carrier will have the choice — where it’s 
over-dimensional or overweight — to permit individually each 
time or to enter into a partnership. And I don’t know the case 
specifically that you’re referring to, but I understand that 
probably that person has chosen to enter into an arrangement 
that would be a partnership as opposed to permitting each time. 
 
But there will always be unique circumstances. And we try to 
design legislation that fits all but we’re never successful usually 
in doing that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I guess there is two parts supplemental to that 
question. I guess what I was wondering basically is as follows: 
are these partnerships agreements restricted just to larger 
operations or do they extend to the smaller operations? And if 
they do extend to smaller operations, is this the kind of example 
that would necessarily be included in these types of things? 
 
What we’ve got here is an individual with a safety feature 
basically built into his truck to make the movement of bulk hay 
much more acceptable, I would think, in terms of safety 
standards. And yet he’s being asked to pay a fee in order to 
accomplish that because of that safety feature extending out 
about a foot beyond the length of his trailer. 
 
So it’s a two-part question: do small operations qualify for these 
partnership agreements, and do they necessarily have to always 
contribute funds back to the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, first of all, the agreements are not 
restricted, not restricted to just large shippers or carriers, 
although for all intents and purposes they largely are with larger 
carriers; although they’re not restricted to large carriers. 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

The fees will always vary by agreement, and my official just 
suggested, if in this particular case you would want to meet 
with them about that — about the specific case that you 
described — he’d be more than happy to. Because there will 
always be new and developing technologies as well that we as a 
department would be interested in. So we’d be only too happy 
to look at that specific case that you’ve described here today. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Further to 
this particular line, if an individual owned three livestock 
hauling units and contracted with a Hutterite colony for 
instance, or some other large hog barn, to move their hogs on a 
regular basis — weekly or monthly, whatever the arrangement 
might be — but it required them to be overweight for part of 
their run before they got to a primary highway, is that the kind 
of arrangement the department would be willing to entertain in 
terms of one of these partnerships? Some provision that would 
allow them to run overweight on the grid road or the rural road 
until they hit a primary highway? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the short answer to your question 
is yes, we’re prepared to look at any arrangement. But 
obviously, I mean it would have to be practical for the shipper 
or carrier and for the department. I don’t think we’d want to get 
ourselves into a situation where we had literally thousands of 
arrangements and absolutely impossible to administer because 
we just . . . I mean, the department wouldn’t have the capacity. 
But I mean we’re very open to looking at any arrangement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So, Mr. Minister, could I ask: is there a dollar 
value associated with the practical quote, “element” of these 
agreements. I mean is there a minimum value of some sort that 
you might want to consider? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, there isn’t, there isn’t right now. 
The program is still obviously evolving. It’s very new, and I 
mean maybe there would be a time when we would want to 
look at establishing a dollar value, but right now there isn’t. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I want to move on to the second 
part of this rewrite on the transportation partnerships fund. In 
clause 4(b), it’s talking about the terms and conditions: 
 

. . . the minister may use the Transportation Partnerships 
Fund to do any or all of the following: 
 

And specifically, it refers here to: 
 

develop, promote, market, and provide transportation 
technology, expertise, goods and services inside and 
outside Saskatchewan; 

 
That’s a fairly wide-ranging mandate, I would say, and I’m 
interested to find out that the Department of Highways, frankly, 
is in that business of developing, promoting, marketing, and 
providing expertise goods and services both in and out of the 
province. 
 
So I would ask the minister if you could give me an account of 
what exactly the department does in that regard and tell me 
what products, technology, goods and services that the 

department is looking to develop, promote, and market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me just explain briefly. But first of 
all, if the member’s of a view that there’s some change here, 
there’s not; it’s exactly the same. There’s nothing changed in 
the new legislation, okay. 
 
Some examples of the technology would be central tire 
inflation. The department’s been working with central tire 
inflation where low pressure tires are believed to cause less 
damage to the roads. International Road Dynamics, IRD out of 
Saskatoon has a system that they’re working on and developing. 
GPS, which is a Global Positioning System which can monitor 
speeds and volumes of traffic which obviously will have impact 
on our road infrastructure. 
 
Certainly there’s a lot of work taking place right now with 
respect to border crossings which would be of immense interest 
to especially trucking firms where you could electronically 
monitor vehicles as opposed to having them specifically 
stopping. 
 
I know at the sixth annual international symposium, that is just I 
think probably winding up today in Saskatoon, there is a lot of 
this technology that people from across the world are here in 
Saskatchewan looking at. One of the ones that was of particular 
interest to me that our province is not yet very involved in this, 
although we have been doing a little bit of preliminary work 
with it, is high speed weight of vehicles. 
 
So a semi could . . . a large tractor trailer could be driving at 
almost regular road speeds and be weighed as they’re going by 
and they would essentially, they would essentially be classed so 
that if they never had any incidents of overweights they would 
be allowed to use the high speed weight each time with almost 
never being pulled in on random selection. This is being used in 
the States and other countries right now. And obviously time to 
shippers is money, so a weight system like this would be 
something that they’d be very involved in. 
 
We are only involved at the very beginning stage of those such 
things, but that’s some of the technologies that we’re talking 
about in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, further to that. Is the 
Department of Highways actually invested in as a partner, as an 
active partner, in pursuing some of these technologies? Do we 
have public money invested in, for instance, the Saskatoon firm 
that is developing GPS technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With respect to the example I used of 
Global Positioning System, that technology has not yet been 
proven; I think it’s very close to being proven. So the province 
hasn’t put any money into that, although we certainly have been 
working with the . . . this specific company that I described, but 
there’s been no provincial dollars put into that yet. 
 
The one area that we have put money into through the 
partnership fund — if you’re describing that as public money, 
which I would — then it . . . we have, into the research on the 
central tire inflation project that I described earlier. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I noticed, Mr. Minister, that you used the term 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

“yet” when you described the GPS effort that’s being 
undertaken. Does the department intend to invest in that? I 
don’t think there’s any question about whether GPS technology 
will be a fact of the future, I think it’s already a fact in many 
vehicles right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I used the term “yet” specifically for a 
reason and that is once the technology is proven, it would be, 
absolutely it would be our intent to put money into it. We 
believe that that kind of technology would be technology that 
would in the . . . I was going to say long term, but probably 
even in the short term prove to be cost-effective for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
If we can ensure through new technology that vehicles are not 
travelling overweight or over speed without having huge 
numbers of people out monitoring it, then I think that’s a good 
investment for the people. And absolutely, if once it’s proven, 
we are committed to putting funding into that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the minister’s 
response and in some ways I’m quite sympathetic, but on a 
philosophical side, I’m a little concerned about that kind of 
technology. That sounds a little bit too much like Big Brother 
watching from that eye in the sky. 
 
Nevertheless, let’s move on to another area of this particular 
rewrite. Section 4(d) refers to monies being paid to the advisory 
committee that had been appointed, and I’d like to know a little 
more about this advisory committee. I see later on that it refers 
to six persons, of whom not more than three may be employees 
of the Crown. 
 
Would you tell me about the committee. Can you give me the 
names of the people on that committee, and exactly what kind 
of advice do they give you in terms of the transportation 
partnerships fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, I hope we get all of this 
accurately. First of all, just with respect to the Global 
Positioning System and your concern that you identified just 
from the last line of questioning, this would all be voluntary, as 
we’ve described even in the other parts of the legislation. 
 
And it would be shippers and carriers that would see this as an 
opportunity to find and create greater efficiencies by using the 
new Global Positioning System. And obviously those 
efficiencies would be paid into the partnership fund, and that’s 
largely why it’s being designed. So it would be good for them 
and for us. 
 
Now with respect to the creation of the committee, I’m 
understanding that there is no change in the wording at all right 
now, the logic for the creation of the committee. 
 
And first of all, let me backtrack a little bit. Obviously the 
members will have to be paid at whatever rate members 
ordinarily are paid for serving the public of Saskatchewan. So 
they will be paid a logical per diem and expenses. 
 
But what we’re trying to achieve in setting up this committee is 
to find people that are, first of all, most affected and most 
knowledgeable in the area of transportation in Saskatchewan 

and how it might affect . . . how it might have impact on our 
economy. 
 
And I don’t yet know the members of the committee like that, 
but those are the sorts of people that we’re looking for. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I guess it would be of interest to 
me, and maybe to the House as a whole, if you could delineate 
the responsibilities of that committee. Are they going to be in 
fact the decision makers in terms of which partnership plans or 
proposals are acceptable and which ones are not? 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, this committee would not be the 
decision-making body, they would be advisory, as I think is 
described under the legislation. And they would hopefully 
provide for us . . . Hopefully they will be made up of the most 
knowledgeable people that we can possibly find, and would 
provide advice to the department about where we would invest 
this money best in the infrastructure that currently exists. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, the legislation says that of that 
six-person committee, three may be employees of the Crown in 
right of Saskatchewan. Are we talking about employees of the 
Department of Highways, or are we talking about employees of 
other government departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That would be the current intention. I 
can tell you that one of the people most logically would 
probably be the deputy minister of Highways. The current 
intention is to have the other two probably from the department. 
 
But I don’t think . . . I’m told that the legislation wouldn’t 
necessarily require them to be from the department, but that’s 
the most logical choice right now. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can I just return briefly to the GPS issue that 
we were talking about earlier. 
 
I understand that there has been considerable attention and 
development to this particular type of technology by private 
industry, particularly in the United States, and some of it 
actually done extensively here in Canada. 
 
Is there a specific purpose that the Department of Highways, 
and by extension the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Saskatchewan, is there a specific purpose that can be 
played by us getting involved in that particular technology 
when you consider the fact that the private sector has really 
developed an extensive capability in that regard already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think one of the things I want to do is 
clarify with respect to the makeup of the board, because we’re 
just discussing here and we think that we may have misled you, 
although maybe not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. 
 
The board makeup right now that we would start with will be 
with four members, with the ability to expand to six. But the 
board makeup at the beginning will first of all include three 
people from the private sector, and the fourth person that we 
would begin with would most likely be the deputy minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

Now if we wanted to expand it, then the next two logical people 
would be . . . if we expand it to six, the next two logical people 
would be probably from the department, although it doesn’t 
have to be. But the beginning, it would be made up of three 
from the private sector and one from the department, the deputy 
minister. 
 
Now with respect to the question about the technology and why 
the province or the department become involved, I mean we 
compliment the private sector for the wonderful technology that 
they’re developing in transportation. The province thinks it’s 
important that it should be involved because . . . Then often the 
private sector will want the department and the province to be 
involved. 
 
We think it’s important around issues of safety and around lots 
of the examples that I used around finding efficiencies that will 
sustain our infrastructure longer. So that’s why we think the 
province needs to be involved. But clearly the private sector is 
critical in this development. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, could we characterize the 
province’s development then, most interested in the area of 
policing, looking after the resources of the province and the 
road infrastructure as opposed to the efficiencies that might be 
gained by the trucking industry? 
 
Are you looking primarily at efficiencies that can be gained for 
the Department of Highways or the Highway Traffic Board 
generally in terms of that industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, I don’t think it’s fair to characterize 
it that way. I think what we’re really . . . we’re primarily 
looking for is the issues around efficiencies around public 
transportation and safety. Those would be our higher priorities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to . . . in this regard, in 
this particular section of the Act, the rewrite here, the 
amendments, I have encountered some confusion in terms of 
who’s calling the shots in controlling the particular fund, the 
partnership fund. 
 
In some instances I see where the responsibility for control of 
the fund is dedicated to the minister himself. But in other areas I 
get the impression that the Minister of Finance or the Treasury 
Board has more pertinent control. So I’d like the minister to 
explain to me if he could or would, who is ultimately in control 
of this partnership fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In any expenditure of public funds, we 
would want to be as accountable and transparent as we possibly 
could be. And every situation will probably vary a little bit. But 
it’s a very good question. Ultimately, we would be of the view 
that it would be the minister of — ultimately — the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I’m going 
to move on a little further in this particular effort here today. 
 
I’d like to move to section 18, amended as follows. And it has 
to do with expropriation and I think you’re changing the word 
. . . or adding the word, take possession, instead of — no, not 
instead of — after the words, enter on. And I looked at your 

explanation here and I’m a little bit concerned here. 
 
Basically as I understand it, this particular provision allows the 
department to undertake whatever project it is going to do; it’s 
allowing the department to get on with its job before the 
expropriation proceedings have ended. 
 
And I’m wondering if that isn’t just a bit presumptuous. 
Whether in terms of expropriation, which can often be a pretty 
difficult process for the people involved — whether it’s the 
department or the landowner — whether it wouldn’t be wise to 
allow that particular process to be fully completed, maybe all 
the legal remedies that are available to the landowner be 
exhausted before the department actually undertakes its work. Is 
this not a bit presumptuous on the part of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told I can blame the lawyers and 
any chance I have to do that I maybe should . . . I have the 
protection of the Chamber by doing that here today. 
 
No, there was a mistake made in 1997 with apparently that 
section being removed. So it’s a re-establishment of the section 
around expropriation. 
 
And I think just generally, expropriation is always done only in 
the public interest. I would hope there isn’t a time when 
expropriation is used in a heavy-handed way. 
 
It will always be difficult for the individual affected, but 
expropriation is always for the general good and not for the 
department or for anyone else specifically. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, since we have the benefit of 
legal counsel here maybe they could tell me, is it not possible 
that somebody on appeal could override an expropriation order? 
And if that is possible, is it necessary for the department to have 
the privilege or the right to embark on a project prior to that 
happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told it is possible but it would have 
to be shown or proven that the expropriation that took place was 
outside of the department’s jurisdiction when that expropriation 
took place. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In the interest of time, I think we’ll conclude 
our questions. Thank you very much to the minister and to his 
officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Chair, I want to take the 
opportunity to thank my officials for assisting me here today 
and to thank the member and members opposite for their very 
thoughtful questions. 
 
And I would therefore move Bill No. 49 without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1745) 
 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70  The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 
Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’éducation (élimination de la taxe professionnelle) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Local Improvements 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Mentally Disordered 
Persons Amendment Act, 1999 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I move that the amendments be now 
read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — By leave . . . It says either/or, Mr. 
Speaker, I picked the wrong one. Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 16  The Justice Statutes (Consumer Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

Bill No. 31 — The Police Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Centre 
of the Arts Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Engineering and Geoscience 
Professions Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my left is 
Larry Spanier, the deputy minister; next to Larry is Debbie 
Wilkie, who is director of marketing and corporate affairs. On 
my right is Bryon Burnett, who is the assistant deputy minister 
of operations. Behind Bryon is Bob Hersche, executive director 
of policy and planning; and behind me is Donna Johnson, 
executive director of corporate management. And we have Rob 
Greenwood, who’s the assistant deputy minister of policy. 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

Subvote (EC01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. Madam, Madam Minister, I want to welcome 
again your officials. We’ve had a chance to meet a few times 
before. 
 
Since we’ve had, Madam Minister, some time before to go 
through several of the questions, I’m going to — in the interests 
of time — try to zero in on one or two of the items that are still 
outstanding in my mind. And I would . . . hopefully we can get 
those items covered in the time that we have left. 
 
The first question then, Madam Minister, is looking at the — 
and this is about where we left off — we were looking at the 
annual report of SOCO, the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. And a couple of things that really stuck out, as I 
mentioned before — this one in particular I’d like a comment 
on if I could, Madam Minister. 
 
This is the item regarding the Regina Motion Picture, Video & 
Sound. From what I see here, the Regina Motion Picture, Video 
& Sound has received a considerable loan from SOCO. I’ve 
also noticed in the records that the president and CEO, Mr. 
Zach Douglas, is a director. He’s also one of the shareholders. 
 
Can you assure me that there was no conflict of interest when 
this loan was approved by the SOCO board? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I’d be pleased to 
answer that. Zach Douglas was never a shareholder. He was 
only on the board because of . . . by virtue of our investment. 
Sometimes if we make an investment, part of the terms of the 
investment are we get representation on the board. 
 
He is no longer on the board, and the current CEO is also no 
longer on the board. 
 
(1800) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, just to confirm that — 
Zach Douglas was not a shareholder of that company? The 
information I have has him listed as a shareholder. 
 
And subsequent to that, Madam Minister, there’s another two 
companies that received loans of, one, $450,000 and one 
350,000. The first one is Bear Necessities Productions Inc., the 
other one is Northwest Pictures Inc. And I’m wondering if Mr. 
Douglas was a shareholder of those companies as well, and was 
he involved in the decision, because they’re subsidiaries of 
Regina Motion Picture. 
 
Was he involved in the decision to allocate money to those as 
well? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to make a 
point I made before, he was never a shareholder in any of these 
companies. It would be a total conflict of interest to be a 
shareholder in a company that you were making decisions 
about, in terms of loaning money to that company. 
 
Sometimes part of the undertaking, if you have an equity 
investment in a company, part of the equity investment, part of 

the terms of the equity investment is that you get representation 
on the board. 
 
So if they sit on the board it’s because that was part of the 
agreement with the company, that we get board representation, 
because we want to see what’s going on. And then at some 
point, in the case of the first company mentioned, we’re 
satisfied that our interest is being protected, so we no longer 
have board representation. 
 
But it’s not that person as an individual, it’s that person as 
CEO. SOCO, they’re representing SOCO, and it was part of the 
deal that was signed with the company. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Now I recognize that being on the board is not an unusual 
occurrence in situations like that. But let me . . . another area 
that I wanted to look at, and this again is still under the SOCO 
portfolio. And this was a company called Unitec — Unitec 
International. And I think we just started talking about that one 
at the last time. 
 
And I think your response at the time was that Unitec 
International has — and I think you indicated — has set up an 
office in Saskatchewan, or plans to do that. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, that’s correct. In Regina. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, the amount of money that 
is going to Unitec is listed as $2 million, I think on a loan basis. 
And I was curious because this particular company is 
headquartered in British Columbia. When I was looking at 
some of the records I found that there was money loaned to this 
company over a period of time. Could you tell me when the 
different loans were approved and allocated to Unitec? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, to the member 
opposite, I’d be pleased to answer that. The original approval 
was August 10, 1998; SOCO approved a $2 million investment 
in Unitec, and then the money was disbursed over a period of 
time, which is not uncommon. You approve in principle the 
idea of a $2 million investment, but the money is disbursed as 
the company meets the requirements of the different stages of 
development. 
 
So it goes from August ’98, and then Thursday, June 22, 2000, 
Unitec closed the day . . . or this is the trading of the shares 
today. So it went over a period of time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I guess the concern that I have in this particular 
company, when I looked at this — and this was I hope not an 
example of all of your investments of SOCO corporation — but 
I noticed from their annual report of 1999 that their current 
assets have diminished to 1.665 million from 2.5 million the 
year before. This was November 30, 1999. 
 
I also noticed that the current liabilities had increased 
considerably during that period of time, and I also noticed that 
there was revenues of only 1,061,000 during that period of time. 
 
I guess my question here is that the statements are indicating a 
very poor return, a very poor operation, and yet in the . . . the 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2000 

last advance of your $2 million loan occurred in early, I believe 
. . . or late 1999 or early 2000. It would seem to me that that is 
not good stewardship of a company. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, a couple of comments. 
 
First of all, they’re current with all their obligations. And we 
monitor a company like this carefully. This is a cyclical 
industry; it goes in cycles. And so it depends. They may land a 
very big contract and all of those numbers change very 
dramatically. 
 
So what you find with . . . you’ve got to remember, if SOCO’s 
involved in these companies it’s because they are higher risks 
than what the banks or credit unions will entertain. And actually 
just this week I met with the CEOs of these companies from 
across Canada. And the one from Alberta, as I mentioned in the 
House, is much more open in its criteria than we are. 
 
So we’re quite careful about who we lend to, but they tend to be 
riskier so they will go in cycles. It’s not uncommon for a 
company to go through a cycle which is a difficult cycle, then 
they get the product out, they land a series of big contracts, and 
those numbers change over time. But from our records they’re 
current and we don’t have them on watch or anything at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Madam Minister, that is somewhat troubling 
to me. I noticed from their president’s or the Chairman’s 
message that there was investment in Indonesia at a time when 
the market in Indonesia was certainly very risky. 
 
I noticed also that under the section bad debts, for 1999, it was 
$481,000 with only revenue of 1 million. To me there should be 
red flags going up everywhere in this particular company. And 
when you look at the debt-to-equity ratio it’s a way out of 
whack. 
 
I guess, Madam Minister, my question would be: these red flags 
should have caused, I believe, some further investigation into 
this company. And who was responsible for continuing to put 
money into this company? Was it the board? And how was the 
Chairman of the board . . . no I’ll leave it there. How was this 
decision made, based on that kind of information? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite: we are now going into territory where I’m not 
prepared to go. Companies have a right to a certain amount of 
confidentiality about their business activities. And we are not 
here to manage their companies. We’re not here to say sorry 
you can’t invest there, you shouldn’t be doing this. 
 
All I can say is that these folks monitor these investments on a 
regular basis. This company is current. There is no suggestion 
that they are behind in any of their commitments or the 
commitments that they made to us when the money was lent. 
 
And to go further is way beyond the scope and I’m not going 
there. I’m not getting into, in the legislature of the province of 
Saskatchewan, taking a company and going through details that 
shouldn’t be before the legislature. It is current. 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — So, Madam Minister, it’s probably current, 
but we are talking about public money here that was loaned 
through SOCO, which is a responsibility of your department. 
And the numbers that I’m quoting are not private numbers; 
they’re not confidential numbers. They’re numbers that are 
obtained through the yearly disclosures by these companies. 
 
It just seems to me that the monitoring of this was a bit, maybe 
. . . it should have been — I’d better word this plainly — these 
red flags should have caused some concern, that apparently 
you’re assuring me that are not of concern. 
 
And I wanted to know, Madam Minister, the president and 
CEO, when did he leave the position as president and CEO of 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite — Zach Douglas left March 1, by the way — what you 
have to look at when you’re looking at what occurs in an 
organization, is its track record. 
 
And what I’m saying to the member opposite is this. This 
organization has lent $37.7 million over the course of the period 
of time since it’s been created. The loss is $50,000. They’ve 
lost 50; that is, they have had one bad account to the tune of 
$50,000. 
 
If you took any private-sector lender and said here’s the track 
record, I wouldn’t be questioning these people on where they 
are with a particular account — and it’s not appropriate anyway 
— but I wouldn’t be because I’d say, the track record here is 
that you look like you are pretty diligent and doing your job. 
This would be better than a lot of banks and a lot of credit 
unions in terms of that track record. 
 
So then to return to your question, March 1 was when Zach 
Douglas left. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I 
appreciate that assurance. I hope that these accounts, in fact, are 
as secure as you have led us to believe here. 
 
In the interest of time, I have no further questions. And I would 
like to thank you and your officials for helping me out, 
clarifying these particular points. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (EC01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EC02), (EC05), (EC07), (EC06), (EC13), (EC12), 
(EC04), (EC11), (EC09), (EC10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 167 

 
Subvote (EC02) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 
 



June 22, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Subvote (SO01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 154 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
I’d like to thank the officials and I’d like to thank the member 
opposite for some very good questions. I think over the course 
of this we’ve had some good exchanges. So I thank you very 
much and I move the committee rise and report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:19 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


