





























































Hansard: June 07, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1613 
 June 7, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of many people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, dozens of names appear on these sheets. They are 
all from the community of Invermay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to present to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Lanigan, 
Guernsey, and Drake. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of their hospitals 
and in particular Lanigan and Watrous. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Lockwood,, Lanigan, Guernsey, and Nokomis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 

communities of North Battleford, Allan, Elstow, and Bradwell. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the future of the hospitals in Lanigan and 
Watrous. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Elstow, and Allan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Addley: — I’d like to present a petition requesting that 
smoking be banned in all public places. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions were collected by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a 
petition requesting that smoking be banned in all public places. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions were collected by the youth of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today to present about forced amalgamation. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Invermay . . . Invermay. 
These people are very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about forced 
amalgamation. The last sheet’s all Invermay too. 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures here are all from Buena Vista. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about hospital closures. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Lanigan, Lockwood, and 
Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned with hospital closures. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The signatures are from Allan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today in regards to the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Elstow and Allan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of the citizens of the community of Allan who 

are concerned about the closures of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Watrous and Lanigan hospitals remain open. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the petitioners, or the signatures on this petition are from 
Allan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
confiscation of municipal reserve accounts. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Courval, Mortlach, and Coderre. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good citizens of 
Guernsey and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

To legislate a total ban of smoking in public places and 
workplaces in the province; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Strasbourg, Duval, 
Govan, and Bulyea; 
 
And to ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain 
open. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I will make a notice of a written 
question. I give notice I shall on day no. 60 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
much did SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SaskWater, and 
SaskPower spend on advertising in the last fiscal year? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, two special guests seated in your 
gallery. And I would ask them to stand as I introduce them, 
please. 
 
His Excellency Dato Jocklin, High Commissioner of Brunei 
Darussalam, and Mrs. Datin Meliah, wife of the High 
Commissioner. 
 
His Excellency is in Regina on his first official visit to our 
province. He is meeting with the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training, the mayor of Regina, and 
officials of the fire management and forest protection branch of 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management). 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that you hosted the High 
Commissioner at a luncheon today that was attended by some 
members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have the honour of meeting with His Excellency and his wife 
this afternoon. Please join with me in welcoming His 
Excellency, the High Commissioner of Brunei Darussalam, and 
Mrs. Meliah. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition it is my pleasure to join with the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development in welcoming His 
Excellency Dato Jocklin, the High Commissioner of Brunei 
Darussalam, and Mrs. Datin Meliah, wife of the High 
Commissioner. 
 
I was one of those members that had the good fortune of 
meeting the High Commissioner at lunch. And while his stay in 
Saskatchewan this time around will be a short one, after 
learning about all of the wonderful golf courses in this province, 

he has assured us that he will be returning to further explore 
some of the golfing opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly, a number of very special guests seated in our gallery 
today. I’ll be telling you more about them later in my 
ministerial statement regarding the appointment of a Provincial 
Advisory Committee Of Older Persons. 
 
Joining us today are some of the members who have been 
appointed to the committee and I’d ask them to stand — Don 
King, Frank Bellamy from Regina, Wes Ashwin from 
Saskatoon, Doreen Mowers from Moose Jaw, and Frank 
Mirasty from Meadow Lake. 
 
Please join me in welcoming those guests to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a second group of special guests here today, the Last 
Mountain Seniors’ Education Committee are visiting the 
legislature today. 
 
This group is part of the outreach program of the Seniors’ 
Education Centre at the University of Regina and is joined 
today by Don King, who I just introduced to you and who is 
director of the education centre. 
 
This group works with older adults to foster active living, 
lifelong learning, and healthy lifestyles. For the past nine years 
they have planned and delivered programs to over a thousand 
registrants in the Last Mountain area. They do prove that there 
is lifelong learning. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group later this afternoon 
and on behalf of the government, I would like to welcome them 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join 
with the government in welcoming the Last Mountain Seniors’ 
Education Committee. A lot of the members live in my 
constituency. It’s great to see them here and I hope they have an 
enjoyable visit. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure to introduce to you today the kindergarten 
through grade 9 students from the Weyburn Christian School. 
Their teachers and parents are with them. 
 
This is a wonderful school and the parents are to be commended 
for starting this school and through diligence and hard work 
keeping it going. Some of these students were frequent visitors to 
my campaign office last September and I think we have some 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

future politicians in this group. I’d like everyone in the 
Assembly to help me welcome them in the east gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I want to join my colleague and welcome all the 
elders that are here today, but especially one elder — Frank 
Mirasty from Meadow Lake, the Flying Dust Band. 
 
I want to point out to Mr. Mirasty that I’ve met many of his 
family and many of his grandchildren and his children over the 
years, and he’s got an excellent family. And I know that they’ve 
had some difficult days in the past but I wanted to encourage 
him to continue his fine work and his fine example of what a 
leader should be in the Aboriginal community. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Potholes Fixed on Highway No. 4 by Local Residents 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
unable to be in the House, Mr. Speaker, because of some 
pressing matters related to my critic responsibilities on behalf of 
the official opposition. 
 
Unfortunately while I was away I missed one of those rare 
occasions to introduce constituents visiting the House from 
Cypress Hills. Although introductions were accomplished by 
one of my colleagues, I wish to reiterate that the visitors were 
members of grade 12 class of another one of those fine schools 
in the constituency of Cypress Hills — Eastend School. And 
this class gave me an hour of their time to answer questions a 
few weeks ago, and I regret having missed the chance to 
introduce them to you personally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in case there was any confusion or problem with mistaken 
identity, it was my brother Dennis who accompanied that group 
here, in addition to their teacher Shelley Morvik. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was, as I indicated earlier, preoccupied 
with helping the citizens of the Val Marie area repair potholes 
in Highway No. 4. Now cynics might call it old-fashioned 
politics, but whatever it was, I and my colleague from 
Cannington, were doing it by the spade full — literally and 
figuratively. 
 
A group of nearly 50 individuals led by the mayor, Robert 
Ducan, and reeve of the RM (rural municipality) Mike Waldner, 
took the initiative to get something accomplished which seemed 
impractical or impossible maybe to those with lesser vision. 
With co-operation and joint effort, the volunteers dug out, 
cleaned, and repaired 28 kilometres of highway, which had 
been pockmarked with potholes since earlier this spring. 
 
I salute the effort of the people involved, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank them for showing what can be accomplished with 
determination. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

People of Val Marie 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that 
different people can draw different conclusions from the events of 
yesterday in Val Marie. That of course is our right. 
 
But there is one inescapable fact on which we can all agree, and it 
is this: the people of Val Marie saw a problem; they acted to 
correct it. For this act of community determination, they deserve 
our respect and they have earned our admiration. It can be put no 
more simply than that. 
 
As Mayor Ducan said: “the work bee has been a positive event.” 
Positive I would suggest in at least two ways. One, the people of 
Val Marie, crew members of the Highway department, and a 
couple of itinerant workers from the Sask Party showing their 
usual expertise with a shovel, patched a significant stretch of 
Highway 4. They got the job done. 
 
Two, and more significantly: they provided a living demonstration 
of one of the fundamental principles of living in a democratic 
society. We all have individual rights that are protected by the 
instrument of the individual, the government. Those rights are best 
guaranteed by active participation in society, by the vigorous 
exercise of our responsibilities to our communities and our fellow 
citizens. 
 
The people of Val Marie gave us all an excellent lesson in the 
balance between rights and responsibilities, and we thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Val Marie Residents Pave Highway 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to send my salutes to the people of Val Marie. To Mike Ducan, the 
mayor; and Mike . . . Robert Ducan, the mayor; and Mike 
Waldner, the reeve, and to the 50 people that showed up to shovel 
asphalt and clean out the potholes, Mr. Speaker. They did an 
excellent job. 
 
And fact is, Mr. Speaker, this event I found on the Internet under 
SASKABUSH. And they wrote a very interesting little article 
about this and I would like to quote from it, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 
 

Tired of waiting for the government to get off its red-taped 
. . . (backside) and repair the horribly neglected highways, 
the desperados bravely walked into a department of 
highways compound, swiped the equipment and the 
materials and paved a . . . stretch of highway near the small 
town in southwest Saskatchewan. 

 
That small town, Mr. Speaker, being Val Marie. The article 
goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

“We can’t have this kind of thing going on,” said the 
outraged Premier of Saskatchewan, “The next thing you 
know, people are going to expect to have safe, drivable 
highways. Those standards are just too high to be 
realistically maintained” (Mr. Speaker). 

 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

The Premier added that he was content with the current 
state of highways, pronounced recently as merely 
“hazardous” . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Val Marie and community took back 
into their own hands, control of their own lives, which had been 
taken away by this government. I congratulate them again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Awareness Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the week of June 4 to June 10 is 
Tourism Awareness Week as we promote and celebrate 
Saskatchewan as well as increase the awareness of tourism’s 
benefit to the entire population of Saskatchewan. 
 
Tourism generates $1.14 billion in revenue for Saskatchewan 
each year and employs about 42,000 people. That’s one of 
every 11 workers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tourism is Saskatchewan’s fastest growing industry. In fact, in 
1998-99 Saskatchewan enjoyed the highest visitation numbers 
in over a decade. And this year tourism inquiries in the first 
quarter of the year have nearly doubled over the numbers of 
inquiries from the same period last year. 
 
More than 30 events have been planned to celebrate 
Saskatchewan’s Tourism Awareness Week. Everything from 
agricultural fairs and rodeos to musical festivals, fishing 
tournaments, and community sports days will take place across 
Saskatchewan to kick off the new tourist season. I’m sure in the 
days to come members will be speaking in the House about 
some of those events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s a wonderful place to live and a 
fantastic place to visit and the people of this province are great 
ambassadors. We look forward to sharing our province with the 
many visitors that will arrive over the next few months. 
 
I want to thank Tourism Saskatchewan for getting all of us to 
think about the importance of tourism to this province, and for 
also reminding us of one more reason in a long list of reasons 
why our province is the best place in which to live in Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert 4-H Beef Cattle Show and Sale 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour today to rise so that I might bring mention to our 
Assembly of an event that took place in Prince Albert. This 
event was so huge that it took two days . . . it required two days 
in order to complete the event. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was 
almost midnight of the second day before completion was 
realized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to the Prince Albert and area 4-H 
beef cattle annual show and sale. And the two days of Sunday, 
June 4, and Monday, June 5 were jam-packed with competitions 

as youths from seven different clubs demonstrated their skills in 
judging, grooming, and showing their calves as they highlighted 
the Saskatchewan beef industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert 4-H beef show and sale is 
arguably the largest in Saskatchewan, and attracts some of the 
most aggressive bidding as buyers try to outbid each other for 
the honour of supporting tomorrow’s beef producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s beef industry is the least 
supported by government of all agricultural sectors and yet we 
are constantly reminded that it is the most viable in today’s 
agricultural economy. 
 
These young people from the surrounding district of Prince 
Albert have clearly indicated that Saskatchewan beef industry is 
a proud choice for their future. Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure 
to have participated in the Monday night sale and proudly 
purchased one of the 120 finished steers offered for auction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly in joining me 
in congratulating the 4-H’ers in the Prince Albert district. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Real Carriere wins Scholarship to Lester B. Pearson College 

 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
tell my colleagues about a young man from my constituency 
who has won a tremendous scholarship to a prestigious school. 
 
Real Carriere from Cumberland House has been awarded a 
$50,000 scholarship to the Lester B. Pearson United World 
College of the Pacific in Victoria, BC (British Columbia). 
Lester B. Pearson has an enrolment of 200 students representing 
each Canadian province, territory, as well as students from 83 
other countries. 
 
Real will attend the college for two years. And in addition to 
academics, Real will be able to partake in such courses as 
kayaking, mountaineering, and photography. 
 
I might add that Real’s experience, background, and identity 
will stand him in good stead. His grandfather, my late uncle, 
Bill Carriere, was a world’s championship dog derby winner in 
1961. His father, Solomon Carriere, is three time world 
marathon canoe champion, triple crown winner in New York, 
Shawinigan Falls, and Minneapolis. His mother, Rene, is an 
excellent teacher, outdoor educational enthusiast, and an 
eco-tourism practitioner. 
 
As the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) of 
Cumberland, as the Minister of Northern Affairs, and as an 
uncle, I offer my congratulations to Real Carriere — ki geechi 
gus keetan. You have done well. The family and the people of 
Cumberland House are proud of your accomplishment. 
 
I ask my colleagues of the legislature to extend a very special 
congratulations to this outstanding young man — Real. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

Canadian Environment Week 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House today to further raise awareness of Canadian 
Environment Week. Here in Saskatchewan we are fortunate to 
have an abundance of resources all contributing to our rich and 
diverse environment. From the quiet beauty of the Far North to 
the sweeping vast expanse of the southern grasslands, it’s ours 
to enjoy. We must ensure that we do all we can to protect it. 
Not only for our enjoyment, but also for the generations to 
come. 
 
From industries to interest groups, I’m encouraged by the many 
partnerships that have evolved over the years, all attesting to the 
level of commitment that exist in protecting our environment. 
 
I’ve seen first-hand how a responsible approach can impact not 
only the environment, but also on society as well. As past 
president of SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) SARCAN, I know the benefits to the 
environment are obvious is the hundreds of thousands of 
containers that are recycled at SARCAN depots throughout the 
province each year. But I’ve also seen the positive social value 
that’s felt by SARCAN’s employment of citizens with 
disabilities. 
 
This is just one of the many partnerships that are in place here 
in Saskatchewan, further proof of our commitment to making 
the environment sustainable for future generations. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding of Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday a couple of Saskatchewan Party members were out 
fixing the potholes on an NDP (New Democratic Party) 
highway. Today we’re going to fix some potholes in the NDP’s 
math. 
 
For the past few days the NDP have been saying 87 per cent of 
highway-related revenue goes back into highway construction 
and maintenance. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have the NDP’s own 
budget estimates — got them right here — and the government 
collects $348 million in fuel tax. They collect another $112 
million in motor vehicle fees. That’s a total of $460 million. 
 
Now the government spends $110 million in highway 
maintenance and just $61 million on highway construction. 
That’s a total of $171 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 87 per 
cent of revenues; that’s 37 per cent of revenue. 
 
To the Premier: Mr. Premier, why are your ministers saying you 
spend 87 per cent of highway revenues fixing highways when 
the real number is just 37 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever else one can 
say about Conservatives in Saskatchewan we know one thing 
— arithmetic is not their strong point. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What the Leader of the Opposition is 
saying today as usual, Mr. Speaker, is not factual. The total fuel 
tax revenues we collect, Mr. Speaker, are $348 million. That’s 
what we collect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t hear the Leader of the Opposition talking about the farm 
fuel rebate, Mr. Speaker, because the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t say for example that up to $50 million is going to be 
rebated back to the farmers. And I say to the Leader of the 
Opposition, how do you rebate the fuel tax back to the farmers 
as the opposition believes we should and we are doing, and 
spend it on the roads, Mr. Speaker? How do you do both at the 
same time? 
 
And I can report to the House, Mr. Speaker, that we’re spending 
87 per cent of the net revenue on the roads. And that’s what 
we’re doing — never mind the arithmetic from the Tories, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP would rather make up numbers than fix the highways, and 
they’re not very good at either actually. Mr. Premier, here is the 
numbers right out of your budget. 
 
Your budget for highway construction actually decreased this 
year from $64 million in 1999 down to $61 million in the year 
2000. However, some budget items in the Highway’s 
department did increase. The administration budget increased 
by nearly 6 per cent — that doesn’t fix roads. And the 
accommodation and central services budget increased by over 7 
per cent — that doesn’t fix roads either. 
 
Unfortunately none of that money goes to actually fixing 
highways. Mr. Premier, you take in $460 million a year in fuel 
taxes and licence fees and just 37 per cent of that money goes 
back into highways. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Instead of making up phony 
numbers, why don’t you just fix the highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we don’t need any lectures from the 
Leader of the Opposition when it comes to phony numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s where the phony numbers are coming 
from. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, not only does the Leader of the 
Opposition refuse to acknowledge that $50 million of road tax 
revenue is going to be rebated back to the farmers, he refuses to 
mention, Mr. Speaker, the $21 million of fuel tax revenue that 
goes to the rural municipalities to fix the grid roads, Mr. 
Speaker. And he doesn’t mention the $5 million centenary fund 
money that goes into highways and roads, Mr. Speaker. He 
doesn’t mention the $15 million going into the provincial 
municipal infrastructure fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He doesn’t mention any of those figures. And he doesn’t 
mention the 13 cents on the dollar which goes to pay the 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

interest on the debt run up by those people in the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker. And when you add all of that up, Mr. Speaker, and 
those numbers, unlike the numbers from the Leader of the 
Opposition, do add up, we’re spending 87 per cent of the net 
revenue on fixing the roads and highways. More than we’ve 
ever done before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised the 
people of Saskatchewan that he would spend $250 million a 
year for 10 years on highways. Had he kept that promise, the 
people of Val Marie would not have been out filling potholes 
yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, the NDP 
government was embarrassed yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they should have listened to the Saskatchewan 
Party and our platform which called for spending an additional 
$50 million on road construction, on highway construction. Not 
administration services, not central services — highway 
construction; that’s what this province needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a real commitment to highways in this 
province and would have nearly doubled the highway 
construction budget this year. That’s our plan. What’s your 
plan, Mr. Premier? Make up numbers and gravel the highways? 
 
Mr. Premier, highways in this province are an absolute disaster. 
It is a botch on your record. Why are you spending 37 per cent 
of highway revenue at fixing highways? Why aren’t you 
spending more? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition tries to be Mr. All-things-to-all-people. He comes 
into this House day after day, and he says we should reduce the 
tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — He says, Mr. Speaker, that we should 
reduce the taxes in this province. He says we should not collect 
any gas tax in this province and then, Mr. Speaker, he has the 
audacity at the same time to come into the House and tell 
people he’s going to spend more. He’s going to tax them less 
but he’s going to spend more. 
 
And the problem here, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s the same old 
Tory story that we saw in the 1980s when Grant Devine told 
people that you could have no gas tax and you could spend 
more money on the roads. And it wasn’t true then and it’s not 
true now; and it didn’t add up then and it doesn’t add up now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Three times the 
minister has tried to answer my question, and the only thing 

he’s said that’s right is that we’re prepared to do something and 
he’s prepared to do absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a few potholes in their own 
platform. In fact, the Premier recently put his old friend — his 
old friend, Ned Shillington — in charge of renewing the NDP 
Party. Ned took one look at the NDP platform and what did he 
do? He moved to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan are tired of being 
treated like second-class citizens, treated like peasants by this 
government. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Highways confirmed that he would 
turn the highways back to gravel. But he doesn’t think that’s so 
bad. In fact he says, and I quote: 
 

You don’t have to go back that many years when there was 
no pavement in the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that quote speaks volumes about the NDP 
arrogance and their attitude to people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, why is your government treating rural people like 
second-class citizens? Why are you doing that? Would the 
Premier answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite and in particular to the member from Cypress 
who was in Val Marie yesterday working with the mayor and 
the reeve from the area, unlike other members of the former 
Conservative government who should have been down there 
fixing potholes because they’re the ones responsible for the 
huge debt and I would argue, I would argue when it comes to 
potholes that Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I ask all hon. 
members to kindly come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
from Cypress and the people who came out to fix roads at Val 
Marie, I think they deserve a big thank you from all the people 
of the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, 
the Leader of the Opposition who while he was in Ottawa 
argued to get rid of rail lines, end the Crow rate, he should 
apologize to the people and he should take his Tory friends, 
Eric Berntson, Colin Thatcher, and the rest of them down and 
fill some potholes and help that member out because he caused 
the problem by running the debt up and urging the federal 
government to abandon rail lines in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve only been an MLA for a short 
time but I think yesterday was one of the most rewarding days 
I’ve had as a representative of the people. 
 
Yesterday in Val Marie I saw that nine years of neglect and 
mistreatment by the NDP government had not broken the spirit 
of Saskatchewan people. This morning I learned that Val Marie 
was actually the second example of volunteer highway repair 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

crews. 
 
Last Saturday there was a similar crew at work out fixing 
provincial access roads near Atwater. Those people were given 
coal patch and a truck to use by the Department of Highways. 
My question is to the minister today. What exactly is your 
government’s policy on this kind of activity? What services are 
you willing to provide other communities who want to fix their 
highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I say to the 
member from Cypress, it’s interesting that he takes this position 
of who’s responsible for the breakup of the highways as large 
quantities of grain come off the Val Marie line, run on the road, 
No. 4 Highway to Swift Current to the inland terminals, when 
back in 1995 on March 30 in the Common’s debate, the Leader 
of the Opposition said this, and I quote: “For years farmers have 
been saying they do not mind doing their share and (losing the 
rail subsidy) . . . lose the rail subsidy . . .” 
 
And went on to argue about the Crow Rate which has led 
directly to the abandonment of the rail lines and elevators that 
put the grain onto the highway he’s now arguing about. 
 
I say to the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’ll say it 
out there. I’ll say it anywhere. Can you imagine the irony of an 
individual who sanctimoniously argues about the breakup of the 
highways when he personally argued and urged the federal 
government to abandon rail lines in this province. How smart is 
that? How smart is it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this morning on CKRM, the 
Deputy Premier said he was willing to look at other volunteer 
projects. And now that the government has completely 
abandoned its responsibility, I’m sure there’s lots of 
communities thinking about doing the exact same thing as done 
in Val Marie yesterday. 
 
So how does this work exactly? Who are the people of these 
communities going to call at the Department of Highways? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you supply the coal patch, will you supply 
the trucks, will you supply the flag crews now that your 
government has endorsed this policy of do-it-yourself road 
repair? And what services are you willing to provide other 
communities who want to fix their roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite, I have a book here that lists out all of the work that’s 
being done in various constituencies around the province, which 
would include the member from Cypress, but also many, many 
other constituencies. 
 
For example, I want to talk to the members opposite about the 
work that’s being done, for example, in the member for 
Souris-Cannington. And I want to list out the projects that are 
being done this year: No. 8 Highway south of Carievale, 4 

kilometres for a price of $400,000. 
 
Another project . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite, the total for his constituency alone is over three and a 
half million dollars — three and a half million dollars. 
 
Now some would argue why you would spend any money in 
that individual’s riding given how negative he is when he 
comes here. He argues every day that no money is going into 
his constituency. The taxpayers of the province are putting 3.5 
million into his riding. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, the total amount being paid 
and put into roads in this province is at a record level of $250 
million. That’s far beyond anything when the Tories, you 
members, were in government, put into roads. 
 
And I’ll tell you this. In 1982 when you campaigned to get rid 
of rail lines and the Crow rate, you were the architects of the 
destruction of the highways in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, for most of the communities 
affected, $250 million is too little too late. The people of Val 
Marie felt a tremendous sense of pride in what they 
accomplished yesterday, but even as they were completing their 
work, the people of Climax and Bracken were hit with the news 
of turning their road back to gravel. Highway 18 will be 
reverted to gravel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Climax and that area are simply not 
willing to let this happen. Since the news broke I have spoken 
with several area residents who say that they are prepared to 
maintain that road themselves. They will provide the labour. 
They will provide the equipment. All they need from the 
Department of Highways is some co-operation and a 
commitment from your government not to turn Highway No. 18 
back to gravel. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you cancel your plan to gravel Highway 18 
and talk first to local residents about other possible solutions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Cypress who indicates that the stretch of road I believe he’s 
talking about, between Bracken and Climax, and No. 18 
Highway, that the community has come forward and said look, 
what we want to do is have the ability to discuss with you the 
care of this road and the responsibility for this road. 
 
I have talked to the officials in Highways and they are at 
present time contacting the people in Climax. And if an 
arrangement can be made where the responsibility for this road 
will be taken up by the municipal government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well this is what he’s asking for, this is what 
he’s asking. Within a spirit of co-operation that can be worked 
on. 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

But I say to the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the 
Leader of the Opposition does not like the approach being taken 
by the member from Cypress, who I think in a reasonable way, 
brings to this House some alternatives that the people of Climax 
are talking about with highways. 
 
And I say as it relates to your question — if the leader cares to 
listen rather than yell and bellow from his seat which he is 
well-known for — I would say this is the spirit of co-operation 
that we should have, of working with communities, and I would 
take your idea as a positive move. 
 
And again, to the Leader of the Opposition who continues to 
yell from his seat, if you’ve got a question stand up, stand up 
and ask. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
plans to gravel at least five highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan. As we were alluding to a few moments ago, 
Highway 18 is one of those. But there is a section on Highway 
42, Highway No. 8, 47, and Highway 308 — they’re all being 
turned back to gravel, according to department plans. 
 
Now the minister says that he will accommodate some efforts to 
negotiate or look at alternatives for Highway No. 18, but is 
there a similar plan for the other highways? 
 
If we were talking about gravelling 8th Street in Saskatoon or 
Albert Street in Regina, what would be the outrage, and what 
would be the response of this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the people of Val Marie showed yesterday, 
local residents aren’t just complaining, they are willing to do 
something about the problem. And so too are the people of the 
communities that we’ve mentioned along these other highways. 
 
Immediately after question period, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
moving an emergency motion to halt all highway gravelling 
projects and instead asking the government to consult local 
residents to consider other alternatives. Mr. Premier, will your 
government support this emergency motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have to apologize to 
the member from Cypress that your leader and other members 
were yelling so loud while you were asking the question, it was 
difficult to hear the question. 
 
But what I can say is this: that the history of highways in this 
province is a very interesting one. I remember while we were in 
opposition on that side of the House, there was a government 
being run by Grant Devine who in 1984 auctioned off 400 
pieces of highway equipment — a two-day sale. And then he 
argued to get . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — He sold off 400 pieces of highway 
equipment at fire-sale prices. Then he argued to get rid of the 
branch lines, and convinced the Mulroney government to get rid 
of branch lines. 
 
And then he ran up the debt to 15 billion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m going to ask the hon. member for 
Rosthern to kindly allow the Deputy Premier to respond to the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — So, Mr. Speaker, they sold off the 
highway equipment. They argued Ottawa to abandon the branch 
lines. They ran up the debt to $15 billion. And then they have 
the audacity to come here and say, why are the roads in bad 
shape? 
 
I would urge the members opposite to look in the mirror, to 
look in the mirror. We’ll take our share of responsibility, but I 
would urge you in all honesty to think about what your history 
is as it relates to highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question is also about the state of our 
provincial highways. My question deals with the 21st century, 
not the 19th, so I hope I get a 21st century answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from Tom Jukes, the general 
manager of the Harbour Golf Club and Resort at Elbow. He 
says Highways 19 and 42 are the lifelines for tourism and 
business in the Lake Diefenbaker and Elbow area. And I quote: 
 

The condition of these highways are deplorable and unsafe 
for normal travel. There are numerous areas to these 
highways which have holes at least 2 feet in diameter, 6 
inches deep. The Highways department as of June 6 has 
not even attempted to fill in these craters. 
 
This shows the Government of Saskatchewan’s lack of 
concern for the safety of the people who have to use the 
highways, and the total lack of concern for the economic 
impact on the business community of this area. 

 
Mr. Minister, why have no highway crews visited this section 
of highway this spring even for maintenance? Why has this man 
also forced to go out and patch a road out of his own pocket, 
using his own money into . . . the road into his golf course? 
Because the province has neglected it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member indicates 
that the debt and the history of the Conservative Party was a 
20th century issue and we should deal with the 21st. But I want 
to say that the interest on that debt is a problem in the 21st 
century. That’s how it is. It’s a problem to the tune of $680 
million a year — $680 million a year. 
 
Now I would say to the members opposite what they should be 
doing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the Hon. Leader of the 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

Opposition to kindly allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the Leader of 
the Opposition, the way he bellows from his seat: maybe it’s 
not by accident that he’s lost the last two elections he’s run in; 
maybe you should act like a leader if you want to be the 
Premier — maybe you should act like a Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite as it 
relates to highways, I say to the member opposite as it relates to 
highways, think for a moment what you could do with the $680 
million we are paying in interest this year on the Grant Devine 
debt in terms of building roads. 
 
We would have the most magnificent roads in the world if it 
weren’t for the biggest pothole in this province, that is the Grant 
Devine debt which was struck by you people. Take your 
responsibility and do something about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I didn’t want to talk about it, considering we got 
more of the popular vote than they did. And I believe some of 
that debt was brought on by the province in the ’70s under 
Blakeney, if I’m not mistaken. 
 
But getting back to the question, the Harbour Golf Club and 
Resort estimates they will lose in excess of $100,000 in 
revenues, directly related to customers not returning for a 
second trip. He says tourists compliment them on their golf 
course and their other great facilities all the time in that area, 
but then they say they just won’t come back because of the 
roads they have to take to get there. 
 
He says, and I quote: 
 

. . . the development of a multi-million dollar resort here 
has been put on hold until the road conditions have been 
improved. 
 

It seems like job loss, not job creation, is the norm for this 
government. The damage to cars, trucks, RVs, boats, trailers 
occur almost on a daily basis. We as taxpayers have the right to 
safe, reliable highways and the province has the responsibility 
and the legal obligation to ensure that these safe, reliable 
conditions are maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do you explain your priorities given that 
hundreds of thousands of dollars are at risk and future economic 
development in this province is put on hold due to your failure 
at regular road maintenance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting these 
people across the way just cannot stand good news. In private 
members statements today there was a statement made in terms 
of appreciation for the people who invest in tourism in this 
province, but this year tourism will generate a record $1.1 
billion in revenue. A record number. 
 

And what he says . . . what he argues, incorrectly, is that 
tourism is doing badly in this province. Now I know that would 
make them happy if tourism was doing badly, or if agriculture 
was doing badly, because the Leader of the Opposition believes 
that if the economy is bad he might end up winning an election 
in his third try. 
 
Well good luck to you, sir, but the economy is doing extremely 
well — extremely well — no thanks to you, no thanks to your 
buddies, and no thanks to Grant Devine. You can change your 
name, you’re still Tories, and you still have bad time with the 
numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan who in his normally 
sanctimonious fashion is trying desperately to kick-start or 
re-kick-start his desperate bid to lead the NDP in the next 
election campaign. He better check with the Premier next to 
him to find out if he’s going to move over for you first before 
you want to start it off again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, the fact of the matter is, the people of this 
province are sick and tired of your kind of sanctimonious 
answers. They’re sick and tired of your arrogant government. 
They’re sick and tired of everything about you. And that’s the 
reason why, that’s the reason why in the by-election that’s held 
on June 26 down in Wood River you’re going to get the 
thrashing of your lives, the thrashing you deserve, and the 
thrashing the people of Saskatchewan want to give you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Deputy Premier, the fact of the matter is the 
highways of this province are in desperate shape, the people of 
Saskatchewan are very angry at you, and they’re taking the 
matters into their own hands just as they did down . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. member, kindly go directly 
to your question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Deputy Premier, will you finally admit to the 
people of Saskatchewan that you have failed desperately to 
provide highway transportation for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of leadership 
campaigns . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — But I say to the member opposite, I 
say to the member opposite, last time you ran for the leadership, 
I helped; I spoke positively of you. And I will this time — I will 
this time. 
 
I have a quote here, the headline from the Estevan eagle says, 
“Crow benefit payout draws criticism”. Provincial PC Leader 
. . . the Rosetown, Rosetown Eagle. 
 
Now listen to this though, “The provincial Progressive 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

Conservative Leader . . .” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who? Who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Bill Boyd. In Rosetown for a 
constituency association founding meeting went on to talk 
about changes to the Crow rate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I must . . . Order. I feel it’s . . . Order. 
Hon. member from Kindersley please come to order. I’m asking 
once more for the hon. member from Kindersley to please come 
to order. I’m asking all hon. members to come to order. 
 
The debates going across the floor are not allowing people to be 
heard and I believe that it’s necessary to remind hon. members 
this is not Friday yet. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Appointment of Advisory Committee of Older Persons  
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here in 
Saskatchewan we recognize the important place seniors hold, 
not only in our history and in our hearts, but in our present and 
in our future. Indeed Saskatchewan has one of the highest 
percentages of seniors in Canada. One of every seven people in 
our province is over age 65. It is within this context that as 
Minister responsible for Seniors, I am pleased today to 
announce the appointment of a Provincial Advisory Committee 
of Older Persons. 
 
This committee comes in direct response to the final report of 
the 1999 Provincial Advisory Committee for the International 
Year of Older Persons . You should all receive a copy of that 
report which I am releasing today. 
 
It’s important for government to talk with the people it serves, 
and I believe that this forum will ensure that I hear the views 
and concerns of older persons in Saskatchewan. Together we 
will develop solutions to help meet their needs, whether it be 
health care, housing, transportation, education, or any other 
concern. 
 
I am very pleased that Don King has agreed to take on the 
chairmanship of this advisory committee of older persons. Don 
King, I introduced earlier on in the gallery. Don is director of 
the Seniors Education Centre at the University of Regina. I’m 
also pleased to appoint Wes Ashvan as vice-chair of the 
committee. Wes most recently served in 1999 as chairperson of 
the Provincial Advisory Committee for the International Year 
of Older Persons. 
 
I’ve also appointed 11 additional committee members 
representing senior’s organizations including the Fransaskois 
seniors community, indigenous groups, and others who are 
familiar with the concerns of seniors such as SWAN 
(Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network). 
 
They are Jean Nahachewsky and Bubs Coleman from 
Saskatoon; Marj Beament from La Ronge; Margaret Cline from 
Zelma; Lucie de Montarnal from Debden; Frank Mirasty from 

Meadow Lake; Ed Leson from Prince Albert; Doreen Mowers 
from Moose Jaw; and Frank Bellamy, Dr. Patricia Hutchison, 
and Trevor Quinn from Regina. 
 
I am truly excited about this new initiative. Based on the 
success of Saskatchewan’s International Year of Older Persons, 
I’m confident that this committee will be effective in helping to 
deal with issues affecting older persons and I look forward to 
working with them in the year to come. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To ask leave to 
respond to the ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I join in adding my comments to the 
minister’s statement about the appointment of a Provincial 
Advisory Committee for Older Persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that people often refer to a certain a time of 
your life as the golden years. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that 
is a very appropriate way of describing the years we associate 
with seniors because they are very precious years and quite 
appropriately are called golden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those years mark a time of everyone’s life where 
they have much to contribute to our province, to our society, to 
the people of this province. I think of seniors as the people that 
. . . are really the people that have so much wisdom to 
contribute. They have so much to offer in terms of mentoring to 
their children and grandchildren, and to the communities around 
them. And they certainly are the core of much of the volunteer 
work that goes on in our communities across this province. 
 
I’m always amazed when I hear people who retire say that 
they’ve never been busier in their lives. That’s because they’ve 
become the backbones of community projects and have so 
much to contribute. 
 
(1430) 
 
But it’s also important as well, Mr. Speaker, that as the minister 
said that we have to talk to our seniors. I think we need more 
than that — we have to listen to them because they also do have 
needs that we as a society have to address. 
 
We have to listen to their concerns about the delivery of health 
care and the reality that they will need special health care 
considerations. We need to listen to their needs about housing 
and transportation and many other issues. 
 
And so, Madam Minister, and colleagues in the House, I think 
to have a provincial advisory committee is a great vehicle to 
allow not only that talking process to occur, but very much a 
listening process. And I congratulate the minister and look 
forward to as well hearing from this committee. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — Kindly proceed with your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under clause 
495 of Beauchesne’s, I quote: 
 

A Minister is not at liberty to read or quote from a despatch 
or other state paper not before the House without being 
prepared to lay it on the table. 

 
I would ask that the Deputy Premier table the documents he was 
reading from during question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
point of order, I think that it’s acceptable for ministers to make 
reference to briefing notes. I think the reference in 
Beauchesne’s that the member refers to are quotations taken 
from letters that are communicated to the minister. 
 
And this point of order is not an acceptable point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I will take the opportunity to 
review both what was quoted and what was said in the House, 
and return with a decision on the point of order raised by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise now to ask leave 
to move an emergency motion under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the hon. member to briefly 
explain to the House the urgency of the motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday when my 
colleague from Cannington and I were in the Val Marie area 
working on the highway project, Highway No. 4, it gave us 
mixed emotions I suppose. We were exhilarated to be part of an 
event that actually was producing some positive results. 
 
But we also had at that same time a delegation from a 
community not far from Val Marie approach us about some 
concerns that had come to their attention. They had just been 
made aware of the fact that a contract had been let to return 
Highway No. 18 to gravel. And their concerns are of a great 
immediacy, because I understand the contract was let recently 
and the contractor is already mobilizing to move into the area to 
return the stretch in question to gravel. So we don’t have a lot 
of time to review this matter. 
 
And not only is it Highway No. 18 near Climax that is at issue 
here, Mr. Speaker, there are several other highways around the 
province that are already targeted for similar action. And I think 
that that needs to be addressed in this particular debate. 
 
And so I would move as member of Cypress Hills seconded by 

the member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to set aside any 
plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to gravel; 
commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments; and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are pleased to table the answer to 
no. 162, and we’re also extremely happy to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Answer to question 162 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government, we are extremely happy to table the 
response to question 163. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 163 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 79  The Saskatchewan Centre 
of the Arts Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts 
Act, 2000. The existing Centre of the Arts Act has remained 
largely unchanged for 30 years while its management and 
operating practices have evolved over time to keep pace with 
changes in the centre’s business climate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will bring the Centre of the Arts 
legislation into line with modern governance and business 
practices and will enable the centre to pursue opportunities 
which will ensure it remains a showcase for all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The initiative for this legislation comes primarily from the 
centre’s board of directors. The board and management of the 
centre have done an outstanding job of stabilizing the operation 
of the facility during a time when all cultural-based facilities are 
facing tremendous pressures. And it’s certain, Mr. Speaker, that 
this Bill will enable the centre to continue to operate into the 
future with more financial independence. 
 
The legislative renewal initiatives in this Bill can be 
summarized in four categories. The first, refocusing the centre’s 
mandate; second, improved governance and accountability; the 
third, providing new business tools for the centre to become 
financially self-sufficient; and fourth, standardizing provisions 
related to the centre’s status as an agent of the Crown. 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill acknowledges that convention and 
catering is a necessary part of the centre’s business to support 
programming; and this Bill streamlines the wording of the 
centre’s general powers allowing for a broader interpretation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation implements a number of improved 
governance practices. The size of the board will be reduced 
from 50 directors to a more manageable 12; the tenure of board 
appointments will be increased from four one-year terms to 
three three-year terms, allowing for better continuity; and the 
board will now have the authority to create bylaws as a means 
of implementing policy decisions; and the board’s responsibility 
and authority for hiring and supervising the centre’s executive 
director and staff will be strengthened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past decade government has encouraged 
the Centre of the Arts to become as self-sustaining as possible. 
And this Bill includes a number of provisions which will enable 
the board to continue the good work it has done. 
 
It clarifies that the board may seek financial support from a 
number of sources; it provides the board with authority to make 
investments subject to the same rules as executive government; 
and it creates two new restricted funds, one for capital 
improvements and one for programming. This latter feature is 
intended to assure private sponsors that their contributions are 
being used for specific purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new Act also brings a number of legislated 
features into line with standards that have been adopted in other 
public agencies. It clarifies the centre’s power and 
responsibilities with respect to contracts and liability; it makes 
clear that the centre’s fiscal year is the same as the province’s; 
and it provides for standard public employee benefits. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move forward 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act, 
2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move to adjourn debate on this Bill No. 79. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt over the past number of years — 
30 years to be exact — the Centre of the Arts has certainly 
provided a location for many worthwhile opportunities, an area 
where people can gather to . . . whether it’s a performance in the 
arts, whether it’s groups coming to perform in the city or the 
southern part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that certainly from the area I represent, 
people have taken the time to come to different presentations. 
And without a facility like the Centre of the Arts, some of the 
attractions that we’ve had in the past like Beauty and the Beast 
and Fiddler on the Roof would not have possibly been possible 
because we wouldn’t have had the venue in which to present 
those types of performances. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite obvious that the centre does play an 
important role. I appreciate the fact that . . . what the minister is 
saying. And I think where we’re heading here is working 
towards building a relationship and allowing the centre to 

become more self-sufficient. And I think that’s important. I 
believe people certainly believe in that. 
 
And the reduction of the board from 50 to 12, I think on many 
occasions when you have so many people on a board, Mr. 
Speaker, very seldom do you have all 50 members together. 
And sometimes it’s very hard to get a board meeting when you 
have that large a group to work with, trying to coordinate their 
schedules with the timing for meetings. So I think that’s 
probably a good move and a move that is more manageable. 
 
It’s also, as the minister indicated, the Bill is giving forward . . . 
or bringing forward some areas to address the avenue of 
fundraising to maintain the current facility and allow it to 
continue to grow and to expand. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, just from my involvement in some of 
the activities, and certainly with the Saskatchewan prayer 
breakfast committee has been really pleased that the Centre of 
the Arts has made itself available for the prayer breakfast. And 
the manager and certainly the chef in the centre has been doing 
an excellent job. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen from the services 
that we have received, that there’s more to the centre than just a 
place to go and view an artist, whether it’s a group of singers or 
whether it’s some entertainers. But the centre does a lot to 
create a venue for meetings such as SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and other organizations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think what the minister, and I believe what 
the minister is saying today, it was time to take a look at the 
Bill. I believe she indicated it was . . . the minister indicated it 
was over 30 years since they’ve reviewed the Bill. And this 
legislation that is coming forward should create an avenue that 
allows the centre to progress and proceed into the year 2000 and 
beyond, Mr. Speaker, so that it can continue to be the location 
and the centre that many ongoing concerts and areas of . . . 
items of entertainment will be available for the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister did mention a number of changes and 
updates that they are proposing in the legislation and we want to 
take the time just to review those to find out exactly what all is 
involved in regards to those changes. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I believe I should adjourn 
debate at this time so that we can do that — give that 
appropriate review to this piece of legislation before we move 
forward. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Court of Appeal Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Court of Appeal Act, 2000. Mr. 
Speaker, The Court of Appeal Act was first passed when the 
court was created in 1915, and a number of provisions in the 
Act have remained unchanged since that time. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a need to update and clarify some of these 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

provisions. 
 
The present section of the Act relating to jurisdiction is 
incomprehensible to anyone other than a legal historian. The 
Bill before the House doesn’t change the jurisdiction of the 
Court of Appeal in any way, it simply restates the historical 
jurisdiction of the court in a way that can be understood by 
users of the Act. 
 
The legislature will be asked to approve the re-enactment of 
The Court of Appeal Act in both French and English. This Act 
has been identified by the French community in Saskatchewan 
as one that should be translated . . . as one that should be 
translated because of its importance and usefulness to that 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the English version of this Bill required revision 
for clarification purposes before the French translation could go 
forward. As well as adopting gender-neutral language, this 
update of The Court of Appeal Act substantially improves the 
law by making it clear and more understandable, even to my 
own colleagues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal also asked that a few 
changes of substance be made at the same time the Act is 
re-enacted in French and English. These changes clarify the 
powers and procedures of judges and the court under the Act. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are as follows. 
 
First, the Bill clarifies the powers of the Chief Justice. It states 
that the Chief Justice is the presiding judge and the 
administrative head of the court and that he or she has general 
supervision over court matters. 
 
(1445) 
 
Second, the Bill clarifies the powers of the court. It states that 
the court may make any order that could have been made by the 
body appealed from, can impose reasonable terms and 
conditions in an order, and can make any additional order that 
he considers just. As well, in setting aside damages assessed by 
a jury, the court may assess any damages the jury could have 
assessed. 
 
Third, the Bill clarifies the procedure respecting rehearings. It 
states that the court shall rehear an appeal if due to death or 
resignation, only one judge who heard the appeal remains. As 
well, if the number of judges is reduced to an even number that 
is deeply divided on a matter, a party to the appeal may apply 
for a rehearing. 
 
Fourth, the Bill now includes provisions respecting appeal 
periods that were for money in the Court of Appeal rules. This 
will make the Act more user-friendly as it will provide one-stop 
shopping for users. 
 
Finally, the Bill eliminates the ability of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to decrease the size of the court by leaving 
this important function to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting a Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to the Act that’s being presented, and I understand that a fair 
portion of the Act is going to be taken up in regards to the 
French translation of the Act in a number of areas of concern 
and responsibility in regards to the Court of Appeal. 
 
There’s one question I have in regards to the Court of Appeal 
though. I’m not exactly sure if this is a question that we might 
be able to get into and discuss a little more when we get into the 
Act. 
 
While the Act, because of the bringing it up to date in regards to 
French translation they’ve added to the Act, made some 
changes to the Act, but sometimes some of the questions that 
are raised when it comes to appeal, the appeal process in the 
province of Saskatchewan — and it’s not just this province, it’s 
right across the country — the question can be asked whether or 
not the appeal process is as independent as one might feel or 
believe. 
 
I think when people are asking for . . . appealing a decision, the 
feeling is that if a decision has been made by a court and by a 
justice of the legal community and then you’re going back to 
the legal community for an appeal, you begin to ask yourself 
whether or not the appeal process is just verifying the facts of 
the information presented, or whether the appellant is getting 
the fair consideration. I know that’s a question that’s been 
raised and certainly something we can raise with the minister. 
 
But in regards to what the Act presented by the minister today, 
it appears to be a fairly straightforward piece of legislation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, however, my French isn’t very good and I 
want to take the time to review the Act just a little more 
carefully as well, and give my colleague that opportunity so that 
when we’ve finished debating this Act, we will feel comfortable 
that the Act is indeed done and reached the purposes that the 
minister has talked about. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to speak on Bill 35 and the several 
amendments that the government is proposing. To begin with, I 
want to address the issue of high-speed chases. 
 
There is very little doubt that they are a danger to motoring 
public, to the police officers involved, sometimes even to 
pedestrians. Therefore for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) to deny coverage to someone who’s initiated a 
high-speed chase is a logical conclusion. 
 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

But surprisingly though, not two years ago our party brought a 
private members’ Bill proposing just this type of action. I don’t 
know why it took this government so long to act on it, even 
though I’m finally pleased they are. It seems like when this 
government runs out of ideas, when you lose touch with people 
you come to the side of the House that are in touch with the 
people to get the ideas. 
 
Other amendments, such as giving power to SGI to go after 
people for recovery of damages and to suspend licences of 
uninsured drivers, follows in most respects what Saskatchewan 
people have considered long overdue changes to this Act. 
Something else that we’ve talked about in our campaign and a 
lot the things we were getting at the doorstep when we went 
around. 
 
Another thing that I believe an amendment looks at is a 
proposed cap that SGI is putting on aftermarket installed 
electronic equipment. There are a few points I’d like to make on 
that. There’s little doubt that electronic equipment such as 
stereos installed after vehicle purchase are becoming more and 
more expensive. A limit of $1,500 coverage may or may not 
cover some, and there probably will be appeals to that. 
 
But I’d like to make another point that one of my other 
colleagues had that some of these aftermarket additions, are 
they just electronics or are they other things such as special 
wheels, special tires, spoilers, special paint jobs, various 
modifications, motors, transmissions, etc.? I’m wondering like 
if the minister has taken that into consideration, if that is part of 
the Act that I’m not sure on. 
 
But I see in another step, on another amendment, the radar 
detectors will not be covered at all. I don’t know why is this 
particular item excluded. I know some Saskatchewan drivers 
will be unhappy that money they’ve invested in such equipment 
will be unprotected. 
 
I see cellphones will be included in your insurance coverage 
where they were not before. And I would agree with this 
opinion, that with the many cellphones that are out there; in fact 
some cellphones are being built into vehicles right now. 
 
Another step on the radar detectors. Does that mean eventually 
you’re going to ban them, to make them against the law? 
Considering right now they are legal in Saskatchewan, why 
wouldn’t they be covered under your insurance plan? 
 
It seems like that kind of just falls into the pick and choose 
frame of mind that this government always does when it 
implements something. It seems to pick and choose here and 
there. It doesn’t follow through with a lot of things, just goes 
right . . . just picks and chooses. 
 
I’ve only touched lightly like on some of the amendments, but I 
want to address with this legislation what I can’t see what it 
does not do. 
 
There is currently no amendment whatsoever to the no-fault 
insurance system we have here in Saskatchewan. We’d hoped 
amendments could have been made to ensure that the mandate 
of the review committee was more in tune with the concerns of 
the no-fault victims. 

This did not happen even though a party has a private member’s 
Bill on the order paper that would go a long way towards 
making the review mandate wide open. Clearly this is what the 
people of Saskatchewan want, as is witnessed by the numerous 
phone calls from the many people who want this government to 
make improvements to no-fault system, as well as have a fair 
and open review process which can be well documented. 
 
All the meetings have gone through, all through this province; 
and all the numerous calls that have been made to offices, our 
offices, and I know numerous calls made to your offices on this. 
 
You know unfortunately, we cannot talk about a free and open 
process when we consider the mandate of the current no-fault 
committee. Victims want to see a fair, comprehensive review 
with open comparisons and a committee that did not have to 
worry about the shadow of this government looming over the 
committee table. Not surprisingly, the victims’ groups are not 
happy. 
 
The Law Society people are not happy. And, in fact, it appears 
that even Judge Wakeling himself was not happy. That this 
highly respected man would resign should have been indication 
enough to cause this government to rethink its policy on no 
fault and to perhaps bring something positive back in the 
process way of an amendment in this Bill. 
 
But I see that didn’t happen. But what has happened so far is an 
exercise in just how far this government would go in terms of 
restricting its so-called review process, much to the dismay of 
the many people whose lives it adversely affect. 
 
I’ve addressed some of the issues of this Bill here today, and I 
know there are many others. 
 
There’s also about commercial trailers and providing licences 
for them as it happens in other jurisdictions. The trucking 
industry, I believe, should have some input into this, and 
hopefully, the minister has been in consultation with them and 
have the opportunity to have some input with them. I hope that 
the things he’s bringing in are they favourable of. 
 
Another thing the minister has talked about rates appeal, the 
surcharges that are applied to licences. This is extremely 
important, Mr. Speaker, because SGI, even though they may not 
have been a charge . . . There may have been a conviction that 
the court decided person A responsible for the accident over 
person B. SGI in a lot of cases makes that determination 
internally and assigns a fault to a driver. That driver’s insurance 
is then correspondingly increased even though the driver may or 
may not have been at fault. 
 
In conclusion, I cannot stress enough how disappointed I am 
that one of the major concerns of this Bill has not been 
addressed, which is no fault. It should be addressed in a more 
open and honest way to ensure that only victims’ rights are 
upheld, but the very essence of our democracy and our freedom 
is maintained. 
 
So with that note I move adjournment on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 36 — The Motor 
Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I understand this 
amending Act, Mr. Speaker, it puts a safety program in place 
for commercial trucks and buses based on the National Safety 
Code and enforced by the Highway Traffic Board of this 
province. I also understand the Highway Traffic Board will 
have the power to enforce further safety regulations and 
requirements. 
 
It’s also my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that all carriers will 
have to be in possession of a National Safety Code certificate in 
order to operate in Saskatchewan. This prompts questions about 
the requirements to obtain such a certificate and under what 
circumstances, if any, a certificate could be revoked. 
 
At first blush at least, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a 
positive thing that there would be more or less consistent safety 
standards from province to province throughout this country. 
However, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many of Canada’s 
provinces and territories are entering into this National Safety 
Code program. 
 
I see advantages in having uniform safety standards from coast 
to coast in this country, but this is precious little advantage if at 
least the vast majority of other provinces and territories in this 
country do not enter into the program. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how compatible our trucking safety 
rules and regulations will be with those of our neighbours to the 
South. Since there is more and more trade conducted in Western 
Canada from north to south and less and less trade from east to 
west, it seems that this may be an important matter for 
consideration now and a matter that will likely become more 
and more important as time goes by. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems incredible to attempt to make the 
trucking industry safer by changing the rules, regulations, and 
enforcement procedures that govern them while at the same 
time allowing the highways of this province to fall into such a 
state of disrepair as to be unsafe for even pickup trucks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are horrified by stories of school buses driving 
on the wrong side of our secondary highways in order to avoid 
potholes, and ambulance drivers avoiding entire sections of our 
secondary highways in favour of grid roads to give their 
patients a smoother, safer, and faster ride. 
 
All of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, brings into question the true 
commitment of this government to safety on our highways. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is one thing to impose more onerous rules on 
the trucking industry, but it seems to be another matter for this 
government to hold up its end when it comes to keeping our 
roads safer for the public — roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
are by necessity shared by cars, school buses, ambulances, and 
commercial trucks. 
 
As I understand it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will also 
amend the insurance requirements of carriers. Under the 

amendments in this Bill, truckers hauling what are considered 
to be low-value loads can be exempted from carrying any cargo 
insurance. But as I understand it, liability requirements are to 
remain unchanged. 
 
I note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that highway traffic officers will 
have discretion as to whether or not cargo insurance 
requirements will be waived. I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the interests of treating everyone equally, why wouldn’t there 
be specific parameters laid out in the Bill that would also give 
truckers entering this province a more clear understanding of 
the rules and standardize interpretation of the rules. 
 
I also wonder which commodities will be considered low value, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Will grain, for instance, be considered low 
value because of the low commodity prices that we are all 
living with these days? And if so, will all grains be considered 
on the same basis since a semi-load of oats may be worth 
$2,000 while a super B load of lentils or chickpeas may be 
worth $30,000. And how capable are highway traffic officers to 
make these judgments? 
 
(1500) 
 
We are all interested in safety on our roads, and the trucking 
industry is a part of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a very 
responsible part of it as well. 
 
In my consultations with members of the industry, they tell me 
that they don’t mind more stringent rules within reason. But 
they know very little about this Bill or the ramifications of it. 
However, they all echo the sentiment that the government of 
this province has a responsibility to maintain safe roads as well. 
 
All in all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we support the principles 
of uniformity of standards for the trucking industry, the devil 
may be in the details and we will want to consult further with 
the industry on these details. And accordingly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I wonder if the hon. 
member for Thunder Creek would indicate to me his motion 
once again, please. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 47 — The Power 
Corporation Superannuation Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 47 
is a very interesting Bill. The amendments are very short, very 
concise, and I won’t take long. But I have a couple of thoughts 
that I would like to put forward, and a couple of concerns as 
well. 
 
One of the first things that I think is important to understand 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

when we’re dealing with any kind of a superannuation fund is 
that we do in fact have adequate representation on any of the 
board that is in control or in charge of that particular fund. And 
the amendments precisely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, address the 
representation on this board. 
 
And I think it’s a good amendment in that there is some 
additions to the board. I noticed from the minister’s statements 
when the Bill was being read for the second time that there is a 
disproportionate representation now on this board. There is the 
five-member board currently, representing the two unions that 
in fact represent the Saskatchewan Power Corporation plus 
management. 
 
Now I noticed also from his remarks that there is in fact 718 
active members in this plan. There is 22 deferred members; I’m 
not sure what that category refers to. But I notice that there is 
1,685 retired members that are partaking of this particular fund. 
 
So I can see the need for changing the representation on the 
board because the number of retired members that will be in 
fact affected by this superannuation Act will be increasing as 
time goes along, and that representation, I think, is going to be 
very critical. 
 
I noticed from the minister’s remarks as well that they have 
already had representation, but as an observer status only. And I 
assume that this is trying to catch up with what is in place 
already. 
 
The question I would have of the minister presenting these 
amendments would be why was the natural reaction to expand 
the board from five to seven? It would seem to me that the fund 
is the same, the number of people involved are the same, maybe 
slightly increasing more toward the retired side. My question is 
five members, I think, is a good number on the board — why 
was not the board considered for restructuring? Why was not 
one of the other members replaced by a superannuee for 
instance? 
 
It just seems that the natural reaction is to make things larger, 
make it bigger, more appointed people. And I have some 
problem with that aspect of it. 
 
It specifically mentions in the amendment that one of the 
appointees would be from the group of retired people or 
superannuees. I think that is good. I would hope that the search 
and selection of that particular member will be certainly a 
member that will be representative of that large 1,685-member 
group of retirees and not somebody that will be tending to 
represent one of the other aspects. 
 
The seventh member that will be appointed to this board from 
these amendments is in fact from the SaskEnergy management. 
That is an interesting one. I really had to look at that a second 
time because representation from SaskEnergy seemed to be not 
in that same category. But on further review I realize that the 
SaskEnergy/SaskPower connection had been made into two 
groups and the SaskEnergy . . . people in the SaskEnergy had 
already been represented in this superannuation fund and so that 
does make sense. 
 
I do notice though that there is no mention of somebody from 

particularly the SaskEnergy in the amendments in the Act, only 
referred to in the minister’s notes. I would have felt that if that 
is in fact the direction that the minister wanted to go, that he 
would have put something into the Act stating that they wanted 
a representative not just solely from the superannuees but also 
from SaskEnergy. I don’t see it there. 
 
I guess the other aspect that I would have is to make sure that 
the fund is doing what it is supposed to do. And I would have 
hoped to have seen some direction from this fund in terms of 
the division that this fund and the board was directed. The 
viability of the fund is very critical. 
 
I’ve had several calls from retirees of SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower. One of the questions that I had asked earlier was 
about the indexed pension for retirees in this fund and I was 
given the response from the Minister of Finance which I passed 
along. 
 
But that is some of the questions and concerns that should be 
directed to this board and that’s why it is so critical to have a 
superannuee or a retiree that understands the current conditions 
and will in fact be able to direct the board or help the board in 
direction toward some of those areas. 
 
There’s an increasing number of people, as I mentioned, 
moving into the retiree part of this fund. And the question I 
would have — and I’m hoping that when we get into the next 
phase of this legislation, into committee — we’ll be able to find 
some of these answers as to how the viability of this fund is 
going to be directed; if in fact there is a working plan or a 
vision for the sustainability of this fund because there is a 
number of people that depend very heavily on this particular 
fund. 
 
As I mentioned the amendment is very straightforward, it’s very 
short. I was hoping that there might have been more to it, but 
again maybe we’ll have some of these answers when we get 
into committee. And I don’t have any other comments and I 
would be prepared at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to move 
this on to committee at this stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to stand 
today to speak to The Vehicle Administration Act. We never 
know for sure what the Bill is going to bring forward when we 
see it in the Assembly. It’s always a rather a small looking, 
innocuous Bill and when we see something that has anything to 
do with vehicles in Saskatchewan, we’re always a little worried. 
We rely on vehicle travel so much in this province, probably 
more than any other place in Canada, because you’ve got to get 
into a vehicle to travel any place, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, driving a vehicle in Saskatchewan is quite a feat 
usually when you have . . . if you’re living in rural 
Saskatchewan and you have to dodge the potholes and the 
conditions on many of the roads in our province. 
 
In fact when the Bill was presented I quickly looked through it 
to see if we’d have to take another test out in rural 
Saskatchewan to see if you could actually drive on our roads. 
And I was quite delighted to see that we wouldn’t have to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s kind of entertaining to think of the 
scenario that instead of driving . . . of having people train to 
drive with those pylons in the middle of a parking lot, instead 
we take them out to Highway 349 in my constituency and get 
them to drive around the potholes, and if they pass then they 
can get their driver’s licence. It would be good for business in 
our area, especially the garages that rely on wheel alignments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes from The Vehicle Administration Act 
will affect everyone in this province, especially the one on 
mandatory photo ID (identification). People in the hospitality 
industry, especially bar owners have been asking for this 
change for many years. In fact it’s one of the Bills that the 
Saskatchewan Party has been asking for for a number of years. 
I’m glad that the government is finally looking at it and 
realizing the importance of it. 
 
Too often hotel owners are held responsible for the sale to 
underage youth, even though they’ve been as diligent as they 
possibly can be in trying to determine the age of youth. 
 
The use of photo ID and the photo ID itself makes it virtually 
impossible for someone under the age of 19 to purchase 
alcohol. And I believe that’s the kind of reassurance that a 
number of hospitality industry people are looking for. And as 
we move to even greater sanctions against those who sell 
cigarettes to minors, it’s probably even more important that we 
have this ID in place. 
 
If we’re going to ask business owners to be part of the solution 
to keeping our youth away from underage drinking and 
smoking, this is going to be a very important tool. That’s why 
the Saskatchewan Party proposed photo ID in the private 
members’ legislation. 
 
One concern that we do have here is what the cost is going to be 
to drivers to have the mandatory ID licences. How much money 
does it actually cost SGI to have a photo ID made? 
 
And when you think about it, how many drivers are there in this 
province, and if SGI makes a dollar or two on every one of 
these licences, that’s going to be considerable funds for the 
coffers of the province again. 
 
We’re wondering if the government is going to use this 
opportunity to ding the driver with excess fees for the new 
photo ID. And if they set the price unjustifiably high just 
because they can, I don’t think it’s going to surprise anybody if 
the people retaliate again. 
 
One of the major features of this legislation is the call for 
tougher drinking and driving regulations. It should be noted that 
changes here are being made as a result of federal legislation. 

I think it’s a point of shame for many of us in Saskatchewan 
that our province has the distinction of having one of the worst 
records when it comes to impaired driving, and I know that 
every member in this House wants to combat that. 
 
The first thing I want to point to is the new zero tolerance 
policy for new drivers. I think this is a very good idea and I 
believe many members who were in the House in 1995 would 
know why I thought this was a very good idea. 
 
In 1996 I proposed an amendment to the zero tolerance, to the 
Bill that was brought forward that year. In fact I remember 
sitting in the House, being on the opposition side with some 
different faces — and I remember there wasn’t as many of us at 
that time — and we brought forward this amendment because 
we said, Mr. Speaker, why does it make any sense that a young 
driver could have any alcohol in their blood at all at any time? 
 
They’re not allowed to drink, they’re not allowed to purchase 
alcohol, and yet we do allow them to have some blood alcohol 
in their bodies when they’re driving. It didn’t make any sense to 
us then and it doesn’t make any sense to us now. So we did 
bring forward that motion. 
 
And I was absolutely surprised at that time that the government 
thought it wasn’t a good idea and they defeated the amendment. 
 
Now four years later, all of a sudden it’s a good idea. I think 
that it’s kind of a shame that you think that we have to wait for 
four years and risk accidents, we risked all kinds of traumas that 
could have happened, because the government thinks that 
anything that isn’t their idea isn’t right. 
 
(1515) 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very much in favour of this 
amendment. I’m just a little, I guess, I’m a little taken back that 
it’s taken the government this long to figure out that a good idea 
can come from this side of the House as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill also brings in tougher, more 
immediate, penalties against adults who continue to be careless 
about their own safety and other’s, by continuing to drink and 
drive. A new immediate 90-day suspension for those charged 
with impaired driving or failure to submit to a breath or blood 
sample is quite in departure with what is going on up to this 
point. While some may see this as punishment before 
conviction, I think most of us see it as a reasonable measure to 
protect the rest of us against those foolish enough to get behind 
a vehicle when consuming too much alcohol. 
 
Too often those charged with drunk driving have used tactics to 
delay and delay their court appearances putting off the loss of 
licences for months or even longer. Of course, another thing the 
government may want to try to do is clear up the clogged justice 
system we have that causes delays for people trying to find their 
day . . . have their day in court. 
 
I’m wondering about those who are charged with drunk driving 
and having their licences suspended immediately and then 
cleared of charges. Will this open up for SGI to . . . for calls for 
compensation for those who have suffered financial losses due 
to having their licence suspended, but are eventually cleared 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

up? Like most legislation, I’m sure they have granted 
themselves full immunity but this is something that we will 
want to have cleared up before the legislation passes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another concern that I have with the . . . 
with legislation, period, is in this province is that . . . we find 
that the tougher or the more convictions you have against your 
licence, the higher the cost of the licence. And that probably is 
some type of deterrent in a way, but it also means that if you 
have enough money it doesn’t matter how bad a driver you are, 
you can get yourself a licence in Saskatchewan. 
 
I really do think it’s offensive that if you have enough money, it 
doesn’t matter how bad a driver you are, you can afford to buy 
your driver’s licence. I don’t think that money should have 
anything to do with your ability to drive and how well you do 
drive, but this is what is happening in our province today. 
 
This Bill also puts more restrictions on new inexperienced 
drivers to allow them to gain ability and confidence on the road. 
However, I think it’s important that we recognize that many of 
our youth do hold down jobs and have other activities or 
responsibilities that make it necessary for them to drive at night. 
I would hope that the government would recognize these cases 
as situations where there might be exceptions made. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also note there’s an ability to grant such 
exceptions in the legislation, and I hope that they take these 
cases seriously. 
 
This amendment also gives SGI a little for . . . little for 
authority in suspending or downgrading licences when they fail 
to meet the necessary requirements to operate a vehicle; 
namely, that you can’t drive in a safe manner. People whose 
skills have deteriorated sometimes don’t realize this until it’s 
too late. 
 
I can certainly see that some people will not be happy about 
re-testing or being restricted in their ability to drive. But if the 
new power is used properly, I believe it could go a long way 
into making our roads safer. 
 
There are several other changes in this Bill that we’ll also be 
speaking on. But right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly now go to second readings, item no. 6, 
Bill No. 232, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000. 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’d like to ask the hon. 
member to repeat her motion because the Bill under 
consideration is The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 
2000 (No. 2). Is she proposing to approve second reading or is 
she moving a superseding motion? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m moving a . . . I move a 
superseding motion. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Could the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena state her superseding motion again please? 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move: 
 

That this Assembly now go to second readings, item no. 6, 
Bill No. 232, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 

The motion is seconded by the member from Cannington. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:21 p.m. until 3:31 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 19 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Eagles 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Brkich Wakefield Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — 28 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Belanger Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The Speaker: — The motion is lost, continue with business — 
Bill No. 54, The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2000 
(No. 2). 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
listened to the comments made by the member for Kelvington I 
wasn’t sure if I’d missed them or not. 
 
But we had brought numbers forward today about the . . . And we 
were talking about the terrible state of highways in this province, 
and that the government has been saying they’ve been spending 
$250 million on highways, Mr. Speaker. And actually it’s a way, 
way lower than that, Mr. Speaker; it actually comes out to about 
170 million that actually is spent on capital costs, capital 
expenditures, and maintenance — a far cry from the 250 million. 
 
By the way, the first year the $250 million has actually been in 
place of about four years of committing $250 million, but 
having a way short . . . it would be a way short of that number. 
 
They actually take in, Mr. Speaker, about $460 million, and the 
breakdown on that is: 347.6 million in a fuel tax that the 
member of the Liberal Party in the last campaign, the Leader of 
the Liberal Party, had stated that he would put all that money 
into highways, and for some reason seems to have had a 
complete turnaround on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t know why because the condition of the highways 
right now, people all over this province are pleading for that 
member and the member from North Battleford to step forward, 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

hold this government accountable, and spend that same money 
that they promised during the election on the highways that’s in 
so bad a need of that money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. I heard a member say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Leader of the Liberal Party has turned around so many 
times in this session that’s he’s actually dizzy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in motor vehicle fees that the government 
takes in, it works out to $112.4 million. And when you total the 
gas tax up and the licensing fees up, it comes out to around 
$460 million. When you only put 170 million back in, that 
works out to about a total of 35 per cent of the tax that you take 
in that is associated with vehicles — a far cry from the 87 per 
cent that the government is trying to spin with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will have a number of comments to make 
on this Bill as we look through it and hear from people out there 
in the public. And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think there is one word that describes Bill No. 59, The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 and to make 
related amendments to The Trade Union Act. Mr. Speaker, that 
word is draconian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s taken from the name of the tyrant of Athens, 
Draco, who simply decreed what the laws would be and woe 
betide anyone who opposed him. And that is exactly the way 
this government operates, Mr. Speaker. They will decree what 
will happen. 
 
The fact is though, Mr. Speaker, they don’t use the word decree. 
The tradition has been amongst the NDP in their nine years of 
mismanagement of this province to use the term, deem. We 
have deemed it to have happened. Even though, Mr. Speaker, 
no such event occurred, they will pick a point in time and say, 
this will be the law as of that date even though no law was 
actually in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is another one of their examples, Mr. Speaker, of 
heavy-handed government control, even though, Mr. Speaker, 
the people in no way, no shape, or no form want this legislation 
passed either in this legislature or in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill is strictly about forced unionization of workers. The 
government opposite says, oh no, oh no, we’re not doing that, 
Mr. Speaker; we’re not forcing people into unions. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, that is exactly what they are doing. They have been 
angry, Mr. Speaker, at corporations in this province, they have 
been angry in particular at the construction corporations in this 
province, ever since they were defeated in 1982. 

The main purpose of this Act, though, Mr. Speaker, really has 
nothing to do with workers. This government was first elected 
in 1991, was re-elected in 1995, and in that eight-year period, 
Mr. Speaker, they could have brought forward legislation of this 
type had they wanted to. But they didn’t. 
 
What changed in that time, Mr. Speaker? What change 
happened in this province that necessitated this government to 
bring forward this draconian legislation? Well I think we found 
out last week, Mr. Speaker, what happened. We saw layoffs, 
Mr. Speaker, layoffs of workers last week that indicates to us 
the reason why this particular Bill has come forward at this 
time. 
 
Those layoffs, Mr. Speaker, didn’t happen in the carpentry 
industry, they didn’t happen to the electricians, they didn’t 
happen to the plumbers — no, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even 
happen in the construction industry at all. 
 
Where did those layoffs take place? Those layoffs, Mr. Speaker, 
took place at Tommy Douglas House, the NDP’s 
election-machinery office. Why did that happen? Well gee whiz 
it might have something to do with the fact that their 
fundraising is drying up in this province because nobody wants 
this government in place. 
 
But there is one group, Mr. Speaker, that has traditionally, day 
after day, month after month, year after year pumped money as 
the lifeblood of the NDP Party into those old and withered 
veins. That group has been the union organizations. They 
pumped $300,000 in, Mr. Speaker, for the last election. 
 
But again, that NDP machine isn’t happy with that much 
money. They needed more, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we 
have Bill 59 before us. They needed more money going into the 
union coffers so the unions in turn would pass more money on 
to the NDP coffers, so they wouldn’t have to lay off the rest of 
the staff of Tommy Douglas House — the place the NDP use to 
funnel their money through for elections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is that going to work? Well what happens, 
Mr. Speaker, is when an employee is working for a company 
that may be unionized or may not be unionized, if they’re laid 
off and the company happens to have a union contract some 
place within their entire organization . . . What happens in other 
areas is you can have a company operating in residential 
construction, you can have company operating in commercial 
construction, in heavy construction, and while they may have 
the same ownership at the top, they are indeed separately 
registered companies. 
 
If one of those companies has a union contract when an 
employee is laid off and rehired under this Act, in any one of, 
let’s say, those three companies, they will now be automatically 
unionized. There’s no vote, Mr. Speaker, in asking the 
employee or any of the employees at those locations do you 
want to belong to a union? No. The government simply decrees 
that all of those workers that have been laid off and rehired will 
now be unionized. And that’s why this is a draconian Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has been very, very 
opposed to what it calls double breasting. That means an 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

organization — a company — could have, say, a sector or a 
subsidiary operating in the residential area and they could have 
a subsidiary operating in the heavy construction area. One of 
those might be unionized. They insist that both of those be 
unionized, Mr. Speaker. So they rewrote the Act back in 1992 
but they didn’t force those two entities to become one or to 
become unionized. 
 
Because at that time, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s coffers were 
flush. They didn’t need the money. But they certainly do now, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this entire effort is taking place 
today rather than in the previous eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister states that the reason this Bill needs to 
come in place now is to bring in labour harmony in the 
construction sector. Labour harmony, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I have to ask the minister: in the eight years that they have 
been in government — nine years almost now — when was 
there a labour strike within the construction industry? There 
wasn’t any, Mr. Speaker. So where was the disharmony under 
the previous legislation? It wasn’t there. 
 
But the disharmony, Mr. Speaker, that has taken place is with 
the NDP coffers and the people making the donations. That’s 
where the problem has come in, Mr. Speaker, for the 
government opposite. And that’s why they insist on this 
draconian legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the construction association are not in favour of 
this. But certainly the unions are. And the fact is the carpenters’ 
union sent out a letter to its members. And I’d like to quote 
from it. And it says: 
 

After much lobbying by the building trades . . . has finally 
announced (they’re talking about the government here) has 
finally announced proposed amendments to the CILRA 
that will get rid of the grandfathering provision and allow 
us to force several large general contractors to work totally 
union. This will add hundreds of employees. But we may 
have to force them to co-operate through the Labour 
Relations Board.  

 
So they’re going to use another one of the government’s entities 
to which they have appointed virtually the entire board, Mr. 
Speaker. And that board simply kowtows to the government’s 
and the NDP’s wishes. 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, whenever an employee brings 
forward a concern before the Labour Relations Board, it’s heard 
almost immediately. Whenever an industry or a corporation or a 
company brings forward a concern before the Labour Relations 
Board, it takes months if not years for a hearing to take place. 
 
(1545) 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, we know of a number of 
circumstances where it’s been more than two years that a 
company has had a complaint before the Labour Relations 
Board, and nothing has been heard of that complaint, Mr. 
Speaker. They simply refuse to meet to deal with the 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But if an employee brings forward a complaint, it happens very, 
very quickly, Mr. Speaker. And it also almost unanimously 
happens in favour of the union against the company, Mr. 
Speaker. Again much to the satisfaction of the minister 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter from the carpenters union goes on to say: 
“of our organizing efforts, both top down, by bringing the 
spin-offs under control.” They have wanted to gain control of 
those employees, Mr. Speaker, involved in other sectors of the 
construction industry that they have not been able to get control 
over. 
 
Why have they not got control over them, Mr. Speaker? 
Because the people working in those areas were not interested 
in being unionized. All they have to do is go and ask them if 
they want to be unionized, and if they do, you get a union. We 
have seen that happen just recently within the last few weeks, 
Mr. Speaker. But it hasn’t been happening in the construction 
industry, Mr. Speaker, because the people involved are not 
interested in belonging to a union. 
 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

In preparation, the members have amended the trade rules 
and bylaws to include a requirement for members to sign 
support cards when requested, and to report when they are 
working non-union.  

 
So, Mr. Speaker, they will have a list of people who are 
prepared to accept employment outside of the union. Now I 
wonder why they really need that, Mr. Speaker. What difference 
does it make? 
 
Mr. Speaker, before this House we have another Bill that deals 
with the human rights. No place under Saskatchewan’s Human 
Rights Code are people’s employment protected if they’re not 
in a union, Mr. Speaker — if they’re not in a union. 
 
They can be discriminated against as much as possible; they can 
have all sorts of statements made about them that would be 
against the law if you said those very same words in 
relationship to someone who is protected under the human 
rights law. But if it deals with labour or not being in a union in 
this province, then those people have no protection under this 
socialist government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only just the employees and the employers 
in the construction industry that are opposed to this particular 
piece of legislation, but it’s also the editorial writers of this 
province. And I quote from the Regina Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The effects will be to create new union shops even if 
workers in these firms would rather remain independent of 
union status. As a result, many will become union 
members by decree instead of having the right to vote for 
union status.  
 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite like to brag about how 
democratic they are. In fact it’s even part of their party name. 
But when it comes to action, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a member 
on the opposite side who believes in democracy in their heart. 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

They believe only, Mr. Speaker, in control and power of the 
state and the exercise of that power, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
believe in democracy, Mr. Speaker. They don’t believe in 
allowing workers to have a choice. They only believe in taking 
control of workers and their lives so that they serve the interests 
of the NDP and not of the worker as an individual, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon StarPhoenix goes on to say: 
 

As inflammatory as forced unionization characterization is, 
it is difficult to see the Bill as anything but that.  
 

And I have to agree, Mr. Speaker. This is nothing but forced 
unionization. It’s nothing than the heavy hand of government 
again taking control of people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s going to happen — one of 
the things that’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker — here, once 
this takes place, is that construction companies, the construction 
industry outside of this province, will benefit dramatically, Mr. 
Speaker, because they will be able to enter this province and 
tender on construction projects and be successful. 
 
The local guys won’t be able to do that because they’ll be 
forced to live under this government’s draconian legislation. 
They will be put at a serious impediment which is actually, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re already at a serious impediment because of the 
heavy tax burden placed on them by this government. 
 
The chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce is opposed to this particular piece of 
legislation. And it states in a letter that was sent to the minister: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan should not amend The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act in any way 
that would eliminate the grandfathering rights of unionized 
contractors to continue to operate their non-union 
subsidiaries. 

 
It goes on further, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is an important 
point. Again it addresses the rhetoric of the members opposite. 
A rhetoric they fail to live up to though, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Given the demographics of the province, the provincial 
chamber is also very concerned with the impact of your 
amendments on companies who have joint-ventured with 
First Nations organizations. In our meetings with First 
Nations representatives they have related strong opposition 
to organized labour workplaces. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we saw that happen not that long ago with 
the unionization of the Regina casino which is operated by the 
First Nations gaming. They did not want that organization 
coming into their workplace. They felt that if a union was to be 
formed it should be formed under their jurisdiction. 
 
Again, that was not the case. This government intervened, Mr. 
Speaker, and allowed the unionization to take place within 
those organizations, Mr. Speaker, against the wishes of the First 
Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to quote from some of the editorials. 
This is from earlier this year. It talks about the harmonization, 

the harmony within the work industry that the minister talks 
about the need for and the fact that there was no harmony. 
 
It goes on to say: 
 

The Act is no more than a sop to the province’s trade 
unions. The effect will be to create new union shops even 
if the workers in these firms would rather remain 
independent of union status. As a result many will become 
union members by decree. 

 
This initiative is aimed at putting an end to the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement which has had the 
effect of driving up the cost of major Crown construction 
projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I was out on the highways yesterday helping 
repair the potholes. And people asked, where did the money go? 
Where did the money go, Mr. Speaker? Well there’s one of the 
examples where the money went. The Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement meant that construction projects of our 
Crown corporations were dramatically increased with no added 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The estimate done in British Columbia under this same kind of 
legislation is that it adds a 30 per cent additional cost. And we 
saw those examples, Mr. Speaker. We saw an example in 
Regina of a SaskTel construction project that on a $200,000 
project added roughly $60,000 initially over the tenders of the 
non-unionized contractors who were not allowed to participate, 
Mr. Speaker, in that tendering, but tendered nevertheless. 
 
That is the kind of operation, the kind of government these 
people are running. They have to pay off, Mr. Speaker, their 
debts — their debts from the past election. And one of the ways 
of paying that off, Mr. Speaker, is this kind of draconian 
legislation. 
 
Now there are other people in this province that . . . in this 
country that practice draconian legislation. We have seen that in 
the selection of candidates by the Liberal Party where no matter 
what the local people want in a nomination meeting, the leader 
simply says this will be who you get. 
 
This is a similar type of legislation, Mr. Speaker, as that Liberal 
practice. They simply decree who and what will happen 
regardless of what the people’s concerns and the interest they 
have in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Brian Barber the vice-president of Dominion 
Construction in Regina has said, Barber added: 
 

The owners of Dominion Construction may reconsider 
operating in Saskatchewan under the new legislation. It’s a 
real concern, it limits our ability to work here. 

 
And the minister opposite says they’ll have to move their 
equipment and their operation. Mr. Speaker, it’s not that hard to 
pack up and move and a good many people in the construction 
industry in this province have done exactly that. They continue 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked the other day with the roadbuilders 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

association. Over half of the equipment they had in this 
province 10 years ago is gone. They’ve moved it out or sold it 
out of the province. 
 
Half of their remaining equipment, Mr. Speaker, sits idle while 
our highways continue to deteriorate, while the people of 
communities like Val Marie have to go out themselves with 
their own shovels, their own rakes, their own trucks to fill in the 
potholes in the roads of this province because that government 
has abdicated its entire responsibility. 
 
The only thing they have done, Mr. Speaker, in this last nine 
years of their government is blamed somebody else — anybody 
but them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the form of government that we’re 
supposed to operate under in this country, in this province is 
called responsible government. Well we have the most 
irresponsible government in the history of Saskatchewan in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a good many of my colleagues who wish 
to also address this particular Bill, this draconian Bill No. 59. I 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1600) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I request leave to go to subvote 
10 of the Estimates to engage in review of Northern Affairs. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

(Office of Northern Affairs) 
Vote 45 

 
The Chair: — Before I call the subvote 10, I’m going to invite 
the Hon. Minister of Northern Affairs to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, over here is my deputy minister, 
Alex Campbell, over to my left. As well, we have Brian 
Cousins, who is the executive director of corporate services, 
and also Donna Dumont, the business manager on corporate 
services. 
 
Subvote (EC10) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister and to 
his staff. I want to thank the minister and staff for being here 
today, and certainly for those staff members that had to come in 
from La Ronge today — welcome to the Assembly. And it’ll be 
a pleasure to be able to spend an hour with you discussing the 
different parts of Indian and Northern Affairs that are certainly 
very relevant to this province. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, to begin with, I was wondering if you could 
spend a few minutes just giving us on this side of the House a 
little bit of an overview of the department, some of the 

aspirations of your department, and how your vision, as you see 
it, as it fits into economic development for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, for the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, we do have quite a bit of developmental work in 
northern Saskatchewan. And over the years, we’ve been 
moving towards evolution on greater northern control. And that 
northern control is taking place in the various sectors — from 
municipalities to education and health — but the most important 
area was in the economic development front. 
 
So our primary goal and strategy is working into the economic 
development area, as well as to do coordination and strategic work 
with the other departments as well as with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve worked with northern leadership over the years to create a 
Northern Development Board, and we have an Interim Northern 
Development Board which is in partnership with First Nations 
people, with Metis people, as well as municipalities’ leadership. 
So it’s a unique concept in Canada wherein everybody’s 
working together as a whole from the different community 
levels but also with different jurisdictional levels. But also with 
the federal government. We sit in on the board with the federal 
government so that we are working together on a team spirit. 
 
Your question on the common vision is fairly straightforward. 
A lot of the people have done the necessary work on creating a 
vision statement, so I’ll read you the vision statement that was 
done in conjunction with northern leaders. 
 
The vision statement states that: 
 

The people of northern Saskatchewan will possess the 
means to address the goals and aspirations they have for 
their communities, their families and themselves. With 
respect for northern people, their cultures and traditions, 
government will work as an active partner with 
communities, Aboriginal authorities, business and industry 
to promote the social and economic development of the 
North. 

 
There’s also a list of goals and objectives dealing with the 
economy, dealing with institutions, dealing with the aspect of 
education, and making sure that there is a balanced approach on 
social and economic development; but as well a strategic 
emphasis in regards to the key areas that people have brought 
together as well as a balanced approach to the environment. 
 
We have a unique . . . environmental quality committees in the 
North. It’s a first in Canada where there are environmental 
quality committees — three of them in the North — and they 
work together with not only governments at the federal and 
provincial level, but also with industry. And because they 
represent the communities, the community input is there. 
 
So in a nutshell, that gives us an overview in regards to the 
Northern Affairs office and the northern strategy and 
partnership with the people of the North. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you spoke of the Department of Northern Affairs 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

being a strategic arm for the several different departments that 
the government has. And you spoke about Education and 
Health as a couple of those different arms. 
 
I’m wondering then, we have two departments of Education in 
this province — which is probably about double what we really 
need — plus we have the Department of Northern Affairs also 
being involved in education as you’ve mentioned. How is it 
then you feel that we need, in this province, another arm such 
as, you say, the Department of Northern Affairs being a 
strategic arm in the development of educational benefits for 
northern communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — It’s no different than in regards to the 
rural areas. 
 
We have in addition to Education and Health, as you say in our 
rural areas, we have Agriculture and Food. It’s a strategic focus 
in an agricultural segment in our society, a very most important 
segment of society. 
 
And in regards to the North we also look at the economics of it, 
but we also do the coordination of it. We do not duplicate that 
which is already done in education. Education does that. 
Basically our goal and desire was to do what we have been 
doing in general in the South where we’re trying to do an 
interdepartmental strategy. Rather than the departments 
working separately and not coordinating efforts, they wanted to 
coordinate things in the North. And that falls into the purview 
of Northern Affairs. 
 
We provide the mechanism to do that interdepartmental work, 
and as such it’s been quite fruitful. You know, people from the 
Social Services sector are working with Education, with Health, 
during the strategic designs that are required for more effective 
programming at the community level. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I understand very 
clearly what you’re saying, but I still have a great deal of 
concern over this. In this province we have, you know, the 
several ministries, and you again mentioned Health and 
Education and Social Services, and certainly Justice would fall 
into the categories of the social departments that we need to be 
very cognizant of. 
 
Why is it then . . . has it been felt by you and your department 
and your government that intergovernmental agencies that are 
created through the collaboration of several departments needs 
to be more closely established in the North than it is in the 
South? 
 
Having been around education for several years of my life and 
trying to provide opportunities for families and children in a 
coordinated effort to deal with, whether it was Justice and 
Health and Education or whether it was Education and mental 
health and Social Services, whatever, there was a great deal of 
barriers created. So how is it then that you are able to break 
down these barriers so much more quickly than in the North? 
Or are you able to? Or are there still so many . . . quite a few 
barriers to be broke down that we are not able to be able to 
break down north of the . . . or south of the northern boundary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Part of the idea in creating a more 

flexible strategic Northern Affairs office is to try the regional 
focus. It’s half of the province in area. We have a lot of the 
situations of development that are new, the new mining 
developments, the new forestry strategies, you know, that are 
taking place. 
 
And it’s important to focus in different areas. And I know that 
from the members from the rural areas. I watch them very 
carefully, and I listen to them on a daily basis, you know, 
talking about the need to do strategic design at the rural 
development areas. And you have REDAs (regional economic 
development authority), you know at the regional development 
areas, you have regional school boards, you have regional 
health districts, and so on. So we’re doing and replicating that 
which we see in regards to northern development. 
 
We were, to put it very bluntly, quite a bit behind the rest of the 
province in regards to developmental activity. And that’s why 
you need a strategic focus. 
 
But I must say that there is success. About 1991 when we come 
into government there was about 500 people working in the 
mines in regards to the North. And today I’m very happy to 
report that we have 1,000 people from northern Saskatchewan 
working in the mines. 
 
A lot of people thought that it would not be possible in a short 
period of time to get that many Northerners going, but we’ve 
had excellent co-operation from the mining companies. They’ve 
been willing to co-operate with the communities. And the 
communities have been willing to co-operate with the business 
as well as government, both at the provincial and federal level, 
and also at the municipal, First Nations, and Metis level as well. 
 
And that strategy of working together has proven benefits not 
only to the idea of getting people jobs, you know, by doubling 
the number of jobs in a certain period, but the business 
development we know that entrepreneurship is so important 
whether you’re in the rural areas, the urban areas, or the North. 
 
And in that regard, I might say this, that the opportunities 
provided by the business sector in regards to bidding for the 
contracts in the mining sector, we’ve now seen in the mining 
sector approximately around $20 million worth of contracts and 
wages in the early ’90s. We now have a couple . . . about a year 
and a half ago, about 180 million. 
 
So we’re seeing a major improvement of entrepreneurial 
strategy by northern businesses in regards to northern 
development. And many of them partner with people from 
themselves within the North. They also partner with people 
from Saskatoon or elsewhere in the South. 
 
So you’re seeing partnership strategies, you know within this 
province and sometimes, of course, some of the larger scale 
corporations are not only within Canada but some of them are 
from the international mining companies. So they do some 
strategic partnership there as well. So you’re seeing this concept 
of partnership and evolution and development; seeing success 
stories in the training aspect, in the jobs aspect, as well as in the 
creation of business development. 
 
(1615) 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, you touched a little bit 
on the mining sector and if your pleasure, we’ll go into that for 
just a few minutes. You mentioned with a great deal of pride, 
and certainly we all feel that pride also that in the last few years 
the workforce in the mines has doubled and the business 
opportunities for northern businesses has gone up from 20 
million to 180 million. That’s a significant increase and 
certainly bodes well for the North. 
 
We’ve been hearing . . . well they’re not rumours, but I’ve 
certainly had quite a few phone calls from residents who have 
worked for several years in the mines, have recently received 
layoffs especially from the two big mining partners up there. I 
was wondering if you’d be able to make a comment as to . . . 
because of the success that you’ve mentioned, more and more 
people working in the mine, how come there was such a 
significant layoff that took place at the two new mining 
developments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The layoffs were actually the 
developments that were taking place at Cluff Lake. There was a 
phase-out on the Cluff Lake project. And of course a lot of the 
displacement was taking place as well in regards to the changes 
over the new developments that were taking place, that there 
ought to be milling operations for example in Key Lake. The 
ore had been running out for example in Rabbit Lake. And they 
had to make a new road system, you know, coming into the two 
new mines. And from there, the companies were not exactly the 
same companies so they made some decisions to have a 
transition period. 
 
So what we saw from last year and this year, of course, there 
was going to be a slight dip, about 150 people, which affected 
Northerners, you know, quite a bit as well. Because I know my 
constituents, and I know the member from Athabasca’s 
constituents particularly, these issues were raised to us. 
 
But we said at some point there’s depletion in a mine in history, 
and that the case is, are we able to get new ore bodies 
developed? And I was very pleased just a couple of weeks ago, 
and when you look at two most highly . . . the two largest 
mining companies in the world, COGEMA and Cameco, you 
know, had an official opening. 
 
And so we’re going across with the two new mines at McArthur 
and McClean. And that has provided a little bit of hope, you 
know, in the downturn that we had. And there is talk about 
another ore body as well. And I think over time as we have 
probably the best standards in the world in regards to 
environmental protection which has a double base to it from the 
. . . not only do we have the environmental qualities in the 
North, but we have the federal and the provincial regulatory 
standards. But that indeed, in this case, we have seen these, this 
downturn being affected quite positively. 
 
There’s still hope for a lot of people in the North. They 
understood that there was going to be a downturn. And it 
affected people from the South as well because half of the 
workforce is from the South in regards to the mines. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, you mentioned to a 
small extent the environmental protections that are in place to 
protect the environment in the North. Certainly the two large 

corporations there, COGEMA and Cameco, have tried to do 
their utmost in protecting the environment. Certainly uranium 
mining is quite an expensive and a dangerous type of operation. 
We’re dealing with highly radioactive material. 
 
And you mention that, of course, that the federal government 
has some very strict regulations in place, and the provincial 
government also has regulations in place. 
 
I guess from this side of the House when we look at, you know, 
economic development in this country and certainly in this 
province and certainly in northern Saskatchewan, why it’s felt 
that from this government that large mining corporations need 
to jump through two sets of hoops, so to speak. 
 
Does the government then feel quite strongly that the 
regulations put in by their partners in Ottawa are that weak that 
we need to duplicate this, or is there some very clear reason 
why you have a second set of hoops for mining corporations to 
jump through when it comes to environmental protection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, it’s straightforward in regards to the 
base-metal industry, but in regards to uranium it’s a special 
case. 
 
This is basically because during the historic basis . . . while 
today we recognize tremendous peaceful uses of uranium and 
that our energy is for lighting up homes, etc., and for other 
industrial developments, we also recognize that the history of 
the uranium also dealt with the defence side of the question. 
And of course, defence was a federal jurisdiction. 
 
So in the United States and in Canada we have seen, you know, 
the controls on a special case scenario regarding the uranium. 
And that is the reason why. Historically we have moved more 
and more in partnership and trying to make sure that the 
regulatory around is indeed quite similar. There are still some 
things that we are working out with the federal government at 
the present time. So I take your question to mean that we want 
to make sure that there is no excessive duplication, that indeed 
we want to make sure that we are effectively making sure that 
the best levels of radiation safety for the workers. 
 
And also in regards to the environment that the best standards 
are put there. But that again I understand your question to be 
that we have to watch out for excessive regulatory regimes. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I was hoping we 
could wrap this little piece of questioning up rather quick, but 
you kind of opened up a can of worms here that I’m very much 
concerned about. Certainly you mentioned that a great deal of 
regulations that need to be watched over for uranium mining 
and the use of radioactive material throughout the world. We 
need to be cognizant of this. 
 
And I’m wondering as a Department of Northern Affairs and as 
a provincial government then, do you feel quite strongly that the 
federal government is not holding up their own weight when it 
comes to clarification of how the final product is being used and 
that it is actually being used for peaceful purposes, as you say, 
to light the houses of the world. 
 
Because as you indicated also and we agree here, that certainly 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

radioactive material is quite a dangerous product and can 
certainly be used for very destructive methods. And as you 
indicated, those of you on that side of the House and certainly 
those of us on this side of the House are very much opposed to 
having that type of a product used for destructive purposes. And 
it’s certainly much more beneficial to mankind having it used 
for peaceful purposes. 
 
We’re kind of wondering then, I would have to kind of wonder, 
certainly the defence of this country is the responsibility of the 
federal government. Does the department then feel, and your 
government feel that the federal government is not keeping up 
on their side looking after putting the proper measures in place 
to ensure that the product is going to be used safely. And we 
have to take that role on of a federal government as a . . . from a 
provincial aspect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — There is still a role for the federal 
government on the environmental side. We know automatically 
that on the international front we see in Europe 
interjurisdictional aspects with the European Union that have 
evolved over the years. And people know that there is pollutants 
that can go back and forth between the United States and 
Canada. 
 
So once that happens it’s very important for our role, and a very 
effective role to be played by the federal government. And we 
look upon that role, in particular regards to uranium 
development, as a positive one overall. There’s always aspects 
to work out in regards to issues that come in from time to time. 
But at the present time the reason is there is a role for the 
federal government to play as well on the environmental front. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. In this area of 
uranium development and the economic development in the 
North, there was a plan just a very few short years ago by one 
of the tribal councils and several bands in northwestern 
Saskatchewan to try to help alleviate some of the problems that 
are involved around the storage of depleted uranium fuels, and 
the plans seemed to end up going nowhere. 
 
Now I guess from this side of the House when we’re always 
looking at economic development for the province and 
initiatives, certainly from northern communities, I’m wondering 
what the position then is of the Department of Northern Affairs 
because of the, because of this lack of opportunity or the 
opportunity that was missed? If you’d be able to respond to 
that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — We dealt with that issue, and they dealt 
with that issue at that time. And the answer was no to the 
request. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. We’re certainly 
disappointed that you couldn’t come up with a little stronger 
answers to why there was a necessity to quash northern 
development. 
 
But I want to stay in the area of economic development. In the 
North, of course now after this budget, we’re going to end up 
with kind of a two-tier system for outfitters in the North, 
depending upon if they happen to be on a reserve or if their 
business is off-reserve because of this PST (provincial sales tax) 

tax structure. 
 
In many of the provinces that . . . now there is consideration in 
northern communities to put everyone on a level-playing field. 
Because as we know, Mr. Minister, many of these business 
developments that are on native Indian reserves are not near 
some of the other communities. And yet it’s going to detract to 
some degree from the business opportunities if you happen to 
have a business off an Indian reserve. 
 
Has your department started to look at this time in any way to 
create some sort of a level-playing field as many of the other 
provinces have done so that everyone in the North will be able 
to participate in economic development and probably more 
specifically the tourism industry and just general service to the 
people who live in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, we’re trying to take a very positive 
view in regards to the tourism development. I know that, 
historically, I myself was involved in the tourism industry back 
in the mid-’50s. And we did a lot of the early developmental 
work. 
 
And I see that as the development arose in the North, a lot of 
the new people, you know that have come in and who did the 
early developmental work then, and in many cases a lot of the 
Northerners were left out of the tourist industry except in 
regards to being guides and doing the necessary work that was 
there. 
 
Now we’re seeing a partnership idea evolve. Very similar to the 
idea on mining. People want to be on an equal footing on the 
business development. We’re seeing proposals coming forward 
where there is equal footing on the business development side, 
not only on the employment side. And we’re seeing some very 
positive work with the outfitters group in trying to do the 
educational development work there. 
 
And so I’m seeing some positive lights there. I’m starting to see 
that talk about the partnerships. And people are taking about 
ecotourism, but not only the ecotourism side of the business but 
the regular tourism that has been there before. You know, 
building on the basics that are there, but also on the idea of 
cultural tourism. 
 
Some of the people have said, well why don’t we have a 
partnership so that, for example, if the Dene people in 
Wollaston Lake, you know, have a special way of doing and 
tending to the fish and how they catch them, are there some 
unique ways on the Crees and the Metis people from 
Cumberland? Those types of ideas on cultural tourism are going 
to be put in as part of the picture in regards to ecotourism and 
the regular tourism that’s already there. So that has been talked 
about. 
 
We had a major tourism conference last year which was 
attended by 150 people. It was quite a display, not only on 
sharing of unique ideas, but a lot of excitement, you know, 
being fostered and particularly on this idea of partnerships. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, certainly when we 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

talk about economic development in the North and 
opportunities for partnerships, we certainly want to applaud 
those kind of efforts. 
 
But getting back to my original question, we’re seeing an 
unlevel playing field developing here. And it’s being applied to 
very small, specific areas of the North. 
 
And we’re wondering as the government and as the Minister of 
Northern Affairs, are you looking at opportunities then so that 
all areas of northern Saskatchewan will be able to continue to 
participate in the growth that is taking place and going to take 
place in tourism and in the ecotourism and traditional tourism 
that is taking place in the North, as you spoke of earlier — the 
fishing and the hunting — so that . . . 
 
Because we know that all those communities, the reserves that 
are up there, they’re certainly, now that they’re not having to 
collect PST and they don’t collect GST (goods and services tax) 
on their goods and services, is that all of a sudden we’re going 
to have little pockets of highly developed economic opportunity 
and it’s going to create a great deal of separation from the rest 
of the North who are not going to be able to benefit from those 
same opportunities. 
 
So has your department been able to . . . had time yet to step 
back and take a look at this and how they’re going to be able to 
address this situation so that everyone who lives in the North 
and not just those that have businesses on the reserves be able 
to participate in the continuing expansion with tourism in the 
North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, as regards to the taxation question 
on the tourist aspect that you’re talking about, of course it is 
well known that people who do tourist development off-reserve 
. . . I mean most of the projects will be off-reserve; the tourist 
outfitting businesses are mainly off-reserve. 
 
So obviously if the treaty Indians are off-reserve, they’re paying 
taxes exactly the same as everybody else. There maybe some 
developing examples into the future wherein treaty Indians may 
be able to establish on-reserve. And I know of a particular 
example and maybe there might be some other developing 
examples. 
 
And from the governmental strategy, we respect, you know, the 
law that exists. We had a standard of . . . that’s on the same 
level as the GST, so that indeed people who pay the PST will 
have the same protection on-reserve, you know, as the GST. So 
it’s a national basis, you know, right across Canada. So that’s a 
standard that we’re using. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, you are starting a 
northern tourism task team to look at how to further expand 
tourism in the North. I guess we’re rather curious on this side is 
that this is the year 2000 and it took till this long for the 
government of the day to grasp the concept that there is a great 
deal of opportunities for tourism and economic development in 
the North. 
 
As you’re well aware, for this side of the House we kind of 
have an ideology that we need to remove red tape from tourism 
development. And certainly, you know, I would want to have 

such a blanket statement as that, you know, just override the 
whole issue when we want to be quite aware that when it comes 
to ecotourism we still need to look after protecting the 
environment. And certainly we have to be careful that the lakes 
are not overfished and we have to be very cognizant that the big 
game populations remain high and stable. 
 
So I guess, you know, from my point of view here then, Mr. 
Minister, why is it necessary then to create a task team to look 
at tourism in the North when it’s already fairly well widely 
known in this province, in the North in this province, in this 
country, and in Europe and in the United States that what we 
need to do is to get tourism up and running in this province and 
not create another level of bureaucracy and red tape to hold it 
back. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess I want to ask you, what do you hope 
to establish with this tourism task team? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — It’s fairly similar as you will find in 
regards to rural development. If you’re going to do rural 
development and you’re doing, particularly . . . (inaudible) . . . 
for example on diversification, the new aspect, you know, from 
moving from the grains into the diversification areas. 
 
There’s always room, in historic terms, to have task teams to 
deal with particular focused strategies, because there’s always 
new ideas, new developments that are out there. 
 
So you always have to have faith and trust in people that there 
is always new ideas that they are willing to bring out. And in 
our task team approach, we make sure that the people are from 
northern Saskatchewan, they bring the ideas. 
 
My understanding is that they recently did a first phase 
overview with a northern labour market committee. So that 
there’s not only a job . . . a business strategy there, but a job 
strategy as well. 
 
So I’m very . . . actually I’m waiting for, you know, the task 
team to do their report because I’m pretty sure that they will 
have exciting ideas for development. The general idea that you 
talk about on the need for tourism, that’s already accepted. And 
the tourism conference said that they needed a task team to do a 
strategic focus and that’s what they’re really doing. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to ask a couple of questions with respect to representative 
area networks. And as you will recall, a while back there was 
some concern from both industry and conservation groups in 
terms of the process around how areas were being determined, 
identified, and assigned. 
 
Now on the industry side, certainly the concern is that there are 
areas that may very well be off limits to them in the future, and 
these could be areas of high mineral potential. On the 
conservationist side, they are very concerned that a lot of their 
work and effort over the years which, as I understand it, is 
based almost entirely on scientific data and should reflect what 
it is that is attempting to be accomplished with the development 
of the representative area networks. So it appears that somehow 
the process here, Mr. Minister, has let down both industry and 
the conservation groups. 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2000 

My question to you, sir, is how involved has your department 
been in the consultation process around representative area 
networks given that mining, exploration, certainly are large, 
large components of the northern economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes. Like I mentioned earlier on, on the 
consultation, of course the lead department on RANs 
(representative area network) . . . And you might want to ask 
more questions on RANs pertaining to the minister in charge of 
RANs, the member from Athabasca. But for us, we work in 
coordination with them to make sure that, number one, there is 
consultation, proper consultation, you know. 
 
Secondly, that they have . . . that if and when something is 
going to be established, that the proper information is there. We 
want to make sure that there is always room for developments 
as we know on the mining sector and the forestry sector. And to 
make sure as well that we recognize that there are unique areas 
in the history of our province that need protection. So that we 
do this balanced approach. 
 
And in that sense we have this . . . The key question would then 
have to be asked, you know, by the Minister of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), you 
know, during the question at that time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
indicated that you were involved in the consultation process. 
Can you explain to me what form of involvement that was? 
Were you or were any of your department officials involved in 
the numerous hearings that were held throughout the North? 
Did they make submissions to these hearings, and if so, would 
you be able to make copies of those submissions available to 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I have staff that work in conjunction with 
SERM, and the records of course are kept with that SERM in 
regards to the whole process. Now on our side we work in 
coordination with them and to move things along. We want to 
make sure that indeed established realms of what we call 
sustainable development, making sure that we have 
development in the North that does a serious look at the 
economic development side and also on the environmental 
questions. 
 
And it’s an excellent question. When we look at the 
development over the . . . and I reiterate this on the mining side. 
The mining development we’ve seen has gone from 500 
workforce to 1,000 workers, you know, since 1991. And we’ve 
seen the development of mining from 20 million to 180 million. 
 
So we’re seeing a high level of development, you know, 
occurring on the mining sector but we want to as well make 
sure that the environment is well protected. That’s why we 
work with SERM. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
so specifically were you or were any of your department 
representatives involved in any of the hearings that were held 
with respect to community input for the representative area 
networks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, that will be an excellent question. 

We’re on the development stage. We’re doing the development 
work right now. And what we’re seeing is that we have on the 
one hand, you know, the evolution of development of land use 
policies. And we did that a couple of RANs, which one was 
Wapawekka. And there was extensive work done, and our staff 
worked along with SERM. 
 
And I remember people actually going into the area in 
Wapawekka Hills. These hills are about 2,500 feet high. 
There’s fairly unique areas right in there because of the long, 
historic . . . (inaudible) . . . that were there. There was areas in 
there that caribou were at. There is unique trees and vegetation 
on the east, northeast side, you know, the Wapawekka Hills, 
you know where the protection occurred. 
 
But with the outfitter that was there, they even took them in to 
look at the sites. And they did . . . actual people going through 
the forest to look at the unique vegetation. Because when the 
glaciers were around, 9 million . . . 9,000 years ago, that indeed 
they are very similar to what happened here in Cypress Hills. 
You will have seen the conifers that were around on the 
prairies, you know, scraped off, but a lot still left off at the 
Cypress Hills because the Cypress Hills were way high. 
 
And you see that type of argument that was played on in 
regards to Wapawekka Hills. And so that there was good solid 
consultation with the people that were doing the outfitting in 
that area, as well as the people who did the mining in that area, 
as well as people who are doing presently fishing in there. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — So, Mr. Minister, are you saying then that 
no one from your department including yourself were formally 
involved with any of the hearings at all that went on in the 
different communities with respect to community input and 
consulting with the various stakeholders in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — No, I said earlier on to the member that 
my staff is always there working with SERM. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — And did your staff add any of those 
hearings, any of those community meetings that they participate 
in terms of making any formal presentations? Did they have any 
type of formal input at those hearings whatsoever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — My staff basically works in terms of 
facilitation and when the meetings are set up with SERM; we’re 
trying to get input for the different players, different resource 
users. 
 
So the basic reason for any hearing on land use etc., is to get the 
players, you know, from the mining community, from the 
forestry community, from the fishing and trapping, as well as 
the outfitting industry and other users whether it is the gathering 
of berries etc. So you try and get the input. The main reason is 
to get input from the people and we play a facilitator’s role. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as 
I’m sure you are aware the La Ronge mineral industry group 
has a fair degree of difficulty with the way that the development 
of the RANs has been approached. 
 
And one of their concerns is, is that the government for 
whatever reason has shied away, if you will, from taking 



June 7, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

appropriate and relative amounts of area in southern 
Saskatchewan and putting them into the RAN system. And 
what they’re then attempting to do is make up the shortfall in 
the North without adequate consultation from either the 
industry sector or the conservation sector. 
 
What would you say to those individuals, Mr. Minister, who are 
concerned that perhaps the interests of northern Saskatchewan 
are not being represented by the allowing of the shortfalls in 
southern Saskatchewan to be made up in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Is the member saying that the official 
position that you say is that . . . Are you saying that the RANs 
should be more in the South? I’m trying to gauge your question. 
Are you saying that the RAN development should be basically 
in the South and not as much as the North? Is that really the 
question? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — No. The question is based on a concern 
that was expressed to us, Mr. Minister, by the La Ronge mineral 
industry group and as a matter of fact I’ll read the concern 
directly: 
 

The RAN proposal for southern Saskatchewan will 
withdraw much less land than the northern RAN proposal. 
There is no basis to support a policy whereby shortfalls in 
the South can be offset by a larger land grab in the North. 

 
It is their concern, Mr. Minister, and I’m asking you to respond 
to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — By the way, I’ve actually written a letter, 
you know, back to the members, basically that the two points 
that are very important are number one, that there’s going to be 
proper consultation, you know, and also making sure that the 
information is there. 
 
And I know that the . . . you will probably be very happy to 
know that . . . You might want to raise the same question to the 
Minister of SERM, because he’s the one who is actually in 
charge of the RANs rather than myself. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. Just one more quick question. 
 
Did your department have any role whatsoever in informing the 
various stakeholders of the final decisions that were made 
around the establishment of the RANs? Were you in any way in 
charge of the responsibility of meeting with the various mining 
and exploration companies and indicating to them what the 
decisions had been in terms of the various areas that had been 
identified and what the timetables were going to be for further 
identification of more RAN areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, again it will be a question that can 
be tabled with the SERM minister. And I would like to be able 
to help you out, but the specific details, etc., in regards to 
process and timing and all of that will be with the SERM 
minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if it would be all right if 
we rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again, or are 
there urgent questions the members need to do? 
 
Okay. Then we’ll report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 
 
 


