





























































Hansard: May 30, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1435 
 May 30, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who would like to see their fuel tax reduced by 10 cents a litre. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens in their continued concern about the high 
price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Yorkton, Melfort, Kinistino, Englefeld, and 
Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have constituents 
that are unhappy with the price of fuel and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Kinistino 
and Birch Hills. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the future of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by citizens of Lanigan and Drake. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to bring a petition 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the health care in 
this province. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this is signed by constituents from Lanigan, Lockwood, 
and Guernsey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition regarding the Lanigan, Watrous hospital. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed from the people in the Lanigan, 
Drake, and Viscount areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition with 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petitioners are from Lanigan, Drake, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon to bring a petition from people who are opposed to 
enforced municipal amalgamation. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people 
from the rural municipality of Paddockwood No. 520. 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present today on behalf of citizens concerned about poor 
cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

And the petitioners come from the communities of Govan and 
Strasbourg. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition regarding the future of Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the good people of Lanigan and Drake have signed this 
petition. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition for improved cellular telephone coverage in 
the Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea districts. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Strasbourg, 
Craven, and Southey, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
To discontinue the use of public money for funding events 
that are pornographic in nature; and 
 
To provide reliable cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, and Cudworth. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 54 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Regarding the report entitled Children and Youth In Care 
Review: Listen to Their Voices, were there any differences 
between the draft report which was reviewed by the 
Department of Social Services in March of this year and 
the final report which was reviewed and released by the 
Children’s Advocate in April of this year; if so, what were 
those differences; also, did the Department of Social 
Services request and/or make changes to the draft report; 
what were those changes? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and the members of 
the Legislative Assembly, three very distinguished guests that 
we have sitting in your gallery who are present with us today in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
They come to Canada and to Saskatchewan from a far away 
place, and yet a very close place — South Africa. And in 
particular, they’re elected and other officials with the province 
of Free State in South Africa. 
 
I will ask them to stand as I introduce them. They are Premier 
Winkie Direko; Premier, Madam Premier. As well, Minister 
Sekhopi Malebo, who is the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. It’s Malebo actually is the correct pronunciation 
— excuse me, Mr. Minister. And the official, Mr. Khotso de 
Wee, who’s the Director General or the cabinet secretary. Mr. 
Director General, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these three people are here learning about the 
parliamentary processes in Saskatchewan. We had the distinct 
honour and pleasure of having them sit in on cabinet 
deliberations today with us. They are meeting with the civil 
servants and reviewing the structures of government as part of 
an ongoing exchange that takes place between Canada and 
South Africa. 
 
Three or four years ago, members who were in the House at the 
time would recognize that we had with us Premier Patrick 
Lekota, also of Free State, taking part in the same exercise. 
Today Patrick is replaced by Madam Premier, and we had the 
similarly enjoyable experience meeting her, her minister, and 
her official in cabinet and in the next few days as they get to 
know the province and our systems better. 
 
One final word in conclusion, with the permission of the House 
and you, sir. I think all of us are very proud of what we have 
seen in South Africa. Going through decades, centuries of 
terrible oppression based on race, the apartheid regime. And 
then coming through it and finding liberation in the graceful 
dignified manner in which — under the leadership of President 
Mandela — people like those in our gallery today have come 
through that fire, that torture that they have experienced, really 
is an inspiration I think to the entire world. 
 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

The Commission on Truth and Reconciliation is an example of 
justice in its highest, most elevated form. 
 
And while there’s much work yet to be done, as we were told 
by our visitors, in building that nation, I have no doubt 
whatsoever that given the principles of dignity and decency and 
commitment to democracy and markets and the development of 
the quality of life in their community that the people of Free 
State, the people of South Africa are well on their way to 
building one of the most generous egalitarian societies on earth. 
 
And I want to welcome them to Saskatchewan and to Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too want to 
rise on behalf of the official opposition and welcome our guests 
from South Africa: Premier Winkie Direko; Minister Malebo; 
Mr. Khotso de Wee; Ms. Rachel Sempe. We do welcome you to 
Saskatchewan. We welcome you to our province. 
 
I would just take a minute to tell our guests in the Assembly 
that many years ago, before I entered the life of politics, I had 
the privilege of visiting their country of South Africa. And I can 
assure everyone here that it is a very beautiful country. The 
Premier was correct in suggesting that it has great potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was there, not all of the reforms that have 
been accomplished were in place. And I too compliment the 
citizens of South Africa, the leadership in South Africa that has 
moved that country towards a more democratic country with 
respect for all people of all races and all backgrounds. It is 
certainly a step in the right direction. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan — a landlocked province; I 
believe their province or state is also a landlocked province in a 
large country with an agriculture base and a lot of beautiful 
terrain. We think you’ll feel quite at home here in 
Saskatchewan. We ask you to enjoy your stay here. I look 
forward to meeting you later in the day, and again welcome 
from the official opposition. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you, hon. member. I’m reminded by the Leader of the 
Opposition that I accidentally overlooked in also introducing 
Ms. Rachel Sempe. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has done so. On behalf of all of 
us, I just wanted to add our words of welcome to you as well. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming Premier Direko and Minister Malebo, the Director 
General and the Chief Director to Saskatchewan and to this 
Assembly. 
 
We had a very fruitful discussion yesterday talking about 
education and how education works in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But also with regard to the functioning of the 
coalition government and how well the coalition government is 
working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I certainly understand that our visitors do have an intense 
schedule of activities today and this week. And I know that they 
are looking at our way of government and the linkages between 
the executive and the legislative arms of government. 
 
And I would like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition and all members in welcoming them to our 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’d like to introduce to you and through you 
to the members of the Assembly, a class of 15 grade 6 students 
from Watson Elementary School. They are sitting in the east 
gallery and they are accompanied by their teacher — and 
pardon me if I don’t pronounce this right — Bernice 
Gerspacher, and the chaperones Karen Eger, Kate 
Wickenhauser, Colleen Hausecker, Norah Mills, Cam 
MacLean, Dori Nordeck, Cathy Fetter, and Jackie Buhs. 
 
Please join me in welcoming this class to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, 58 grade 6 students in the west 
gallery. These students are from Greystone Heights School in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And they are joined by their 
teachers Ms. Alicia Klópoushak and Ms. Chrisa Sikórski. And 
they’re also joined by three chaperones, Mr. Speaker — Mr. 
Len Herrem, Ms. Christine Todd, and Dr. Carroll Chubb. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with these students, their 
teachers, and their chaperones at 2 o’clock for pictures and a 
discussion of what they’re going to be witnessing in the 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to ask all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming these students, 
teachers, and chaperones from Greystone Heights School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with our Premier, the Leader of the Liberal Party, and 
the Leader of the Opposition in introducing and welcoming to 
this Assembly our guests from South Africa. 
 
We had very interesting and heart-rending discussions with 
them today, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to say that they 
touched my heart. And even though my Canadian-accented 
Dutch will be just a poor imitation of Afrikaans . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
. . . To you and through you, I’d like to welcome the people 
here from Watson. I know that’s in the constituency of Watrous 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

but some of the people in the Assembly are also my 
constituents. So maybe I’ll be able to join with the member later 
on and see what kind of treats she offers your group. So 
welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Hon. members, by your leave, I also am 
thrilled to have in the Speaker’s gallery 30 students from St. 
Henry School from the great city of Melville. And I want you to 
welcome them here as well as their teachers Cindy Krizmanic, 
and Fulvia Breda. 
 
We had a little meeting just before the House assembled and 
they’re very much looking forward to enjoying not only the 
beautiful building but the proceedings this afternoon. I ask you 
to kindly welcome them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, you’re probably 
wondering after the superb introduction to the students from St. 
Henry from Melville why I am standing. But, Mr. Speaker, 
amongst the class there is a person, a student by the name of 
Shantal Ecarnot. Now she is the daughter of Joe and Adele 
Ecarnot. 
 
You might know, Mr. Speaker, that Adele worked for the 
Speaker’s Office and she’s also my chief of staff. So again 
please welcome Shantal and the students from Melville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wood River By-election 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to rise in the Assembly today in light of the Premier calling the 
by-election in the Wood River constituency. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party is fortunate to have four outstanding 
candidates that are seeking the nomination to be the 
Saskatchewan Party MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Yogi Huyghebaert, Murray Cheeseman, Stacy 
Dunham, and Wilf Lethbridge will be vying for the nomination 
over the course of the next week, culminating in a series of 
three nomination meetings in the communities of Shaunavon, 
Glentworth, and Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to assure all members of this House 
and the people of Wood River that the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate will be working very hard to represent the interests of 
the constituents of Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also an excellent opportunity for the voters 
to express their opinion on the NDP (New Democratic 
Party)-Liberal coalition, a government which has since its 
formation raised taxes, expanded the PST (provincial sales tax), 
closed hospitals, and is forcing rural amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say that while the Liberals and 

the NDP argue amongst themselves as to whom would best 
represent the coalition government, the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate will represent the concerns of the people of Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House are looking 
forward to the next few weeks and eagerly anticipate the 
election results on June 26. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Health Care Among Best in Nation 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I have more good news from one of 
the best cities in absolutely the best province in the best country 
in the whole wide world. The good news is this: Saskatoon’s 
health care services are rated amongst the best in the country for 
the second year in a row. 
 
The survey in this week’s MacLean’s magazine is based on 
statistics from the Canadian Institute for Health Information 
Data. Out of 50 Canadian cities, Saskatoon placed sixth. Out of 
14 cities with medical schools, and this is very important, 
Saskatoon ranked third — not at the very top, but pretty close, 
and no where near the bottom. Cities were ranked according to 
13 health indicators, including life expectancy and the number 
of hip and knee replacements performed. 
 
Finishing in the top 12 per cent nationally would suggest that 
health care in this major centre is not in crisis, as some would 
say, but is a point of pride for all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased but not surprised at this affirmation 
of our health care system, and I congratulate the professionals 
who achieved this recognition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Post-Secondary Graduates 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
in the Assembly today to congratulate all the students who have 
convocated from post-secondary institutes over the past couple 
of weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I had the opportunity to attend 
graduation ceremonies at both the University of Saskatchewan 
and the University of Regina and was very impressed with the 
number of students who have taken the initiative to further their 
education. 
 
I would like to particularly thank the University of 
Saskatchewan who invited me to be a guest on their platform. 
 
For many of these students this is a very exciting time as they 
will be embarking on new careers. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
many of these graduates will have to leave Saskatchewan due to 
the lack of job opportunities here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that it is noteworthy to mention the high 
number of Aboriginal students who graduated from the College 
of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, and all those 
that received degrees in the field of science. 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

I would like to congratulate all the graduates of the new 
millennium, the class of 2000, and wish them the best of luck in 
all their future endeavours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Grazing and Pasture Technology Program Receives Award 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to inform you that Saskatchewan’s 
grazing and pasture technology program, which the 
Government of Saskatchewan is a partner in, has received an 
award from the International Society of Range Management. 
 
The Society, which is composed of 4,000 members in 40 
countries, recognizes contributions that advance the science and 
art of range management through their outstanding achievement 
award. The award was presented to the manager of the grazing 
and pasture technology program, Mr. Zoheir Abouguendia at an 
international conference recently held in Idaho. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s noteworthy that the award made to the grazing 
and pasture technology program represents the first time in its 
53-year history that the Society of Range Management has 
presented an award to a team for their accomplishments made 
through co-operative effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the team involved with Saskatchewan’s grazing 
and technology program includes individual stock growers 
across this province — the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ 
Association, the Saskatchewan Forage Council, the Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration and Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
This is a fine example of how industry and government can 
work together to help the province of Saskatchewan succeed in 
the livestock industry, and I want to extend congratulations to 
all involved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cross the Border Memorial Day Service 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
had the privilege and the honour to participate in a Memorial 
Day service in Sherwood, North Dakota. This was the 63rd 
cross-the-border memorial service between the American 
Legion and the Royal Canadian Legion. It’s the only place in 
Canada or the US (United States), Mr. Speaker, along the 
border, where legionnaires from both sides of the border 
participate in a joint Memorial Day service. 
 
The Canadian Legion members and the American Legion 
members join together at the border, exchange their flags of 
their respective countries, and march jointly across from 
Canada into the US to participate in this Memorial Day Service. 
 
The guest speaker yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was Mr. Otto 
Helwig, who is the Dean of Architectural Engineering at North 
Dakota State University . He gave a very interesting discussion, 
Mr. Speaker, a presentation on his experiences in the US Navy 

as the captain of an aircraft carrier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we honour those who 
served in our nations’ armed forces on both sides of the border: 
for the duties they perform, for the sacrifices they suffered, and 
for all the accomplishments that they made on their return from 
the war and the benefits that we enjoy because of that, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tunnels of Time — Book about Moose Jaw’s 
Incredible Tunnels 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
everyone in this province knows that one of the best and most 
interesting vacation spots in this province is Moose Jaw. 
 
Three years ago, Mary Harelkin Bishop, a Saskatoon author, 
travelled to Moose Jaw for her Easter break. And we are lucky 
that she did, Mr. Speaker, because on her trip she became 
fascinated by the tunnels in Moose Jaw and decided to write a 
novella set in our famous tunnels. 
 
The idea for the book, Tunnels of Time, came to her during one 
of her three tunnel tours she and her family took in her four-day 
holiday. Tunnels of Time introduces us to a young heroine who 
was forced to visit Moose Jaw for a wedding. While touring the 
tunnels, she bumps her head on a mirror and travels backwards 
in time. 
 
Bishop, a teacher-librarian, read her novella to her two 
elementary student classes. The story was wildly successful 
with her students and she is already working on a sequel, also to 
be set in Moose Jaw. 
 
I wish to congratulate Mary Harelkin Bishop on the publication 
of her book and to wish her luck with her next endeavour. 
 
I would also like to thank Ms. Bishop for making Moose Jaw 
the setting of her stories. By doing this, she has preserved a part 
of Moose Jaw’s heritage while stimulating the imagination and 
creativity of children who will read this book. 
 
I thank her for making Moose Jaw’s incredible tunnels part of 
this incredible book, and congratulations once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Associated Entities Fund Grants 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s a great 
pleasure today to congratulate two special organizations, the 
Ehrlo Community Service’s Sport Venture Library and the 
Regina Therapeutic Riding Association and their partner, the 
Council for Exceptional Children, for receiving grants, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Associated Entities Fund. 
 
The Associated Entities Fund was created by the province to 
distribute a portion of casino profits for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. Since the beginning of 1997, more that 
$6 million have been distributed throughout Saskatchewan for 
programs that support vulnerable children, youth, and families. 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

The fund receives a portion of its profits from Casino Regina, 
the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford, the Northern Lights 
Casino in Prince Albert, and the Painted Hand Casino in 
Yorkton. 
 
Ehrlo Community Services will use its $3,350 grant for its 
Sport Venture Library. This will be used to increase 
recreational opportunities for children, families, and 
communities who have been marginalized from sport. 
 
The Regina Therapeutic Riding Association will use its $4,490 
to provide qualified instruction in horsemanship to children 
with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I congratulate these organizations and ask 
all members to join me in applauding their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Construction Industry Union Legislation 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
keeps saying that her new labour legislation does not mean 
forced unionization. But of course nobody believes her. 
Everyone knows this is about forced unionization, including the 
unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the carpenters’ union has written to all its 
members explaining the new legislation, The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000. The letter 
says, and I quote: 
 

Proposed amendments to the CILRA will allow us to force 
several of the large contractors to work totally union. 
 

Proposed amendments will allow us to force contractors to 
work totally union. That’s what the carpenters’ union is telling 
its members. 
 
Madam Minister, will you admit that this is nothing but a forced 
unionization policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual the hon. 
member has put his spin on the quotation. The fact of the matter 
is in fact it would only . . . I think the intention was that it 
would only cause those employers who had been duly certified 
to live up to their obligations. 
 
This is not about non-union companies. It’s not about moms 
and pops. It’s about companies who have been duly certified, 
living up to their obligations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m putting no spin on this 
whatsoever. I quoted right from the carpenters’ union 
document. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of construction workers in this 
province are non-union. Now, Mr. Speaker, they have the right 
to organize and they can do that right now. But they have 
chosen to work non-union. 
 
So does the NDP respect their right to choose? No, not at all. 
You have to step in and force them into a union just to appease 
your union leader friends. This letter from the carpenters’ union 
says it all. The union is giving advice to its members on how 
. . . not how to organize but how to force construction workers 
into a union against their will. 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t you respect the workers’ right to 
choose? Why are you forcing them into a union against their 
will? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, on the risk of boring 
everyone in the House by repeating this over again, this is the 
law; the same as that exists in Alberta, BC (British Columbia), 
Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, 
Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, the Northwest 
Territories. 
 
This law is the same everywhere, and the only thing it does is to 
ensure that a company cannot operate union and non-union 
simultaneously. If you’re a union company, you’re a union 
company; if you’re a non-union company, you’re a non-union 
company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the 
minister to show me the legislation in other provinces that takes 
away the rights of employers like her legislation takes away 
from employers in the province of Saskatchewan. Show us that 
in the legislation of other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP doesn’t believe in freedom in the 
workplace. Mr. Speaker, they don’t believe in secret ballots and 
they don’t believe in giving the workers the right to choose. 
 
Of course, can you really blame them? They gave people a 
secret ballot in the election last September and most people 
chose somebody other than the NDP. Now we have a forced 
union between the NDP and the Liberals and we know how 
well that’s working. 
 
Madam Minister, why won’t you commit to these basic 
freedoms in the workplace? Why are you trying to turn 
Saskatchewan into Cuba North, a labour dictatorship? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as much as I would like to 
do the member opposite’s research for him, the fact of the 
matter is it would be a pleasure to increase the accuracy, but 
I’m afraid I just don’t have time. But . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I notice the members opposite 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

conveniently don’t accuse us of being just like Alberta, 
although this legislation will make us that way. They don’t 
accuse us of being just like Ontario, although the legislation 
will make us the same . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And the fact of the matter is, in the 
instances they’re discussing, the workers already did choose 
and it was only the ability of double breasting and spinning off 
that undermined that choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the people of Saskatchewan would appreciate it if the 
minister would take a little time with them and actually tell 
them and talk to them and listen to them about legislation like 
this. The minister keeps saying that this legislation is exactly 
the same as in other provinces, but it simply is not true. That is 
not true. This legislation takes away rights from employers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta does allow the same company to have a 
union and non-union wing in different sectors. They have that. 
She says they don’t, but they do. 
 
Of course the government would never want to follow Alberta’s 
lead in economic development. They’re only the fastest 
growing province in the whole country. The NDP would rather 
pay off their union leader friends who bankroll the NDP 
election campaign. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce is 
asking you to draw up this Bill. The Saskatchewan Construction 
Association is asking you to draw up this Bill. Why are you 
going to force through legislation that neither business nor 
workers want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there were a lot of 
questions there and I’ll try to systematically go through them. 
 
Now the member says that there was no discussion. There was 
over a hundred meetings, two reports, and one labour mediator 
brought in to deal with this. 
 
The second point I would make is everywhere in Canada, 
regardless of the government, regardless of the political stripe, 
workers have the right to certify or decertify their unions, 
exactly the same as in Saskatchewan and the same as in this 
Bill. 
 
The other comment I might make is I’m not sure why these 
members are so adamant that Saskatchewan should have a 
different set of rules than everyone else. But the fact of the 
matter is, contractors have discussed this issue of two sectors 
for Saskatchewan. They have said that our construction sector’s 
not large enough, and that’s their own conclusion that they have 
drawn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health District Budgets 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 23 the 
rural municipality of Wolverine wrote the Minister of Health. 
The RM (rural municipality) has participated in stakeholder 
meetings that the health district has held. They know the health 
district is being forced to accept major health facility and 
service cutbacks this year in order to reduce their budget deficit. 
It includes the conversion of the Lanigan Hospital into a health 
centre. 
 
Despite the changes proposed, the taxpayers of the RM would 
still be expected to forward a debenture to the health district. 
Due to the uncertainty surrounding the status of the Lanigan 
Hospital, the RM has notified you in this letter that they will not 
be forwarding this debenture amount. They don’t want to pay 
for health services that they may not receive. 
 
Madam Minister, isn’t this another reason for you to 
immediately release the provincial health district budgets to the 
public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The health 
district plans are all now in and they’re being reviewed in a 
provincial context by the department. The health system . . . the 
plans that we’re looking at are being reviewed from a global or 
provincial prospective so that when we look at plans, we want 
to make sure that what one district proposes does not impact 
negatively on the rest of the province. So we’ve very carefully 
looking at all of them in that global context, and the results of 
that review will be in June. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The deputy 
minister of Health said that she will be looking at these budgets 
to approve them, and she said that there will be a wide public 
consultation after the fact. But what is the point of the public 
getting involved after the budget has already been set which 
will be halfway into the budget year? 
 
She has ordered the health district boards not to be open with 
the public about their budget plans before now, yet stakeholders 
in the district who have held meetings know that hospital 
closures and service cutbacks are coming. Now you have 
stakeholders saying that they will not pay their debentures 
which in turn causes more uncertainty for these districts. 
 
Madam Minister, will you immediately release the budget 
proposals so that the public and stakeholders across this 
province will know what their health system is facing and have 
a lookout for their input? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now the end 
of May. The health district plans are all in and being reviewed 
as was promised. And the results of that review will be released 
in June, which is in a few weeks. 
 
And each district will be allowed then to go and to talk to their 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

public, as they have been all along, with the plan that has been 
approved or altered or suggested to be changed. 
 
So that is what we have been promising all along. And the time 
is pretty much near for us to be doing that, as we promised. 
That’s the process that we’ll be following. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once the budget’s 
already been approved in Living Sky it’s a little late for the 
people to have input on what they can have a say on in the 
budget. 
 
The RM of Wolverine says, and I quote: 
 

It is impossible to expect the taxpayers of this municipality 
to continue to pay this yearly debenture if the services 
provided by this hospital are drastically reduced. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister would be open and accountable to 
the public before, and if she would allow the health district 
boards to speak to the people that they represent, this RM and 
others like it might be able to contribute to the health care 
system in this province. But your cloak of secrecy surrounding 
the health budget isn’t helping anything and it’s not allowing 
for local input. 
 
This RM has chosen to not submit their 2000 debenture 
payment of over $1,400. More are likely to follow suit. 
 
Madam Minister, why do you insist on promoting this 
uncertainty? And will you immediately release the health plans 
for the local people to see them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’ll say again for the third time, that the 
health district plans are in now and being reviewed and they 
will be released as we promised in June. 
 
Each district has their budget amounts. The provincial health 
budget has been increased by 113 million this year, which is 
over 6 per cent of an increase. And we continue to increase 
health spending. 
 
We want to look at the health district plans in the provincial 
context so that we look at what impact the whole province’s 
system has as a whole. We have promised to do that by the end 
of June and we will be doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, another issue that will come to 
light when the minister finally has the courage to release the 
district budgets to the public is home care. 
 
A few days ago I raised the issue in this House about a man in 
Living Sky Health District who was suddenly cut off his home 
care even though he was paying for his service and he required 
it because he was going blind. 
 
Now there’s a report out by the Health Services Utilization and 

Research Commission that says this light housekeeping support 
is failing the people it is supposed to serve. But the commission 
also admits the study was limited and more comprehensive 
analysis is needed. 
 
Madam Minister, are you planning to use this report as an 
excuse to remove home care services from our Saskatchewan 
seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really 
appreciate the opportunity to speak about the HSURC (Health 
Services Utilization and Research Commission) study on home 
care. The study is a second in a series of three. The first one 
examined acute care in relation to home care, and the second 
one is now about preventative home care services. 
 
It’s a very interesting study in that we’re going to be 
considering it along with the other HSURC studies that have 
been done as we shape programs to help seniors. We don’t 
expect a major change in policy with this study. It has raised 
some interesting points about social isolation and seniors’ 
housing that we are going to be pursuing quite vigorously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the commission who conducted 
this study say that they are relying on very limited information. 
They say more study is needed to look at the effect of the 
preventative home care on quality of life, functional ability, and 
caregiver burden. And this will be useful information. 
 
We should be looking at improving the present system and 
building on it for our aging population, not cutting it back like 
they’ve done in the Living Sky Health District. This study and 
the need for more research once again proves that a full and 
complete review of the health care system needs to be done in 
this province. 
 
When will you face the fact that our system is crumbling around 
us? When will you announce a complete review of our health 
care system in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Interestingly in 
Living Sky they did a review of their utilization of home care 
and found out that they had the highest utilization rate in the 
province. They started to look at what . . . how they could 
assess people in home care for what they really needed. 
 
The study from HSURC follows up on what Living Sky does 
and actually validates what they’re doing. It suggests that more 
health services are not in themselves the best thing to be doing. 
It’s not always the best answer just to keep adding more. 
 
We’re now going to have a look at how the services are 
provided and who should be getting them. The HSURC study 
suggests that the people with the highest need should be getting 
the home care services, and those are the things that we’ll be 
looking at as we plan services for our home care and for 
seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for this open, accountable, and transparent government. This 
morning, this morning, Mr. Speaker, we learned there’s been 
another resignation off of the NDP’s botched-up no fault review 
committee. Dr. Stewart McMillan has joined Justice Thomas 
Wakeling in resigning from that committee. 
 
Mr. Minister, this didn’t just happen. It happened three weeks 
ago. Why didn’t we hear about it until now? Why have you 
been covering up this resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that Dr. 
Stewart McMillan has resigned from this committee. There 
were some changes in his medical practice which meant that he 
could no longer devote the time to do this. He regretted that 
because he really had a keen interest in participating in this. 
 
One of the reasons that this was not laid forward at the time that 
it happened is that we have been working very carefully with 
the law society and with the Canadian Bar Association to try to 
get a new Chair to replace Mr. Wakeling. 
 
I received correspondence about two hours ago indicating that 
the person who was the . . . another choice of the law society 
and the Canadian Bar Association, Mr. Fred Zinkhan as Chair, 
has not been able to do this job because the Canadian bar and 
the law society do not want to participate in this. I’m extremely 
disappointed in that and I regret to have to make this 
announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Isn’t this amazing, Mr. Speaker. They keep 
losing one person after another. When they start looking for 
people, they don’t want to be part of it. We can understand that, 
we can understand that. 
 
This is no longer a no fault insurance system. It happens to be a 
his fault insurance system — it doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Minister, Dr. McMillan resigned three weeks ago and you 
said nothing. Less than two weeks ago I asked you about this 
botched review. I asked you about the $87,000 that you had 
wasted and received nothing for it. And somehow you just 
forgot to mention that you had just lost another committee 
member. 
 
Mr. Minister, you were supposed to have this committee up and 
running by May 1. It’s nearly June 1 and all you’re doing is 
losing members. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you admit your no fault review is a 
complete failure and start over with a truly independent review? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation that was 
passed in this House that set up this whole bit of . . . the 
personal injury protection plan in 1995 had built within it a 

five-year review. We have appointed some very independent 
people to deal with this job and I strongly resent the allegations 
made across that the people who are going to do this job were in 
any way not independent. 
 
The people who are continuing there, plus the new people that 
will be appointed, will do this review that will be of benefit to 
all of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, all of the people who are 
part of this system. 
 
The only way we can improve what we’ve got is to listen and 
understand what people have to say about it. I’m extremely 
disappointed and I regret to say that the lawyers do not want to 
participate. And all I’m saying, that at this point we’re going to 
go ahead with our review and I invite them to come and be part 
of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly amazing 
when the law society doesn’t want to get involved in something 
which involves their operation very much. And as I suggested, 
the minister over there knows very well why they don’t want to 
be involved. It’s because the whole system is so botched up, 
they want nothing whatsoever to do with it. 
 
It’s time, Mr. Minister, that you scrap that botched-up review. 
And, Mr. Minister, when we say scrap, that’s exactly what we 
mean — is scrap it. 
 
This review has cost you nearly $100,000. It, Mr. Speaker, is 
absolutely useless — shades of the minister himself. You spent 
nearly $100,000 and the only thing, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned 
to date is a new definition of the word scrap. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you admit this review is a complete 
failure, scrap it, and start over? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the process that we have in 
place, which is as is set out in the legislation, includes a review. 
Part of that is the public review — the discussion with the 
people who would come and present their cases. It also involves 
research and looking at information from other places. That 
kind of work has been started and will continue. 
 
What we want to do is make sure that we have the best 
insurance program for our people in Saskatchewan, and that’s 
what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consolidated Financial Statement 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, later this afternoon the spring report from the 
Acting Provincial Auditor will be tabled in the House. I’m sure 
it will be very interesting reading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his provincial budget address, the minister 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

talked about accountability. He talked about developing a 
framework for accountability which will outline the goals and 
objectives of the government, its departments, and its agencies. 
 
I would like to assume that part of that framework would 
include the movement toward a consolidated financial 
statement, something that was advocated by the former 
provincial auditor. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you fulfill your promise of accountability to 
the Saskatchewan public and commit to the presentation of a 
consolidated financial statement in the next fiscal year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say firstly that 
we always welcome the Report of the Provincial Auditor 
because the work of the Office of the Provincial Auditor helps 
us improve accountability in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite and to the House and 
to the public, Mr. Speaker, that we take accountability very 
seriously. And when he announced he was leaving for British 
Columbia, Mr. Speaker, this is what the outgoing provincial 
auditor, Mr. Strelioff, had to say. 
 
He said, speaking of the tenure of this government: the trend 
line on those three things — the system of government, the state 
of finances, and public confidence in how government manages 
— has strengthened under our tenure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And, Mr. Speaker, we have appointed a 
public accountability review and we are going to continue going 
on the path that we’re going on, which is greater public 
accountability, which is justified, Mr. Speaker, by the credit 
rating upgrades that we’re receiving which satisfy the public 
that we are moving toward better accountability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again the answer is not coming forth. 
 
I asked the question about whether or not this government is 
moving with a consolidated report. Right now the NDP and 
their tagged-along Liberal friends hide 40 per cent of 
government revenues from public scrutiny. 
 
Other provinces have brought in legislation requiring the 
presentation of a budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members, a member 
should not have to exert himself to ask a question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, other 
provinces have brought in legislation that asks for one set of 
books and one bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I will be introducing The 
Government Accountability Act. This legislation will require 
real transparency of financial reporting by the government, 

including a consolidated financial statement showing expense 
and revenue summaries of the Crown corporations, agencies, 
government managed funds, and health boards. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you are sincere, if you are sincere about 
accountability, will you support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there are many places where 
we can look for good advice on how to improve finances in 
government, but looking over there is not one of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I have this to say to the member from 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker. We have in the last few weeks 
received a credit rating upgrade from Dominion Bond Rating 
Service which said, Mr. Speaker, that we have not only 
improved the fiscal performance of the province and the 
accountability of government and diversification in the 
economy, but that things are getting even stronger, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the only party in this province that said anything negative 
about the credit rating upgrade was the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker. And when we got the last credit rating 
upgrade, what did the Leader of the Opposition say, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s on the record. He said we should be ashamed of 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to continue to improve 
public finance accountability as we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Planning for Saskatchewan Centennial in 2005 
 

Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make 
a ministerial statement on the subject of forward planning for 
the provincial centennial in the year 2005. 
 
Last evening and again this evening, I’m attending public 
consultation meetings currently being held across our province 
to gather suggestions on how we the people of Saskatchewan 
would like to celebrate our centennial in 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re living in one of the most promising and 
exciting periods of our history. We’ve just entered the 21st 
century which symbolizes a time of fresh horizon and fresh 
hope, and only a few short years away from celebrating our 
100th birthday. One hundred years of shaping our destiny, of 
developing our unique character, and of carving out our place in 
the history of Canada. 
 
I’m proud of my Saskatchewan roots, proud of being part of a 
province known throughout this world for its humanitarianism, 
its compassion, its work ethic, and its insightful solutions, its 
made-in-Saskatchewan solutions to meet the needs of our 
citizens. 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

Mr. Speaker, we want all of our citizens to be part of the 
forward planning for our 100th birthday. We want them to own 
and participate in these celebrations. 
 
Last night I was in North Battleford, tonight I will be in 
Lloydminster, and I’m pleased that the MLAs for those two 
areas have also been in attendance. The individuals who 
attended the meeting at the North Battleford Western 
Development Museum shared their vision on how we should 
celebrate the first 100 years of our history — with spirit, with 
innovation, and with enthusiasm. 
 
From what I’m hearing from meetings being held across the 
province, Saskatchewan citizens are joining together in a 
genuine and sincere desire to celebrate together. From 
grassroots community-level celebrations to landmark legacy 
projects, there is a sentiment throughout our province to 
embrace our centennial year as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. 
 
The anniversary’s secretariat within my Department of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs is busy preparing for 
this momentous year. Province-wide initiatives of this nature 
take considerable time to plan and we want to ensure that every 
man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan has an opportunity to 
contribute to the planning. 
 
Awareness is building for the centennial year and I encourage 
every member of this House and every citizen of this province 
to embrace the potential of 2005 on a personal level and as 
elected representatives. This celebration, Mr. Speaker, gives us 
an opportunity to work together, to celebrate our love and 
respect and dreams for this province. 
 
I would like to remind the Assembly that there are still several 
consultation meetings remaining. Regina residents will have an 
opportunity this Thursday evening, June 1, to brainstorm ideas 
with their neighbours at the south leisure centre. I urge 
everyone to take advantage of these opportunities to allow us to 
get in on the ground floor of planning a year of celebration, a 
year that will lift the spirit of this province high, a year that will 
let us show our pride in what we have accomplished, of what 
we will accomplish. 
 
Celebrations of sufficient magnitude to spark the imagination of 
the entire province are rare. Saskatchewan’s celebration of its 
centennial is one of those times when we can, with pride, 
chronicle our past and share our dreams for a great future. Let’s 
take advantage of this opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan became a province in the early part of the 20th 
century in the year 1905. It was a time of great hope, a time of 
planning, a time of building, a time of progress. About the same 
time, Sir Wilfrid Laurier was the prime minister of Canada, and 
Sir Wilfrid Laurier predicted that the 20th century would be 
Canada’s century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, world wars, two world wars, a Great Depression 
— there were some things that dampened the enthusiasm of the 
people of this country and in fact the people of this province 
during the early part of the 20th century. 

(1430) 
 
But in spite of those setbacks the province moved forward. 
Population grew, and at one time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
was the third most populated province in all of Canada. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the second half of the century — 
the 50 years of peace, the 50 years of economic stability — 
were not a period of time that Saskatchewan shared to its fullest 
potential. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan experienced less growth 
in the last half of the 20th century than it should have. 
 
And so as we close this century, Mr. Speaker, there has been 
some uncertainty and there’s been some reflection on what 
Saskatchewan needs to do to truly celebrate becoming 100 
years old in the year 2005. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
hard-working, industrious people. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan built this province once; our parents, our 
grandparents were part of the construction crew that built this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did we build Saskatchewan, but we sent 
tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of people to 
Alberta to help them build their province as well. And we did a 
very good job in Alberta as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe Saskatchewan people are preparing to 
celebrate 100 years as a province, and I certainly applaud the 
plan to do that. But, Mr. Speaker, I think they will also be 
planning to make changes, big changes, for the 20th . . . for the 
21st century and for the second 100 years following our 100th 
anniversary in the year 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I expect them to elect a new government with 
vision and one that will re-instill hope for the people of 
Saskatchewan and give them reason to be very positive about 
the second 100 years that we would celebrate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will celebrate a hundred 
years of being a province in the year 2005. They will have 
reason to celebrate, and we in the Saskatchewan Party will join 
heartily in that celebration, not only of a hundred years, but of a 
new government as well that will change the future and change 
the direction of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Balanced Budget Act, 2000 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 207, The Balanced Budget Act, 
2000. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Government Accountability Act 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

move first reading of Bill No. 208, The Government 
Accountability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Research Council 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 76, the Saskatchewan Research 
Council amendment Act — or, I’m sorry — The Research 
Council Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 77, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day it is 
my duty to table a report from the Provincial Auditor. I do so 
now. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Seventy-Five Minute Debate 
 

The Speaker: — Also, hon. members, before orders of the day, 
I would just like to inform the House that I have reviewed our 
practice regarding the occurrence of the 75-minute debate when 
the House does not sit on intervening Tuesdays. And on most 
occasions only Tuesdays that were actually sitting days were 
considered in the decision regarding when the next 75-minute 
debate was to take place. 
 
So in view of this practice, I wish to inform you that the 
75-minute debate will be deferred until next Tuesday and it will 
remain as the government’s turn next week. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Moratorium on Hospital and Health 
Centre Closures 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak for all 
citizens of Saskatchewan who have lost all confidence in the 
health care system in this province and in an out-of-touch 
government. 
 
At the end of my time speaking in the House today, I will be 
moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to put 
a moratorium on any further hospital or health centre 
closures at least until the government’s promised 
comprehensive review of health care in Saskatchewan is 
completed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993 there were 133 hospitals in the province. 
Seven years later, we have less than 65 hospitals. The NDP’s 
wellness model has forced closure on nearly half of our 
province’s hospitals, and this number will no doubt continue to 
increase. 
 
One example of what has happened in our health care system, 
and which is very near and dear to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan, is the closing of the Plains hospital. I’d like to 
quote from the Plains hospital brochure, a brochure about the 
Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker, that was put out by then MLA for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, Judy Bradley. And part of it says, why is 
the Plains hospital closing. And I quote: 
 

The fact is that the Plains hospital is moving, not closing. 
With the move a major south Saskatchewan medical centre 
will be created at the General Hospital. The move will 
mean that at last southern Saskatchewan will have access 
to greater specialized services, new medical technology, 
and we’ll have a greater ability to attract and maintain 
medical specialists. 

 
Further quoting from this brochure: 
 

Between 1992 and 1996 the issue of changing two acute 
care hospitals in Regina and one rehabilitation hospital was 
debated across southern Saskatchewan. Several expensive 
reviews and studies were completed, leading to the 
decision to move the Plains hospital and to create two new 
major health centres. 
 
On the basis of that decision, major investments have now 
been made to improve services for southern Saskatchewan. 
It is fortunate that some try to make political gains by 
seeking to create fear and reverse progress made. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not only the Saskatchewan Party who 
knows what an ill-thought-out idea this was, but all citizens of 
Saskatchewan see the complete folly in this move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I further quote from this pamphlet and I quote 
some of the promises that were made at this time. The promises 
were that: 
 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

All services will still be provided; no reduction in the 
number of beds; no disruption in services to facilitate the 
transfer; enhanced emergency and walk-in care services; 
and more parking at the General Hospital. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what the people of southern Saskatchewan 
actually received is they have seen disrupted services; they have 
seen huge costs overrun; they have seen a parking system that is 
totally unacceptable. And Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
people of southern Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan, that 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest at that time said that he 
would chain himself to the hospital to keep the Plains hospital. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan wonder where is his commitment 
today. And they wonder, is this government why the people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the wellness model was supposed to consolidate 
services and cut costs. In the words of then Health minister, 
Louise Simard, it was supposed to preserve medicare for future 
generations. Obviously this has not happened and we are now 
facing one of the worst health care crises this province has ever 
seen. 
 
The province’s 32 health districts, set up to be arm’s-length 
from government, were put in place to serve the province’s 
many communities. They were there to represent the people. 
Now we have 31 of these 32 districts that are running a deficit. 
Mr. Speaker, health district boards were put in place for 
administrative purposes. Elected and appointed members handle 
the operating plans, the budgets, other day-to-day operations. 
Again they were supposed to be autonomous. 
 
The boards and the health districts that they represented came 
under the umbrella of SAHO, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations. When we look at the situation that many 
health districts now find themselves in, we get a very clear 
picture of a lack of commitment from this government. 
 
Decreased funding over the years has forced many health 
districts into deficit situations. Last year alone deficits totalled 
over $50 million. The Regina Health District’s debt was pegged 
at 30 million, Saskatoon’s at 9 million. East Central was over 3 
million. Accumulated debt stands in the tens of millions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost of providing services has risen 
dramatically over the years and yet health districts have not 
seen a related increase in funding. What has resulted is that 
boards have had to make some very tough decisions. There 
have been staff layoffs, cutting programs or services, and even 
hospital closures. 
 
Throughout this, health district boards have borne the brunt of 
public backlash. For health districts had a choice, balance the 
budget or cut services . . . excuse me, Mr. Speaker, balance 
budgets and cut services, or keep adequate services and run a 
deficit. 
 
Amid the growing fear about health care’s future in 
Saskatchewan, this government has done nothing to help ease 
the crisis that Saskatchewan is facing today and that the health 
districts are faced with. Instead of trying to find where the 
problems were occurring, instead of trying to find solutions, 

instead of providing much needed funding, this government sat 
back and did nothing. 
 
Time and time again, as MLAs and as individuals have brought 
forth concerns to this government, they have passed the buck. 
Go and ask your health district, is the common answer. Well the 
health districts’ hands are tied and now they have also been 
gagged. 
 
On one hand the minister says, ask your health board; and on 
the other hand she says, but the health board can’t discuss any 
of the issues with you. 
 
Health care funding is 40 per cent of this government’s total 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Nearly $2 billion spent annually on health 
care in Saskatchewan. There was only a 70 million increase in 
health care spending in this year’s budget. For all intents and 
purposes, this is a freeze; $17 million will not go very far in a 
health district or across the whole province. 
 
No money was allocated to health districts’ deficits or 
accumulated debt. In fact, the government showed no support 
for them at all in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan wonder what about 
the health transition fund. Other than it being used to pay down 
some health districts’ deficits, we have no indication or 
commitment from this government as to how or where the 
money will be allocated. If there was an extra $150 million to 
be used for health care, why wasn’t this money distributed to 
individual health districts? 
 
Health districts are very upset that money from the transition 
fund is being used to pay off deficits in other health districts. 
The health districts who actually balanced their budgets at great 
hardship to those they represent are now asking why — why did 
we bother to do this? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from my local paper, the 
Weyburn Review, from last week when they interviewed our 
local CEO (chief executive officer), Mr. Lee Spencer. And I 
quote: 
 

The South Central Health District shouldn’t be penalized 
for balancing their books by seeing money meant for 
improvements go to paying off the deficits of other 
districts, says district CEO Lee Spencer. 
 
At a board meeting last week, Spencer said taking money 
out of the $150 million Health Transition Fund — some of 
which was targeted for the SCHD — and using it to bail 
out other districts would be a betrayal.  
 
The Health Transition Fund was portrayed as a one-time 
cash injection to improve services and support change 
within the districts. But it has been used to help out the 
Regina and Saskatoon Health Districts to the tune of $26 
million. 

 
(1445) 
 

The board was somewhat dismayed and frustrated in the 
minister’s announcement that the money would be used to 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

pay down deficits. “We did not put in a deficit — we 
didn’t play that game,” Spencer told Saskatchewan Health 
representative Heather Balfour, who was present at the 
meeting. 
 
Spencer said the board felt betrayed because they have 
handed down balanced budgets for the past five years, due 
to sacrifices and contributions made by SCHD staff over a 
long period of time, structural changes and operating 
efficiencies. 
 
The district submitted another balanced budget for 2000 
for Health Minister Pat Atkinson’s approval on May 1, a 
deadline given by Sask Health. 
 
But a balanced budget doesn’t erase the fact that there’s 
not enough money for new collective agreements and 
inflationary increases, Spencer said. 
 
“We believe the department of health has given us 
inadequate funding, and we are being forced to curtail 
some other issues and not able to fund some other issues,” 
he told Balfour. 
 
Balfour congratulated the board for bringing in a balanced 
budget “which is extra important this year,” she said. 
 
“The minister has asked for a preliminary review of all 
budgets, so I’ve had a chance to look at yours. In your 
cover letter the issues were stated clearly. You’ve been 
very wise in the way transitional funding has been spelled 
out in this document. Regardless of what you’ve heard in 
the media, the direction of the transitional funding has not 
yet been determined,” said Balfour. 
 
Spencer said he hoped the budget would be approved prior 
to the SCHD public meeting (which is next week). 

 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan, and health boards in 
particular, are very upset. The day the budget was released, the 
Saskatchewan Party was very suspicious of this transitional 
fund and the government’s intent. The residents of the province 
are very concerned also about this fund, and we have been 
given many indications that it will be used to close or convert 
hospitals. 
 
At SAHO’s annual convention in March, the Health minister 
told health districts that they would have to tighten their belts 
yet again. In effect the NDP was saying that there would be no 
extra money coming their way. And in what has become a 
typical NDP trademark, the finger of blame was pointed 
squarely at the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same old story. This government wants 
it every way, but at the end of the day they take absolutely no 
responsibility, blame everyone else, and meanwhile the people 
of Saskatchewan continue to pay the bills and to suffer and 
wait. 
 
What they really want to know, Mr. Speaker, is where are their 
taxpayers’ . . . hard-to-earn taxpayers’ dollars going? Some 
people have paid money all their life expecting that when they 
grew old or needed health care that it would be available for 

them, and now they find that it is not there when they need it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently the decrease in the health and social 
transfers is the sole cause of this health care crisis according to 
the NDP government. If you recall, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government was to blame for the agriculture crisis as well. We 
didn’t buy it then and we’re not buying it now — neither are the 
people of this province. 
 
The Health minister has even gone so far as to say what they 
will have to look at is whether health services will be covered 
and what will people be paying for. Is this two-tiered health 
care that we are now talking about in the province of 
Saskatchewan when you have to start deciding which services 
that we are going to have paid for, and which we are going to 
have to pay for ourselves? 
 
The government opposite refuses to admit that we are into a 
two-tied health system, yet the people of Saskatchewan 
understand full well that they are already in the middle of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government always talks about upholding the 
principles of the Canada Health Act. One of those principles, 
accessibility, is at stake here in the province. People are already 
travelling to other provinces and out of country for medical 
treatment. 
 
We know that in fact SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) and Workers’ Comp are sending their claimants to 
places like Alberta for MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) and 
CAT (computer axial tomography) scans, bypassing the lineups 
here in Saskatchewan. Why? Because SGI and Workers’ Comp 
know that early intervention and treatment in an injury is 
crucial to recovery. 
 
Our long waiting lists and lack of front-line staff make it 
impossible to have that kind of care here, yet this government 
makes no promises or provision for people caught in the 
waiting list game. 
 
This government should be providing alternatives if the care 
cannot be provided in Saskatchewan in a timely matter. But no 
solutions are given. Again, the answer from the minister is, your 
doctor decides who gets surgery, who is first on the list. And 
also the doctors have several lists. They have a urgent list and 
they have an urgent urgent list, so it depends which list you end 
up getting on. 
 
The members opposite don’t want to listen to what we’re 
talking about so I’d like to quote from Dr. Stan Oleksinski who 
is the former head of the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
And I quote from an article in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix in 
May of this year. And I quote: 
 

The ability of doctors in Saskatchewan to provide quality 
care for their patients is being compromised by 
unacceptable waiting times for beds and medical 
procedures, the president of SAMA said Friday. The lack 
of access to medical care also threatens doctors’ 
professional integrity and morale, Dr. Stan Oleksinski told 
physicians attending an assembly in Regina. There 
continues to be unacceptable waiting times for surgery, 
diagnostic investigations such as MRI and CAT scans, 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

specialist consultations, hospital and long-term care beds, 
as well as many therapies. 

 
Oleksinski added, patients regularly wait months for 
elective surgery and are being inappropriately discharged 
or not admitted to hospital. Despite efforts of the provincial 
health department, health districts, and other agencies, the 
health care system continues to suffer from insufficient and 
inadequate resources to meet an ever increasing demand 
for care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, no extra funding, no support, no direction, no 
commitment, nothing, from this government. Thanks to the 
NDP’s wellness model, we now have the longest waiting list in 
the country. 
 
We have seen over 600 nurses laid off, and yet the NDP has 
known for several years that a nursing shortage was looming. 
Recruitment and retention for many health practitioners has 
become a major concern. Operating rooms and surgical units 
have been closed. Equipment has been shut down because of a 
lack of staff. People have literally died waiting for treatment. 
 
And it is just about a year ago now, Mr. Speaker, that the nurses 
in this province went on strike. And what were they striking 
for? They were striking because they were working in a system 
that was not giving adequate care to the people that they serve 
daily. 
 
And they went to this government asking for input into how 
patient care could be delivered better in this province and how 
people could have timely care. And what did this government 
do? They legislated them back to work — they treated them like 
criminals in their own province — and failed to listen to them. 
 
Now where are we at today? Have things improved? Has it 
improved in the workplace? Regrettably not. We still have the 
same system that we had a year ago; we have nurses that are 
overworked, overstressed. What has changed? A commitment 
from this government that they were going to change things in 
the workplace? It has not happened. We fail to see any 
improvement in our health care system. 
 
For the upcoming fiscal year health districts were told to submit 
their operating plans to the Minister of Health. They were also 
told that public consultation should not take place until the 
minister had a chance to either approve, reject, or revise the 
plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if public talks did occur, board members risk 
being replaced by a publicly appointed administrator. 
According to the Minister of Health, they did not want to alarm 
residents if they knew of possible cuts. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
truth must be hard to handle but people hate cover-ups. 
 
More importantly, people have a right to know if their access to 
health care will be affected and to what extent. Mr. Speaker, a 
government-imposed gag order. It’s what we’ve come to expect 
from this don’t ask, don’t tell government. Health districts were 
put in place to represent the public. They were there to locally 
administer health care to communities they served. 
 
Given the lack of funding, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of 

Health’s warning that more belt tightening was on its way, 
health districts should not have been placed in this situation. If 
services are to be cut, staff are to be laid off, or hospitals are to 
close, the public has a right to know how their health and their 
ability to access that care will be affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, letters from various health district board members 
. . . Even the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
gave testament to how frustrated and concerned health districts 
were over this recent turn of events. A board member from 
Regina Health District even resigned over this. 
 
The NDP have done a very good job of turning the public 
against the health districts — the very public that they are there 
to represent and serve. Even with the gag order in place, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Health would not rule out hospital 
closures. 
 
Many of the members on this side of the House have grave 
concerns about whether they will retain health care services in 
their areas, and many of them will be speaking on that today as 
well. 
 
Just a couple of weeks ago the minister was quoted in the paper 
as saying that she would not know just how many hospitals will 
close until she sees the proposed budgets from all the health 
districts. She then goes on to say that she could not assure 
anyone that every hospital in this province was going to be in 
place at the end of their consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural residents have seen their way of life eroded. 
Their local hospitals give them a sense of belonging. They have 
meaning in their communities. And they are very concerned 
about this, how it’s taking away their opportunity to provide 
security, especially for their seniors, and to keep those people in 
their communities. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, has this government left out rural residents. 
Conversions, regional health facilities, wellness centres, call 
them what you want. What it amounts to is no acute care, no 
extended stays, no access to other services or programs. This is 
now what dire circumstances this government is imposing on 
the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to speak for a moment about 
some of the concerns that are directly related to Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Weyburn-Big Muddy has now one facility that actually 
offers acute care services and it is in the city of Weyburn. We 
now have around 45 beds, and that is the total number of beds 
that we have in the whole constituency. The other facilities 
were converted to health centres. 
 
In Pangman there is grave concern because they would like to 
see more respite and palliative care provided. They have failed 
to be able to convince the health board and through to the 
government that this is a much needed service that they need for 
their community. They realize that they cannot provide full 
acute care, but they do realize that they have a place to play in 
their community and would like to be given the opportunity to 
do so. 
 
In the town of Bengough we now have a concern about a 
retention of a doctor. And this is an ongoing concern. Last night 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

when I questioned the deputy minister of Health regarding this, 
she provided us with a long list of ways that doctors are 
maintained in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an ongoing problem. And 
from the meetings that I’ve had with different areas, they 
inform me that they’re basically on their own when it comes to 
recruiting a new doctor. And their concern now is that they are 
going to have to have their doctor sign into a three-year 
contract, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when what they really need and 
would like to see is a one-year contract so that they could retain 
the doctor they have and give him a chance to find out if he 
wants to stay in this country and practise. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is something that we would really 
like to see happen in this province — is that some concern be 
given to this concern. 
 
Also in Radville we have a concern where there’s more 
long-term care beds required to meet the needs of an ageing 
population. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that need these 
long-term care beds and their families are very much interested 
in being able to keep them in their community instead of them 
having to go elsewhere. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we need some kind of response from this 
government that will listen to the local people, give them an 
opportunity to have their say in what they really need — 
whether it’s respite care, palliative care or long-term care — in 
their communities, and to give them a chance to bring those 
issues forward and to be listened to and responded to 
accordingly. 
 
In Weyburn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a concern about our 
local hospital. For some time now the local health board has 
been wanting to build a new facility. This is yet to be approved 
by this government, and there’s growing concern in our 
community that we will lose our hospital and that Estevan will 
become the centre. 
 
We are a community of 10,000 people and serve a large trading 
area, and we believe that this hospital should be maintained for 
all residents of the city of Weyburn and surrounding area. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan have 
many concerns about their ongoing health care and what they 
can look forward into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for nearly two years the Saskatchewan Party has 
been calling for a complete, comprehensive, and independent 
review, including an audit, of the health care system in 
Saskatchewan. After much stalling, delays, and unusual lack of 
planning, it seems that the NDP are moving towards our 
recommendation. We have yet to see an actual announcement of 
this or a date set, Mr. Speaker, but we are hopeful that it will 
take place. 
 
We can only hope that the review commissioned be 
independent, look at all aspects of health care, and that the 
government commits to implementing proposed 
recommendations. 
 
(1500) 

Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, the people of Saskatchewan need 
the assurance that there will be no more closures, and so we are 
calling for a moratorium on the closing of any further hospital 
or health centres in the province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are fed up. 
They’ve paid with their wallets — some for many, many years 
— always with the promise they’d be looked after. This has 
become a myth. 
 
Now over the last 10 years, they have paid an even heavier 
price, Mr. Speaker. Many of them have watched their loved 
ones or themselves suffer or even die because of a system that 
has failed them. 
 
The NDP talk about medicare as if it is a sacred cow. I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for us to define what medicare is all 
about and how it is going to respond to the people of this 
province. Because what the people want, no matter what you 
call it, the name is not important, what we need is timely, 
affordable, accessible health care. 
 
And they want a government, they want a government that is 
committed to finding a way to make that happen. This 
government clearly has no intent to do this. They have no intent 
of fixing the system. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party would find a way to provide timely, 
affordable, accessible health care. Because in our party, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and their quality 
of life come first now and always will come first, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to move a motion at this time, Mr. Speaker. Moved 
by myself and seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to put 
a moratorium on any further hospital or health centre 
closures at least until the government’s promised 
comprehensive review of health care in Saskatchewan is 
completed. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise to second 
the motion by my colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members, it is difficult to follow an 
individual that has made a very thoughtful speech on a very 
broad range of topics that deal very comprehensively with the 
issues facing health care, and health care moving forward into 
the future in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, right across this country — and across this 
world — in the early ’90s, there was a recognition that the 
current methodology of delivering health care across the world 
really had to change in some fairly dramatic ways. 
 
There was a move from a focus on hospital and institutional 
care to care that was moving towards a more preventative 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

model and a system that was going to anticipate the future in a 
more responsive way. And that was going to be able to provide 
people across the North American medical spectrum, if you 
like, more timely, effective, comprehensive, and accessible 
health care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, right across this province those winds of 
change were also blowing in Saskatchewan. And the people of 
the province responded, I think, in a genuine desire to make a 
system that was not only better in the immediate term, but 
sustainable into the future. 
 
And so the government of the day made some pretty dramatic 
changes and they affected a lot of communities in our province 
in a very significant way. For any of the communities that had 
one of the main health care facilities closed or converted, these 
were heart-wrenching, difficult issues to face. And through it all 
there was a lot of apprehension, there was lot of debate, there 
was a lot of discussion; there was even dissension. And there 
was a lot of hurt. 
 
And through it all, the process was done in a way that said, if 
you as a community are willing to buy into this model of health 
care delivery, if you’re willing to move from a facility that 
focused almost exclusively on acute care and disease treatment 
if you like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a model that was more 
comprehensive and a facility that would embrace that model 
and dealt with not only the issues of acute care and emergent 
care and things of that nature, but also dealt with the long-term 
care issues facing people who needed it — not only our seniors 
but people who have disabilities and people who require the 
support of a system — if you move to a model that attempts to 
put at least some money into a budget towards disease 
prevention, that we will then truly be building a model as what 
was happening across the world. We weren’t unique, we 
weren’t first, we weren’t last, we were just part of it. We are 
going to move to a model that indeed you could call, I think 
quite appropriately, a wellness model. 
 
Because prior to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the model really was 
a disease-treatment model, an acute care model that was centred 
around institutions and hospitals and emergencies, if you like. 
And for people outside of that need group, they lived their lives 
until they hit that opportunity where they needed acute care and 
then they expected it to be there for them. And by and large, it 
was. 
 
But people in health care, economists, and the leaders in the 
health care field across the world recognized that that model 
would not be sustainable into the future; that what was going to 
be needed is much more of an anticipation and prevention of 
disease and a focus on keeping the population well and thereby 
diminish the requirements and the pressure on the acute care — 
the disease-treatment model, if you like. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, right across the country, across North 
America, and certainly across this province, people began to 
understand that maybe there was some logic in this. This wasn’t 
something that was unique to the government of the day. It was 
something that was a focus of change all around the world — in 
North America, the Scandinavian countries, in Europe, in 
Canada. This was happening everywhere in the developed 
world. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think when you look back at the record and 
you look back to the discussions that occurred in the early ’90s, 
that these were wholesome discussions and they had to happen 
and they had to move forward. And communities began to 
understand that maybe there was going to be some hope that 
there was some vision. And I think, Mr. Speaker, initially there 
even was a great deal of courtesy going to be extended, and 
patience that was going to be extended by communities to allow 
this system to move into the future. 
 
But an underlying pinning of this whole concept was the 
promise — the promise — that was made to all of our 
communities, rural and urban, small and large, major 
metropolitan centres like Saskatoon and Regina, who arguably 
are clearly . . . have primary and secondary and tertiary 
responsibilities, who are the two centres that the province relies 
on for the really significant research and medical treatments that 
it isn’t logical to have in every community. Every community, 
large and small, bought into the commitment that their health 
care, when they needed it, was going to be there for them and 
that the system was going to not be less responsive but more 
responsive to their needs. 
 
And so we’ve heard in the recent days and weeks as we moved 
into this current budget cycle, where communities have said 
district health boards have met with us and said, we went out, 
we bought into this plan, we bought into this model, and we 
believed we had a role and a responsibility to the communities 
that we were destined to serve. 
 
To say to them if you’ll agree with these changes, if you’ll 
agree to move from the model of strictly disease prevention and 
acute care as the centre of health care delivery in your 
community to a model that is more comprehensive, that deals 
with the other issues that I outlined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
facilities are going to be there for you. Trust us and believe in 
what we are saying. This is going to work; it’s going to be 
sustainable in the future. If you will go along with them and if 
you’ll accept and embrace these changes that are being 
articulated, the system will be there for you in the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the future is now. The future is 
really at a turning point at this present time. And so instead of 
providing leadership in this whole process that was going on 
across the world, this NDP government from 1993 has been 
stumbling and wandering around trying to figure out what was 
going on. 
 
There was a commission done in the late 1980s, the Murray 
commission that did a lot of good work. I’m not suggesting for 
a moment that it was perfect. But I have to be one of the few 
people in this province that actually read the darn thing. And 
there was a lot of good work in that report. 
 
I happened at the time in the late ’80s to be involved on diocese 
and pastoral council for the diocese of Prince Albert. And 
Bishop Blais Morand, the bishop of Prince Albert diocese was 
one of the commission members on this Murray commission. 
And I remember at the time how many meetings he went to, 
how many public hearings, and how many briefs that were 
presented right across this province. 
 
People genuinely understood that the winds of change were 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

happening, and were genuinely desirous to have their input in 
what the model for health care delivery was going to be. And 
they did a very comprehensive study, a very comprehensive 
review, a very thorough analysis of what health care there was 
in the province, and made some very significant 
recommendations as to where it should go. 
 
The then Health critic of the day, Louise Simard, attended a 
great many of those meetings I recall, listened to the 
presentations, heard the briefs, understood what was being 
presented. And after elected in 1992 I guess, turned her back 
completely on those recommendations because it was organized 
and put in motion by a previous administration. 
 
So obviously anything that possibly was constructed by a 
previous administration automatically had no merit, despite the 
fact that the people that were doing this were totally beyond and 
outside of the political realm. They were citizens like the bishop 
I served who weren’t there because they were interested in 
politics, who were there because they were interested in serving 
the people of this province and the health care system that they 
are mandated to look into. 
 
And from that day forward we’ve been wandering in all kinds 
of other philosophical directions, whatever was the flavour of 
the day, and trying to manage and interpret what was happening 
right across the world in health care delivery. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we come to today where all of a sudden again we’re 
hitting the wall. 
 
And last year we saw in the operating budgets of the 32 health 
districts that over 20 of them ran significant deficits, some very 
serious deficits totalling in the last fiscal year some $50 million 
annually. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t have to be a rocket 
scientist to figure out that that isn’t sustainable and it can’t 
continue to happen. Because if it does, the system will finally 
eat itself way into such a problem that you’ll never get out of it. 
 
And so what’s the response? The response is the government 
says: thou shalt get your house in order in this budget and you 
shall make a plan that eliminates your deficit; and then we are 
going to provide a transition fund to underwrite you while 
you’re going to do that. It’s as near as I can figure out what it is. 
 
So right now the transition fund is a fund that’s picking up 
deficits, because in the short term there is no way these health 
districts can balance their budget overnight. They can’t snap 
their finger. We’re already a third way into the fiscal year, and 
the budgets that have been prepared and presented, if they are 
implemented today, only three-quarters of the year is left. 
There’s no way that it’s physically possible for these district 
health boards, who have been coping with the fact the 
government has been wandering aimlessly, are going to be able 
to do this overnight. 
 
So then what does the government do in its wisdom? It says, 
you shall keep your mouths shut, district health boards, about 
the plans. You can sit there and listen to whatever the people 
say, but you can’t tell them what the plan is until Big Brother 
signs off on this thing. And so here we now have the district 
health boards’ budgets sitting on the minister’s desk while the 

co-ministers try to figure out which way to head now. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who’s left holding the bag? You 
know who it is? It’s those people who were promised when this 
whole process started by this government, the people that were 
told, trust us and we’ll look after you, the people that said, if 
you embrace this change and you allow your hospital to be 
converted or lost and you have to go to the next community for 
services, those services will be there for you. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re saying, keep your 
mouths shut because we don’t think this is going to happen. 
And the members opposite will say, oh we’re not saying there’s 
going to be any closures. 
 
(1515) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, make no mistake. We know that it is 
impossible for a small health district to find savings in the 
magnitude of 900,000 to a million dollars by adjusting the paper 
clip budget. It can’t be done. In order to meet the challenges and 
the demands that have been set by this administration, there has 
to be very difficult decisions made and it’s going to result in the 
fact closures are going to happen. 
 
But the district health boards are sitting there as this 
government’s patsies, being told to keep their mouths shut 
while we review this and decide how it’s going to happen. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is unacceptable. 
 
And finally . . . finally, you know, at least someone over there 
seems to be listening. And I don’t know if it’s the Premier 
because he’s looking for a new job or if it’s the minister 
because she knows nowhere else to go, but finally someone 
over there actually listened to us when we said there has to be a 
comprehensive review of the system. We called it a health care 
audit. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have always said it’s much more than an 
exercise by a bunch of bean-counters. What it is is an audit that 
has to be done independently. It has to be an audit that’s beyond 
reproach. 
 
It can’t be a system like the Minister of Crown Corporations is 
trying to initiate on the review of the SGI no-fault system. It 
can’t be something where people are dropping out of the system 
before they can even be appointed. It can’t be something that is 
criticized and that people say, this is now something that the 
government lackeys are doing. 
 
It has to be beyond reproach as it was when the Murray 
Commission was constituted a decade ago. And that’s why we 
suggested that the person that in this province that is beyond 
assault, that is beyond reproach in this province, is the Office of 
the Provincial Auditor. So we asked if his office would head 
this up and that he would then make sure that all the required 
professionals, the professionals that were there to look at it, 
would see to it that it was done in a comprehensive way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a very good idea because the 
Premier and the Health minister have now taken that idea and 
suggested that a comprehensive review is indeed something not 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

only that we need in Saskatchewan, but we need across this 
country. And I happen to agree completely. It was our idea, 
why wouldn’t I? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is true . . . today the Health 
minister I understand is in Quebec City with other Health 
ministers across this country saying that Ottawa has to step up 
to the plate if there’s going to be a national health care system. 
And I think it’s absolutely true. It’s an absolute abomination 
what the federal Liberal government has done to off-load onto 
provinces on the road to building a huge fiscal surplus to make 
Paul Martin look good. 
 
Now it doesn’t matter for Paul Martin because Chrétien is 
undercutting him anyway. He might as well did the right thing 
and make sure departments were properly funded because the 
Prime Minister isn’t going to give him a change to exercise the 
benefits of his fiscal tightwaddedness anyway. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are now in a situation that is absolutely 
unbelievable. We have a situation where finally the government 
is willing to do a complete review of the system, which is 
important. At the same time, district health boards are sitting 
there under the threat of censure if they open their mouths about 
their plans in order to cut back on the budget in order to balance 
the books. And physical facilities are again threatened in this 
province with no direction and no promise of where we’re 
going. It’s absolutely incomprehensible that anyone would 
consider supporting such an impossible situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again the Saskatchewan Party’s 
suggestion is a practical, positive suggestion what needs to be 
done. We suggested and fully support a comprehensive review 
of the health care system. We fully do that. 
 
Our only caveat at this time is to make sure that the terms of 
reference and the mandate is appropriate so it can be done 
comprehensively. And we’re counting on the government and 
the Health minister to put that in place. We’re taking her at her 
word when she says that it is going to be comprehensive and we 
support and agree with that. And we will be most desirous to 
see what this commission is going to function like and 
hopefully that it is independent, impartial, and has a 
comprehensive mandate. We support that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But at the same time, how in the world can we ask district 
health boards to plan the shutting down of facilities that this 
comprehensive review may or may not deem as a good move? 
How in the world can anyone on that side of the House agree to 
that? 
 
So surely it is eminently sensible that in the interim — in the 
interim — first of all, that this review is done in a timely way 
and we get on with the task and the challenge, firstly. But in the 
interim, surely it’s incumbent on the government to promise to 
communities that their facilities will not be closed until this 
review is completed. It is just sensible, Mr. Speaker, and I am at 
a loss to understand how members opposite cannot support that 
motion. 
 
But I know what’s likely to happen today. What’s likely to 
happen, there’s going to be some kind of a weird, convoluted 
amendment coming forward that somehow creates some wiggle 

room that says this is all nonsense and everything is going 
wonderful. And of course it isn’t. We know it isn’t so that’s one 
thing that could possibly happen. 
 
Or this Liberal-NDP coalition majority could use their 
heavy-handed tactics to shut down and adjourn debate. We 
hope that neither things happen and that people will debate the 
merits of this very practical and logical motion that my 
colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, has put 
forward. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this not only has impact . . . And 
I’ve tried to take my responsibilities as the Health critic to look 
at the big picture. But if I could, for a small moment, look at my 
own constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Melfort-Tisdale they’ve come through 
very tremendous and trying changes as they’ve encompassed 
this whole health care reform. And, Mr. Speaker, those two 
health districts are working and struggling to provide the 
credibility and the service to the people that they serve. And I 
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate those boards 
and the members that serve on them for doing an outstanding 
job at trying to do what they believe is right in almost an 
impossible situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, health boards across this province are not 
the villains; the lack of direction of this government is the 
villain — and that’s the truth. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I stand in this 
House to second the motion by the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into the debate today on this important issue of health 
care. I’m particularly pleased because this issue, this particular 
issue defines the differences clearly between those on that side 
of the House and those on the government side — proud 
differences, profound differences, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Take for example the grandstanding of late from the opposition 
benches. Yet a look at their election platform confirms their 
lack of commitment to the funding of health care. The Leader of 
the Opposition has urged Ottawa to not send any money to the 
provinces until a value-for-money audit is done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question of the future of medicare is 
high on the list of concerns for the people of this country and of 
this province. The public money dedicated to health services is 
a major expenditure; one that continues to grow at an alarming 
rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a serious matter, and serious issues require 
the attention of serious people, not fearmongers, not finger 
pointers, but serious, thoughtful, caring, compassionate people. 
People who in 1947 struck out on their own and implemented a 
modest hospitalization plan. People who in 1962 introduced a 
more broadly based medical care initiative that we now call 
medicare. 
 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

Based on that program we now have a national program, and it 
has become a symbol, a symbol of Canadian identity. A proud 
symbol. 
 
But the program then was financed by 50/50 federal/provincial 
cost sharing. Compare that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 50/50 — 
with today’s ratio of 87 per cent provincial and 13 per cent 
federal. And the people wonder why there’s a problem. 
 
The opposition knows there’s a problem. But do they have any 
answers? Do they have any solutions? 
 
Well perhaps they do. We’ve had a small stiff of their . . . sniff 
of their solutions. We’ve had the sniff of their election platform. 
Or should I say smell. We’ve had the promise of zero increase 
in health funding, the urging to hold back federal money from 
the provinces, and the hints from across the way that we should 
look at Alberta’s Bill 11 — hints that Saskatchewan should 
entertain a two-tier system. 
 
Since the budget was announced in March, the opposition has 
spent an additional $1.29 billion. In just over a week, from 
March 29 to April 6, the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
wished for $380 million to be spent on K to 12 education; the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar said, give us $40 million and 
we’ll rollback the utility rates; the member from Saltcoats said 
$50 million for municipal infrastructure; the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar said $160 million is all it would take to 
revoke the PST expansion; the member from Swift Current said 
$60 million would reduce the gas . . . or 5 cents a litre on gas; 
the member from Saskatchewan-Rivers said it’ll only cost $40 
million to twin Highway No. 11. 
 
The member from Swift Current, to his credit I guess, $7.5 
million for Swift Current capital expenditure for a regional 
hospital. Again, the member from Swift Current said $14 
million would immediately implement 200 police officers. The 
member from Rosetown-Biggar only wanted $535 million for 
unspecified spending out of SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) revenues, which would go to agriculture, 
rollback increases in fishing licences, park, long-term care, etc. 
 
Only $1.29 billion dollars in a week. Barely a mention of 
spending on health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless you count 
the seven and a half million proposed by the member from 
Swift Current. And that amount was proposed per capita — 
bricks and mortar, not services. 
 
Now serious people do things. We don’t just talk. Our 
government is on the front lines urging Ottawa to restore its 
portion of funding back to the previous levels; their leader is 
urging Ottawa to hold back money. Our government is urging a 
national debate on the future of medicare; their leader wants an 
audit. Our government remains totally committed to a 
single-payer system. The member from Weyburn was quoted 
yesterday as having said, why are we not looking at having 
privatized care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to review some of the spending laid out in 
the Department of Health budget. The 2000-2001 health budget 
totals 1.978 billion which is an increase of $113 million, 5.9 per 
cent over the 1999-2000 budget. The dollar amount is 63 
million more than last year when the budget included 50 million 

for one-time funding for Y2K (Year 2000) security. 
 
The increase provides for a base funding increase of 5.1 per 
cent to health districts, primarily to fund collective bargaining 
agreements, increased funding to strengthen cancer treatment 
programs, additional funds to cover rising use of physician 
services and the prescription drug plan. In addition to the 1.978 
billion budget, there’s a one-time health transition fund totalling 
150 million. 
 
Of the $113 million increase, 63 million increase in base 
funding is provided to health districts; improves wages and 
benefits; continues regeneration of the province’s four regional 
care centres; strengthens specialized acute care programs, for 
example, renal and cardiac catheterization; adds home care 
funding in response to rising needs for alternatives to hospital 
and nursing home beds; and strengthens community services 
including alcohol and drug and mental health programs. 
 
(1530) 
 
From the $150 million transition fund, 26 million will be 
allocated immediately to address operating and capital 
equipment pressures in Regina, Saskatoon, and the cancer 
agency. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 1.978 billion, our health budget is 
the largest amount ever invested by the provincial government 
in Saskatchewan’s health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — In 2000-2001, funding for home care and 
community-based services is $83 million. Funding for hospitals 
is $84 million. The number of MRI scans rose to approximately 
9,000 in ’99-2000, up 73 per cent over the previous year as two 
new MRI units were added in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
In 2000-2001 spending on the prescription drug plan will reach 
$99 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — $99 million. 
 
Ms. Jones: — That’s a lot of bucks, hey. 
 
The health budget provides for a wide and growing range of 
health care services for Saskatchewan people including more 
than 92,000 surgeries every year; 9,200 nursing home beds; 800 
air ambulance trips; 76,000 trips by road ambulance; 1,450,000 
tests in the provincial lab; 400,000 immunizations for children 
and adults; support under the prescription drug plan for more 
than a hundred thousand families; and dozens of 
community-based programs to help maintain their health and 
avoid illness and injury. 
 
Saskatchewan Health is aware of the devastating consequences 
of HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus/acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome) and its effects on individuals, 
families, and communities. We are providing $634,370 in 
funding for HIV/AIDS in community programs in ’99-2000. 
Well you could compare that with funding that was received in 
Regina and Saskatoon AIDS from $7,000 a year in 1991-92 to 
the current levels that I just read to you, and that’s a lot of 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

rubles. 
 
Saskatchewan Health continues to provide support and funding 
of over 13 million to initiatives related to the child action plan. 
Now most of these initiatives are community based and address 
a wide range of health-related issues through prevention, health 
promotion, early intervention, and treatment approaches in 
collaboration with other sectors. 
 
In addition, in 2000-2001, the Saskatchewan government is 
committing $20.7 million in total in new funding under the 
child action plan to strengthen early child development, address 
social/emotional behaviour challenges in children and youth, as 
well as social housing needs in the North. 
 
This year the new total cumulative government funding for the 
plan will rise to $69.9 million. 
 
The government is committed to working with district health 
boards, other agencies and sectors to enhance the health and 
well-being of older persons and to provide comprehensive 
effective health services. And I think it’s noteworthy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that approximately 45 per cent of the 
provincial health budget goes to services for our senior citizens 
aged 65 or older. 
 
As I said, our government is committed to improving health 
services in rural Saskatchewan. Given the rural nature of 
Saskatchewan, there is a need to provide residents with 
reasonable access to quality acute services. The future of small 
rural hospitals is part of a broader discussion, a discussion on 
how we can best deliver services across the province in rural 
areas, in regional centres, and in our large urban centres. 
 
We need to ensure that limited resources are going to where 
they’re most needed, to where people are going for care. The 
lack of funding for health care in the recent federal government 
budget will impact the provincial health budget and health 
district funding. There may be changes, however, they won’t 
occur until district planning process is complete. 
 
The department has worked closely and will continue to work 
closely with rural residents and health districts to ensure that 
rural residents have the services they need, the opportunity to be 
involved, and information about the effectiveness of health 
services. 
 
And I sincerely hope this isn’t too convoluted for my friend 
across the way, but I move, I move the following amendment 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: 
 

Delete all the words after “Assembly” and replace with the 
following therefor: 
 
“urges the provincial government to examine district 
proposals for hospital or health centre conversions to 
ensure that adequate services are maintained and that the 
communities have a chance to provide input into plans.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to rise and join in the debate on the future of 

health care in Saskatchewan, in effect that’s what it’s about. 
 
Before I begin I’d like to talk a little bit about a brief history of 
Canada’s health care system. In 1947 the Saskatchewan 
government, led by Tommy Douglas, introduces the first 
provincial hospital insurance program in Canada. 
 
Usually the member from Kindersley waits at least a few 
minutes before he starts heckling but I guess he’s all primed 
today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I appreciate that. Well 
we’ve got the black cats and the white cats. We’ve got the stray 
cats on the other side of the House, so . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Perhaps I 
should begin again about a brief history of medicare in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Tommy Douglas won the election in 1944 representing the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation). And in that election 
he won it in part because he had a vision for the health care 
system, accessible on the basis of need, not income. 
 
It was a vision that the people of Saskatchewan embraced. And 
today it’s a vision that the vast majority of people of Canada 
passionately share. In fact it’s the defining difference between 
Canada and the United States. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Douglas could not implement his vision of 
medicare as quickly as he would like or as completely as he’d 
like. The first problem was money as usual. I spoke earlier in 
the year of fiscal responsibility and social responsibility. And 
Mr. Douglas also had that view I’m sure. 
 
The Great Depression hit Saskatchewan harder than any other 
province. And it took a while before we got out of that and were 
able to afford that. As a result, Saskatchewan was forced to go 
it alone in 1947 with a modest hospitalization plan. It was 
popular enough, however, to be copied in Alberta, 
Newfoundland, and British Columbia. And ten years after the 
adoption in Saskatchewan, hospitalization was extended 
throughout Canada by the federal government, using the 
incentive of cost-shared financing. 
 
In 1962 Saskatchewan’s NDP government introduces the first 
health care program. 
 
Members opposite should be careful because otherwise we’ll 
start quoting Woodrow Lloyd to them. 
 
In 1965 a royal commission, headed up by Emmett Hall, calls 
for a universal and comprehensive national health insurance 
program. And in 1966 Parliament creates a national medicare 
program with Ottawa paying 50 per cent of the provincial 
health costs — 50 per cent. In 1977 Pierre Trudeau retreated 
from the 50-50 cost sharing and replaced it with block funding. 
 
In 1984 the Canada Health Act passed unanimously by 
Parliament and extra billing was banned, and the five principles 
of the Canada Health Act — affordability, accessibility, 
universality, portability, and publicly funded — was enacted in 
Parliament. 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

Paul Martin, Jr. introduces the Canada Health and Social 
Transfer, causing massive cuts in transfer payments to health 
and social programs. As the member for Meewasin indicated, it 
moved from 50-50 cost shared from provincial funding of 87 
per cent and federal 13 per cent. 
 
And the members opposite raise concerns about the level of 
health care funding in Saskatchewan. However, Saskatchewan 
backfilled every dollar that the federal government took out of 
health care and I’m proud to be a part of government that does 
that. 
 
This year, Ralph Klein introduced legislation to allow private 
hospitals and the federal budget offers only two cents for health 
care for every dollar of tax cuts, ignoring pleas of Canadians for 
medicare. 
 
That’s a brief history of the health care system in Canada. And I 
could go on and on if the members opposite wish. Just to 
contrast the situation in Saskatchewan and now in Canada, 
based on the leadership of Tommy Douglas, I’d like to contrast 
that with a few facts of the US health care experience — the 
for-profit health care system. 
 
The US experience demonstrates that private sector 
involvement in health care delivery is neither more effective nor 
more efficient because customers — known in Canada as 
patients — are charged for each and every cost item. The 
typical US hospital employs 50 billing personnel; a Canadian 
hospital employs only three or four on average. 
 
And we all hear about the horror stories of a $50 aspirin, or 
washcloths or different extra pillows and added cost for that. In 
fact we hear about bills that are sent to patients that are more 
than three or four or five feet long. 
 
To use the words of University of British Columbia health 
economist, Robert Evans, quote: 
 

The US health care system scores relatively badly on every 
dimension and from every perspective: public satisfaction, 
measured health outcomes, overall cost, efficiency, 
coverage, equity of access (and) equity of finance. 

 
The US experience of privatized health care continues to 
provide Canadians with the best reasons for defending and 
strengthening our own cherished public system. 
 
Some more facts about the US health care system. It consumes 
more resources — 14 per cent of the economy compared to only 
9 per cent in Canada. It allocates resources less efficiently — 44 
million Americans lack coverage, while millions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Forty-four million lack coverage while millions 
of beds lie idle — private American health care system. 
 
It is vastly more efficient in terms of its administrative costs. 
Per capita billing costs in 1995 were $361 in the US and only 
119 in Canada. 
 
We all hear horror stories in the news and I remember watching 

one article . . . one news story — oh, a few years ago — about 
this woman that was stricken with cancer and unfortunately she 
didn’t have fully insurance in the States. She had to have a 
discussion with her doctor as to what level of care she could 
afford and how much money the treatment would cost — sort of 
whether you can afford a hamburger or whether you could have 
a steak and lobster. 
 
Fortunately in Saskatchewan and in Canada we don’t have that 
kind of a discussion. And she knew that the very best treatment 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Addley: — And this woman that was stricken with cancer 
in the United States, Mr. Deputy Speaker, knew that the very 
best treatment care was more expensive than she can afford. 
And she had talked to her banker how she could sell her house, 
how she could liquidate her assets, and it just didn’t cut it. It 
wasn’t enough money to have the very best treatment . . . to 
afford her the best treatment that was available. 
 
She had to have the hamburger; she couldn’t super size it. She 
couldn’t go for steak. She couldn’t get lobster. She had to go 
with basically an incomplete meal on the health care system. 
 
That’s what would happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we moved 
from the patient care system, the publicly-funded, the single 
payer, public-administrated system to go to the customer 
oriented, the privatized for-profit system. We want never to go 
down that route. 
 
(1545) 
 
The American system — but I interrupted myself — the 
American system provides . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There 
you go, I’ve got to stop heckling myself. 
 
More facts concerning the . . . more facts concerning the 
American health care system. It provides a lower quality of care 
in order to maximize profits — a lower quality of care to 
maximize profits. As soon as you bring in the profit motive in 
health care then you lose the quality of that health care. 
 
And you’ve . . . members in this House have heard me speak 
about how important business is and how important the profit 
margin is and how pro-business I am. However, in the health 
care system, I believe that it should be publicly funded and it 
should not be for profit. 
 
The American system again. It produces poorer results in terms 
of a nation’s health indicators including life expectancy, infant 
mortality, and social inequalities. The US has the highest infant 
mortality rate among OECD (Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) countries — the highest infant 
mortality rate. 
 
Here’s a few facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the American 
system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . thank you, member from 
Kindersley. People with no health insurance in the United 
States — 44 million. People who are underinsured — 71 
million. People with income of less than $20,000 — 59 per 
cent, almost 60 per cent of people with less than $20,000 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

income are either without insurance or underinsured. 
 
Contrast that with people with an income of greater than 
$60,000, it’s only 8 per cent. That’s a huge disparity between 
the haves and the have-nots within that country. 
 
Hispanic people with no coverage — 50 per cent. Black people 
with no coverage — 37 per cent. White people with no 
coverage — 25 per cent. 
 
And this is the really hard, difficult one is children with no 
coverage — 33 per cent. One-third of children in the United 
States of America have no or inadequate health care insurance. 
That’s made in the USA, Mr. Speaker; fortunately it’s not a 
made in Canada solution. 
 
Some more facts, Mr. Speaker, about the American system. The 
US Department of Health estimates that fraud costs taxpayers 
$27 billion every year — $27 billion. 
 
Member from Rosthern talks about fraud. He’s an expert in that 
area; he knows more about it than I do so I’d be willing to listen 
to him on a later date. 
 
There’s little incentive for fraud in Canada’s public health 
insurance system because corporate profits are not a factor. US 
health care corporations consider medicare a potential gold 
mine. Sun Healthcare Group, Inc., one of the largest private 
health companies in the United States, had this to say, quote: 
 

Essentially we’re interested in the transition in the 
Canadian health marketplace from public sector to the 
private sector and think we can use some of the things 
we’ve learned in the American marketplace. 

 
So based on the facts that I’ve just quoted, they want to bring 
that American-style health care system to Saskatchewan. 
 
Another one — as health care costs rise, employers minimize 
their cost by increasing employee rates and limiting health 
services available. 
 
The New England Journal of Medicine calls the US health care 
system, quote, “the most expensive and most inadequate in the 
developed world”. Let me read that again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
so every member in this House can hear it. The New England 
Journal of Medicine calls the US health care system, quote, “the 
most expensive and most inadequate in the developed world”. 
And the members opposite want to take us to that world and go 
down that road of American-style health care. 
 
Citizens over age 65 with incomes below the poverty level, who 
qualify for medicare, typically spend 35 per cent of their 
income on health care. Those who don’t qualify spend half of 
their income on health care. One-third of all US children have 
no health care insurance at some portion of the year . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Addley: — I’ll go back to my point that, before all the 
things got interrupted, The New England Journal of Medicine 
calls the US health care system, quote, “the most expensive and 
most inadequate in the developed world”. 

Citizens over the age of 65 with incomes below the poverty 
level, who qualify for medicare, typically spend 35 per cent of 
their income on health care. Those who don’t qualify spend half 
their income on care. And as I said previously, a third of all US 
children have no health insurance for some portion of the year. 
 
In 1999 a landmark study done for the US Department of 
Housing and Urban Development found that lack of access to 
universal health care coverage is driving hundreds of thousands 
of Americans into homelessness. We don’t want that style of 
health care in Canada, and thankfully we haven’t gone down 
that road. 
 
Now what have we done in Saskatchewan? I’ve talked a little 
bit about the history of health care; I've talked about what’s 
been done in another country, United States; a little bit about 
what’s gone on in Canada. What have we done and what has 
this government, coalition Liberal-NDP government, done and 
what are we prepared to do? 
 
The 2000 Health budget totals $1.978 billion, which is an 
increase of 113 million, 6 per cent, over the ’99-2000 budget. 
The dollar amount is $63 million more than last year when the 
budget included the 50 million one-time funding for Y2K 
security. A base funding increase of 5.1 per cent to health 
districts, primarily to fund collective bargaining agreements; 
increased funding to strengthen cancer treatment programs; 
additional funds to cover rising use of physician services and 
the prescription drug plan. 
 
In addition to the $1.978 billion, there’s a one-time Health 
Transition Fund totalling $150 million. This fund has been 
established to support innovation to make Saskatchewan health 
care system sustainable into the future. 
 
As well, the federal government’s input into health care wasn’t 
as much as we had hoped. And they’re planning, or have talked 
about having a national review, and I believe have withheld 
some money so that that review will take place and that when 
they put health care dollars back into the system, it will go to 
health care and not to tax cuts vis-à-vis Ontario. 
 
Of the total $113 million increase, $60 million dollar increase in 
base funding is provided to health districts, which will improve 
wages and benefits for health workers, for collective 
agreements; continuous regeneration of the province’s four 
regional care centres; strengthens specialized acute care 
programs; adds home care funding in response to rising needs 
for alternatives to hospital and nursing home beds; strengthens 
community services, including alcohol, drug, and mental health 
programs. 
 
This is a one-time fund to prepare for and support changes 
necessary to ensure the future sustainability of health care 
services. The balance of the fund will be used as a strategic 
reserve to help create a more sustainable health care system. 
 
Some other initiatives that were announced in the budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 21 million in additional funding to cover 
increased costs in the prescription drug program; over 5 million 
to continue the Saskatchewan Health Information Network; 8 
million for the Canadian Blood Services; and $1.2 million for 
new cancer drugs and treatments. 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

At $l.978 billion, Health’s 2000-2001 budget is the largest 
amount ever invested by the provincial government in 
Saskatchewan’s health care system. The increase follows an 
increase of over 11 per cent last year. Funding, in this budget, 
funding for home care and community-based services is 83 
million. This is a 76 per cent increase over ’91-92. 
 
Funding for home-based services alone has increased by 146 
per cent since ’91-92. This has allowed another 9,000 people to 
receive home care. The average cost of providing home care to 
one person for one year is about $2,500. 
 
In 2001, spending for hospitals is 14 per cent higher than in 
’91-92. This reflects the growing volume and cost of services 
being provided. For example, the number of MRI scans rose to 
approximately 9,000 — up 73 per cent. Doctors in 
Saskatchewan performed some 92,000 surgeries — up 19 per 
cent over 10 years ago. 
 
Growth in some high demand surgeries has been even higher. 
Volumes of cataract surgeries more than tripled over the past 
decade. 
 
Two-thirds of Saskatchewan’s Health budget goes to the salary, 
benefits, and physician payments for Saskatchewan doctors, 
nurses, and health care providers. In 2000-2001, spending on 
the drug plan will reach 99 million — up 27 per cent from last 
year’s budget. Rising numbers of prescriptions and the 
introduction of newer, more expensive drugs are behind the 
rapidly growing costs. 
 
But the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy indicates that there 
should be a moratorium on hospital closures. And I just want to 
indicate what is being done in rural Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible) . . . health care: emergency services, by the purchase 
in ’96-97 of a replacement air ambulance, trained first 
responders, improved communications through fleet net 
technology, implementation of other indications, 911 for 
medical assistance. 
 
Ambulance costs through the senior citizens ambulance 
assistance program, which limits the costs of road ambulance 
trips to $250 for seniors 65 years and older. And the air 
ambulance program which limits in-province air ambulance 
trips, with the exception of northern residents, to $350. 
 
Emergency room coverage in rural areas by compensating 
physicians providing emergency room coverage and designated 
sites. Timely transfer of payments . . . pardon me, timely 
transfer of patients between districts, 24 hours a day, by 
established . . . an inter-district patient transfer steering 
committee responsible to develop a province-wide admission 
discharge system. 
 
Training of emergency workers and assisting districts with 
emergency preparedness disaster management. There’s three in 
particular, ones that apply specifically to rural Saskatchewan 
and I’ll be covering those. Cancer services by expansion of 
cancer outreach treatment programs; access to health services 
through four Telehealth pilot projects; renal dialysis through 
new and expanded renal satellites. As well, easier access to 
diagnostic services through a new CT (computerized 
tomography), a second MRI in Saskatoon, new bone mineral 

density testing program, and expansion of surgical services. 
 
Home care services by additional funding, and new initiatives 
include a home-based assessment tool. Community primary health 
services by the establishment of the advanced clinical nursing 
program. It supports the mental health care services through 
additional funding. And health promotion prevention, 
community-based rehabilitation due to acquired brain injuries by 
increasing the number of ABI (acquired brain injury) community 
coordinators. 
 
As well, the development and implementation of prevention, help, 
and promotion programs in co-operation with other sectors, 
including education, the municipalities, and social services. Also 
contracted with Nikki Gerrard, Dr. Nikki Gerrard, a specialist in 
farm stress issues to assist Saskatchewan Health, health districts, 
and our partner organizations to work together on the issue of farm 
stress. 
 
But again, I wanted to talk a little bit about the three areas that are 
of particular interest to rural Saskatchewan. First one is the acute 
care and cancer services. Funding for acute care and cancer 
services has increased by approximately $44 million, the benefits 
which include expansion of cancer outreach treatment programs 
which enable rural residents to receive treatment and support in or 
close to their home community. To date 17 districts, 22 
communities are now involved in the outreach program. 
 
Four Telehealth pilot projects will improve access to health 
services. The northern Telehealth network formerly known as the 
remote consultation and training initiatives is providing rural and 
remote residents with access to specialists, family physicians, 
and other health providers located in larger centres. It is 
providing remote health providers with access to colleagues, 
special expertise, and continuing education. 
 
(1600) 
 
Sites in P.A. (Prince Albert), North Battleford, Saskatoon, 
Meadow Lake, La Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and two northern 
nursing stations — Beauval and Pinehouse Lake — are linked 
to this initiative. Representatives of the NTN (Northern 
Telehealth Network) are working with representatives of the 
First Nations Telehealth research project to link their planned 
Telehealth site in Southend with the NTN. 
 
Southwest rural physicians support initiative involves linking 
physicians from physician clinics in health care facilities in 
Climax, Eastend, Shaunavon, Leader, and Maple Creek in the 
Southwest District. This initiative has been encompassed by 
SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network). 
 
District Internet application has supported the Saskatoon Health 
District in the creation of a web site that delivers health 
information and provides information to the public and to health 
professionals on health and medical services. Saskatoon’s web 
site is www.sdh.sk.ca. A how to get started manual has been 
shared with other districts and is posted on the web site as well. 
 
The satellite initiative is a real-time video conferring system 
linking Nipawin and Cumberland House using a 
communication satellite. All equipment has been installed and 
training will be completed by March 2000. 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

New and expanded renal satellites. In June ’99, the Pasquia 
Health District doubled its renal dialysis capacity at the Tisdale 
Hospital by operating six days per week rather than three days 
per week. The initial renal services were operational in April 
’98. The services in the southeast part of the province, located 
in Yorkton, also adds an additional station and expanded in 
November to a six day per week operation. 
 
A new satellite in Swift Current will be in operation April 2000, 
and their staff is being trained in Regina Health District and in 
the Swift Current Hospital. 
 
New CT, MRI, and other specialized services. Saskatchewan 
residents and specialists have access to the following diagnostic 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — In January, ’98, the Prince Albert Health 
District became the first outside Regina to provide CT services. 
And that’s been expanded. 
 
A second MRI in the Saskatoon Health District started to 
operate in July to make a total of three MRIs in the province. 
 
Expansion of itinerant, surgical services such as establishment 
of cataract surgery in a number of districts. 
 
Rural and northern residents further benefit from strengthening 
service — specialized and . . . (inaudible) . . . services and from 
an approved ability to recruit and retain physicians throughout 
the province, including an adequate supply of specialists in the 
. . . (inaudible) . . . mid-size centres. 
 
Home care services — funding for home care has increased 146 
per cent between ’91 and ’99. Home care clients has increased 
by 47 per cent. Units of home care service in rural 
Saskatchewan have increased by 58 per cent. And the caseload 
of home care has increased to an . . . (inaudible) . . . over this 
period. 
 
New initiatives in home care include the home-based 
assessment tool, increased collaboration between housing 
authorities and health districts in creating housing options, the 
establishment of a steering committee to assist districts in 
dealing with clients and behaviour management programs. 
 
So in conclusion, concerning the rural health initiatives . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh don’t conclude yet. We’re hanging on 
your every breath. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Oh there’s lots to go. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I didn’t see 
you standing there so I’m not sure when you started. So I think 
I should start at the beginning of my speech. The US health . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Okay, again. I’ll start over at the rural health 

initiatives. 
 
In ’97-98 the Saskatchewan government provided an 
incremental 1.7 million for rural health initiatives to encourage 
innovation, home-based services, emergency services, and 
illness prevention programs. And we just can’t take more good 
news. Older persons are major beneficiaries of several of those 
programs. 
 
In addition, during ’96 to 2000, the government allocated 5.2 
million in one-time expenditures for districts in northern 
Saskatchewan. A district benefit of this funding — increased, 
and is improved, access to quality, emergency health services 
particularly for residents of rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, we’ll spend $5 million for senior citizens ambulance 
assistance program and the air ambulance program. 
 
Other rural initiatives that benefit older persons include 
expansions of itinerant surgical services such as the 
establishment of cataract surgery and the expansion of renal 
dialysis services in Tisdale, Yorkton, Swift Current health 
districts. 
 
I was just concluding the part on what we’ve done in rural. 
 
Now to get to the main part of my speech concerning hospital 
closures. The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy was quite 
concerned about the hospital closures. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s two sides of this House. One side 
is talking about hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan and one 
side isn’t. Members on this side have never said rural hospitals 
will close. The future of small rural hospitals is part of a 
broader discussion on communities, districts. And health care 
providers are and will be part of this discussion. 
 
The Minister of Health has said that on several occasions in this 
House. And this government has stood behind that. The 
Minister of Health will work with districts and communities to 
make sure that services are available within a reasonable 
distance and we can have acceptable emergency response times. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was born and raised in rural 
Saskatchewan, six hours from this place, over 600 kilometres 
from where I’m standing. In the hospital that I was born in, 
there was 350 people in that community. And when I heard that 
that hospital was closing in the ’90s, I was very concerned. I 
thought, they’re closing my hospital, my hospital that I was 
born in. 
 
Well I did a little bit of research, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
hospital wasn’t closed. It was converted to a health centre. It 
was basically the funding for that health centre was a reflection 
on how the people in that community were using that. 
 
I come from rural Saskatchewan. I know that if I need an 
emergency need, I’ll go to the hospital, to the health centre, and 
get looked after. But if I have a planned surgery that I know . . . 
Half of my life I’ve lived in Saskatchewan, half of my life. 
More than half of my life I’ve lived in rural Saskatchewan. 
Born and raised, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

So anyway, what I was saying concerning the health care 
system or the hospital in my hometown. The concern was, as 
people on that side of the House know, if there’s a planned 
surgery or a planned purchase that you want specialization, you 
don’t get it done in your local community. You want the very 
best person doing the most on that area so that you have the best 
chance of survival. 
 
For example, I was reading recently that if you want to ensure 
the best kind of health care services, you pick a place, you pick 
a physician, you pick a surgeon that has experience in that. You 
don’t want someone that basically is doing that surgery once or 
twice a year on an emergent basis. You want to get the 
specialized care. 
 
Even babies being delivered, and when I was born in that 
hospital that’s where people went for getting their babies . . . for 
having babies being born. And I know it’s news to some 
members on that side but there really wasn’t a stork that 
brought them; it was actually another matter altogether. We can 
talk about that later. 
 
So what I’m saying, the part I’m getting at is that we have to 
reflect what the rural hospital is servicing and ensure that’s an 
integral part of the health care system. But we don’t need, we 
don’t need bricks and mortar, the 1980s Devine tactic of 
building the hospitals all over things. The usual thing of: if it 
moves, subsidize it; if it doesn’t, pave it; well if they don’t want 
it, build a hospital. That’s Grant Devine’s style. 
 
Question: will there be hospitals closed in rural Saskatchewan? 
As I’ve talked . . . as I spoke, hospitals weren’t closed — they 
were converted and there’s a huge difference. We need to 
ensure that limited resources are going to where they are most 
needed, to where people are going for care. 
 
As I indicated, if you needed your appendix out and it was an 
emergency basis, the local doctor can do that in the community. 
But if it’s a planned event, you’re not going to get it done in 
your town of 350. You’re going to want to go to where they’re 
being done on a daily, weekly basis continually. And the 
member knows that on the opposite side. 
 
Saskatchewan’s acute care system has experienced significant 
restructuring in the last seven years. Fifty-one small hospitals 
were converted to health care systems and that’s a recognition 
of what the service was being provided. 
 
Well all right, I’d like to move along a little bit to the Alberta 
style, the American style of health care which is the kind of 
style that the members opposite want to talk about. During my 
speech quite a while ago, I was talking about — and I failed to 
introduce this — it was early in April and it was about the 
two-tier health care plan that many people in Alberta believe 
that we already have. 
 
It indicates an individual who had difficulty fully opening her 
jaw. And she was recently told she needed a magnetic . . . an 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging scan. She called the clinic 
only to find that the waiting list for the publicly-funded MRI 
was nine months, but that she could be seen the following day if 
she wanted to pay the $600 fee herself. That’s the American 
style, the UK (United Kingdom) style, and that’s the Sask Party 

style of health care. 
 
And that’s what the members opposite are talking about. This 
necessary procedure that’s not covered, or if there was a waiting 
list, has left them convinced there’s already a two-tiered health 
care system in Alberta. They’re also convinced the system will 
only get worse under the government’s private clinic plan. 
That’s from The Globe and Mail, Monday, April 3. 
 
One of the most controversial efforts recently involves 
Alberta’s Bill 11. This legislation is designed to regulate the 
activities of private companies that wish to deliver hospital and 
other treatment services in Alberta. And the members opposite 
say that well it’s the same plan, it’s the same legislation that 
Saskatchewan has. There’s a huge difference, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan legislation that was passed a few years ago has 
been defended . . . was to defend publicly funded, a 
single-payer, public-administered system. And all the speeches 
surrounded by the then minister of Health and by the Premier 
indicated, and in their speeches said, that this is a way to protect 
a single-payer, public-administered system. 
 
The Alberta legislation is aimed at encouraging the 
establishment of for-profit health organizations. And as I spoke 
briefly earlier on, on the American style when they introduced 
profit, one-third of children have inadequate health insurance. 
That’s what happens when you bring in profit in the health 
system. 
 
Our goal in Saskatchewan was to protect and preserve the 
public aspect of our system by explicitly preventing a parallel 
for-profit, private system from emerging. Throughout 
Saskatchewan there’s a deeply held belief that access to health 
services must be based on the need, not the ability, to pay. 
 
The problem with for-profit hospitals and health cares is they’re 
run to make a profit. It’s basic; it’s very simple — period — 
they want to make money. The goal is to make money; it’s not 
to provide health care. You have to provide health care because 
that’s the service that the customers want. But they have to 
make money — there’s a profit area that they need to make. 
 
You either decrease the level of service, you cut back on what’s 
provided, or else you increase the cost, but basically the profit 
margin’s there. 
 
Improving population health as well as the efficiency of health 
care delivery may turn out to be profitable. We must continue to 
build a publicly funded and publicly administered health system 
whose primary mandate is to improve the health of the entire 
population. 
 
(1615) 
 
While the current system works very well for the majority of 
Canadians, they nonetheless feel anxious about medicare today. 
In fact there’s been surveys said that when individuals . . . 
they’re concerned about health care; they believe there’s a 
crisis. However, when anyone’s had any kind of contact with 
the health care system, they rate it very, very high. In fact in 
Alberta they rate it 85 per cent as good or very good. In 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

Saskatchewan it’s approaching 90 per cent. 
 
So why are Canadians, the majority of Canadians feeling 
anxious about medicare today and the future of medicare? 
Because they are in the midst of making some critical choices 
about the future of our health care system. 
 
As was previously said, there’s three choices available to 
Canadians in the health care area. The first is the US style 
which I’ve outlined a little bit. Insurance must be purchased 
directly by individuals or indirectly through employment plans. 
The system leaves about 40 million people uninsured and 
another 50 million people underinsured — over one-third of the 
total population, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, administrative costs are among the highest, helping to 
make American health care costs as a per cent of GDP (gross 
domestic product) the largest in the world. 
 
As I’ve also said, the American system is the most costly of the 
OECD countries . . . They usually wait before I finish the 
speech before they ask me to confirm something. Maybe this is 
getting long. 
 
The American system is the most costly of OECD countries, yet 
major health indicator comparisons show that the overall health 
of Americans in some categories is among the poorest in OECD 
countries, ranking 21st in the infant mortality and 17th in male 
life expectancy at birth. 
 
A second choice is a private system that runs parallel to the 
public system. I believe this is the system that the Sask Party is 
advocating, having both a public system as well as a private 
for-profit system. 
 
And if the member from Saltcoats would listen, he would 
understand why this is a concern. 
 
A second choice, the two-tier model in operation in the UK . . . 
Two-tier means that individuals with the financial ability can 
access services privately, but everyone else accesses publicly. 
 
We do not eliminate waiting lists in a system where a surgeon 
can work in a public plan in the morning and the private system 
in the afternoon. The members opposite need to understand that. 
 
And the reason for that is the incentive of those same surgeons 
to allow public waiting lists to grow, thereby encouraging 
patients to move to the private system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a quote here, as Professor Raisa 
Deber of the University of Toronto observed recently, quote — 
and if the members opposite would listen up this would indicate 
why they should not go down the road of a two-tier system — 
quote: 
 

A viable private tier depends on the erosion of the publicly 
funded system to create a market for privately funded 
(health) care. Unless medicare is (adequately — pardon 
me) inadequate or perceived to be inadequate, there would 
be no reason for the consumers to pay extra for care. 
 

Two tier also encourages citizens who have opted into the 

private system to revolt against continuing to pay taxes to 
support a public system. 
 
For all these reasons, the third option, which is the preferred 
option, which is the option that Tommy Douglas envisioned 
early on, is that of the single-payer public administrated system. 
 
There are some challenges facing Canadian health care, but we 
are not in crisis. We are indeed needing some important 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone on about the health care system that 
needs to be done in Saskatchewan. And that is the emphasis on 
improved health by taking actions on determents, health and 
socio-economic activities, physical environment, biology, 
genetic endowment, etc. 
 
And I could go on and on, but I’d like to conclude with a couple 
of quotes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One is by Woodrow Lloyd, in 
his speech October 20, 1961 during the second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. And this is a quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious of course to everybody that a 
Bill of this kind with the programs such as envisioned is 
one that doesn’t just happen. It is in fact a part of the 
inevitable and inexorable development of the public 
conscience. It is a kind of activity which is rooted in the 
legitimate hopes and aspirations of great numbers of 
people that essential services will be fully and adequately 
available to all people. It is of course . . . too, that 
developments of this kind have never come about without 
varying degrees of opposition. 
 
It is obvious too, Mr. Speaker, that in a Bill of this kind in 
a program such as is contemplated here, governments and 
legislatures and people of today are the beneficiaries of the 
actions of governments, legislators, and people of other 
days. It seems fitting that we should, at a point when such a 
decisive further step is being taken, pay a tribute to all 
those people in organizations who over a great many years 
in the province have done the things that make possible 
this further step towards the great maturity today. 
 
In fact the development of these services, Mr. Speaker, is a 
measure of the extent of public responsibility. This in turn 
is a measure of the extent of sensitivity which have 
developed to the rights and to the needs of others. 
 
I sincerely submit that the extent of our sensitivity to the 
rights and needs of others is a very excellent measurement 
of the maturity of the social society in which we live. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And in final conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to end this speech with a final quote about our illustrious 
Premier today. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Members of the 
Assembly, I’m having difficulty hearing the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. And I think there is too much 
interruption coming from both sides of the House. And I just 
want to encourage all members to give the . . . Order, order. I 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

would . . . Order. I’d like to urge all members to give the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland the opportunity to make 
himself heard in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was just 
my introduction, but as the hour is getting late I’ll wrap up 
within the next 90 seconds with a quote from our illustrious 
Premier today. And I quote: 
 

This discussion also requires the participation of the 
general public in a profound way, not only because of the 
impact of health care policy on all of us but because 
medicare has become such an important part of our 
Canadian identity during the last 40 years. It has become 
the key symbol for our self-definition as a compassionate 
and caring society. It is one of the most important 
touchstones of our citizenship — all governments in this 
country, federal and provincial, to exercise the leadership 
that our citizens have a right to expect of them. 

 
And in final conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this dialogue 
should not be a lengthy or costly process. We know basically 
what we want as Canadians. We know from previous studies 
the things we need to change to make medicare even more 
effective for the 21st century. Let’s get on with the task — the 
country is waiting. 
 
I’m very pleased to second the amendment and vote opposed to 
the motion put forward by the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
I unequivocally do not support the amendment put forward by 
that member. The motion’s amendment, as it reads, says: 
 

urges the provincial government to examine district 
proposals for hospital or health centre conversion to ensure 
that adequate services are maintained and that communities 
have a chance to provide input into plans. 

 
Well the fact of the matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this 
very amendment infers very clearly that the NDP government 
has full intentions of conversion of hospitals into health centres 
or certainly to downgrade services in existing hospitals. How 
could one possibly want to support this kind of amendment? It’s 
an admission of what they’re going to do here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am more than pleased 
though to support the motion put forward by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy that would put a moratorium on any 
further hospital or health centre closures, at least until the 
government’s promised comprehensive review of health care in 
Saskatchewan is completed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no more room in this promise for 
any more movement, for any more action or inaction or lack of 
action by the NDP government. Lack of meaningful action is 
what I’m talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

In as far as them even touching our health care system, they 
have been a dismal failure. There has been destruction and there 
has been bleeding of health care system under this government. 
They have bludgeoned the health care system completely to 
death. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there isn’t a person in this 
province that trusts this government in any way or form any 
more. And certainly not with their precious health care system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, way back in 1993 there were reports by 
the media that were telling the people of this province exactly 
what this NDP government was doing to their health care 
system. And those reports did very clearly make people aware 
of what they could expect. 
 
I want to read an excerpt from an April 2, 1993 press release 
that was put forward by Mr. Randy Burton of The StarPhoenix. 
He said — listen to this, this is what is happening in 
Saskatchewan, this is how people are feeling. 
 

A tide of fear and resentment is growing (across the) 
against the provincial government’s plans for rural health 
care and the future of small town hospitals. 

 
People have responded to that kind of an article that they’ve 
seen in the paper by phoning their MLAs, by calling into the 
Health minister. They have seen clearly what is happening. And 
they did see what happened — 53 hospitals closed without any 
rhyme or reason. 
 
In the last few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my constituency 
we have seen the Cudworth hospital close. Now that hospital 
closed in spite of a very reasonable, common sense, financially 
sound proposal put forward by the people in that district to keep 
that hospital open. A proposal that would have seen the district 
and the government save money. But no, the government had to 
send their hacks in there and ensure that that hospital was 
closed down. 
 
What did the people find after the conversion to a health centre 
happened? They found that they were now in deeper debt than 
they could have ever expected. 
 
So, no don’t listen to the people — the people that have put 
forward a financially responsible proposal to keep their hospital 
open, to keep their nursing home open — but instead have 
government come in and determine what it is that they think 
should happen in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they think they know what’s best, but they 
don’t know what’s best. The people out in the health districts 
know what’s best for their particular areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a continual destruction of 
every aspect of our health care. This government said that we 
were going to have a wellness model, that it was going to be 
based on prevention and intervention as a way to ensure that 
health costs were brought down and that people would remain 
healthier. We have found anything but. 
 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

People in the prevention area have been coming to us and 
saying, here is some very good ideas for prevention, but the 
government is not funding this. We have heard that home care 
is going to be cutting costs. It’s going to be able to enable 
people to be able to stay at home and get the services they need. 
And now what do we have? Home care services are being cut. 
The number of days that people are getting home care services, 
the number of hours are being cut. 
 
(1630) 
 
Elderly people are placed in their homes with just about no 
consideration for the continuum of care that they need. They are 
scrambling out there, in rural Saskatchewan especially, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to be able to find the kind of care that they 
need. Many, many family members are more than concerned 
about their seniors that are staying alone in their homes, and 
now we see housekeeping services being cut throughout the 
province. There is no more ability for people that are seniors 
trying to live together in their own home to even be able to 
access care for housekeeping services. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has not only 
instituted a wellness model where they have had no decent plan 
in place, but now the government is interfering in the business 
of health districts, constantly interfering. The government has 
no business doing that. No one is asking for that. 
 
The health districts have asked for autonomy. They’ve asked to 
be trusted, to be respected in their decision making. And they 
certainly do not appreciate having government send in their 
members from the Department of Health to end up telling 
people what they can do. 
 
And one way that we all know that the government has 
succeeded in having their way which is basically to centralize 
— that’s what they want in the end — is to cut funding, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to cut funding for acute care first of all. Then 
to say that they’re giving more home care funding, but no, 
there’s not a heck of a lot more home care funding. 
 
What they have done also with long-term care is a shame; it’s 
an absolute shame. We have seniors in our province who have 
become accustomed to being able to be able to get into a 
seniors’ home, to be able to have the care that they need. And 
now these people are being told to get into private care homes, 
to pay their own, completely on their own, for all of the kind of 
services they need. 
 
And so we have members opposite telling us that there is no 
private, privatized system. What do you call that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? What do the members opposite call that? If that is not 
privatization, I’d like to know what is? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have people throughout the province 
also who are concerned about emergency services. This 
government said we will be able to just cut back some services 
in your health districts, you may have to go hundreds of miles 
for acute care but we will have ambulances in place to take you. 
 
What do we find in rural Saskatchewan? Well here’s what we 
find every day. Members on this side of the House stand up and 
they raise petitions on behalf of citizens in our area talking 

about the need for proper and reliable cellular service. We don’t 
have adequate tower systems in rural Saskatchewan. There is no 
way that emergency measures people can possibly get a 
message across. 
 
So where is the promise that the NDP has made to ensure that 
there would be adequate services for emergency care? On top of 
that we have a highway system where the ambulance drivers are 
just completely exasperated with the rutty roads that are causing 
their patients more distress, that slow down ambulances as they 
make their way to a hospital 100 kilometres away. 
 
This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has completely failed 
the people of this province. It has completely failed health care. 
It has completely failed in every way and form. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we need not even debate this issue too much further. 
 
The Associate Minister of Health has mentioned and is on 
record for saying that we will no longer see hospitals as they are 
now. She has also mentioned that there was going to be a 
closure of some hospitals in this province. Even though she 
retracted those words after the media got a hold of her, the fact 
is she did make those statements and we are going to most 
likely see more hospital closures. 
 
What I would ask the Minister of Health is, please honour and 
please respect the districts as they put forward their budget 
proposals. If in fact they have seen ways that they could have 
the money at hand, if they’ve been managing well, then please 
allow those proposals to come through so that those services 
that people need in their district that will be specific to the 
needs of that district are able to come forward and . . . 
(inaudible) . . . that still have some health services in the 
province, and comprehensive health services will be able to in 
fact continue with that, that . . . that that they have determined is 
necessary for them. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is . . . Indeed I 
welcome this opportunity to discuss this issue. It is a very 
important issue, and particularly in my constituency there are a 
number of health centres and health service centres that are 
facing a somewhat uncertain future. And I won’t go and 
reiterate on many of the comments that many of my colleagues 
have said about the larger picture or the provincial picture. 
 
I will simply . . . I will say that the plans that this government 
put in place back in 1993 that were supposed to cure all the 
problems we had with health care certainly aren’t bearing fruit. 
In fact they are . . . We have more problems today than we had 
back then when the so-called reform was supposed to provide 
more efficient and more effective and better health care services 
to our residents. 
 
Some of the . . . Two of the communities in my constituency 
that are really wondering what the future of health care service 
in their communities are, are Cupar and Wynyard. We suspect 
— we don’t know because of the gag order placed on health 
district boards. The people are wondering what is going to 
happen in the case of Cupar to the wellness centre, and in the 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

case of Wynyard to their hospital. They would like to have 
input if there are changes coming down the road and they have 
no . . . there is no mechanism or no vehicle for them to have 
input into these changes. And they are very concerned, and 
rightly so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I thought I might just give a brief history of health services in 
these two communities so that all members and the public can 
better understand the reason for the concerns that residents of 
these two communities have. 
 
In the case of Cupar, the hospital in Cupar, a 12-bed acute care 
hospital, was closed as part of the 1993 round of hospital 
closures that this government put in place at that time. The 
people of the community and area reluctantly, I would say, 
accepted the closure of that hospital. 
 
They felt that if indeed this plan was a plan for better and more 
effective health care and more affordable health care, that they 
would reluctantly do their part. And so they reluctantly 
accepted the closure of the hospital, particularly when the 
government gave the residents of the community assurances 
that there would always be health care services in the 
community. 
 
They said okay, we’ll trade that off because we have hospitals 
in Regina; there are hospitals in Fort Qu’Appelle. We realize 
that it’s certainly not near as convenient if our children are sick 
that they would have to go to Regina or Fort Qu’Appelle, but 
we will do our part for the overall good of all residents of the 
province, for the long-term betterment of health services 
throughout the whole province. 
 
But since the closure of the hospital, the building has been 
operated as a wellness centre. And at the time of the closure the 
residents of the community were told that not only would we 
have physician services and some lab services, but there would 
be services from numerous health care providers and there 
would be a number of programs brought to the community that 
would be preventative in nature and would help to prevent 
illness and therefore make health care more efficient. And we 
have seen this take place to a very limited nature. 
 
There is on a sporadic basis services — foot care services and 
chiropractic services — nothing of any particular longevity that 
people can plan for. So people have gone to other centres to 
receive their health care on a more scheduled basis, and that sort 
of thing. 
 
But, nonetheless, we still have to this point in time some health 
care services in the community in the building that was 
formerly the hospital — as I mentioned — a 12-bed hospital. A 
fairly large building that is now being used for limited health 
care services which many people had to question at the time. 
 
They said, well okay, it’ll make sense if we have some 
additional services in the building to use this large building. But 
if those additional services aren’t coming, just the mere cost of 
maintaining the building, heating the building . . . there’s a 
caretaker employed to look after this large building and those 
sorts of things. They could see that if the building was . . . if the 
services weren’t going to be provided that they were told would 
be there, then perhaps we could look at somewhat of a scaling 

down of the physical facility. But that didn’t happen. 
 
Back in 1995 there was an offer from an individual to purchase 
the building to turn it into a level 1 and level 2 private care 
home. It was envisioned at that time that that facility would 
then be fully utilized. It would provide some very necessary 
services to the community, and it would also . . . a portion of 
the building would be used to house a clinic and thereby make 
efficient use of the building and the space. 
 
But what did this government do? When that proposal was put 
to them, they said no, we’re not selling the building. We’re 
going to maintain it under and operate it under the present 
circumstances. Well what do we find today? Now we hear from 
the Regina Health District that it’s far too expensive to operate 
that building for the services that are being provided. 
 
So we had an opportunity to make good, efficient use of the 
building, as I’d indicated, provide services, provide additional 
jobs, and what, as I said, what did the government say? No. 
They had no vision. They had no plan. It seemed like they were 
operating from one crisis to the next and here we arrive at a 
situation where we hear today that there is some very good 
indications that we may in fact lose all health services in our 
community. 
 
This stems from the Boyd report that was tabled earlier this 
winter, where in his report Mr. Boyd stated that the Regina 
Health District should take a serious look at the services being 
provided in the community of Cupar and in the community of 
Imperial. 
 
Now since that time we have seen resignations from the Regina 
Health District, the members saying that we cannot go along 
with some of the plans that the district would be bringing 
forward. Other members have run for cover. They don’t want to 
talk to the public because they’ve been told that if they do talk 
to the public, there would be some very serious ramifications 
coming from that. 
 
So what’s happened is that the community is in limbo. They are 
waiting for this decree from on high to determine what type of 
services that there will be in the community. And this is in a 
community that we have one other health care facility — if you 
call a long-term care home a health care facility. It doesn’t 
provide, as we all know, any doctor services to other members 
. . . other than the residents of the community. And the fear is in 
the community that if we lose physician services that’s just the 
first brick in the dismantling of our long-term care home. 
 
And this is a care home that was worked . . . that many 
members of the community and surrounding communities and 
RMs worked long and hard to secure for our area so that our 
seniors would have a place to go in the twilight of their years, 
so that they could be treated with dignity, so they’d be close to 
their families. And as I said, there’s many people throughout 
the area worked long and hard, donated tirelessly from as far as 
volunteer hours, cash, and those sorts of things. 
 
And when this whole health care restructuring took place, I 
must give them, the members of the board at that time, credit; 
they didn’t trust this government. And so therefore they said we 
will only associate with the Regina Health District . . . we will 



May 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

not become . . . we will not put our facility as part of the Regina 
Health Care District. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in retrospect 
that was a very wise move. 
 
(1645) 
 
This long-term care home or Shalom as it is known in the area 
is often held up by members in the . . . by officials in the health 
care field as a shining example of how a long-term care home 
should be run. It is efficient. It looks after its clients and its 
residents with the utmost of care. And we’ve had many 
instances where people of the area had parents in other care 
homes and brought them to this particular home and have been 
amazed at the improvement in their condition. 
 
And it would be an absolute shame and a disaster if that home 
some time down the road because of lack of physician services 
in the community were to be closed. And this is the real fear of 
the community — not only losing physician services, but 
eventually losing perhaps their long-term care home. 
 
And this certainly is not acceptable, and the residents will 
certainly do everything within their power to make sure that 
that does not happen. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to turn to the 
community of Wynyard, another town in my constituency who 
is these days very worried about the health services in their 
area. Wynyard happens to be in the Living Sky Health District. 
And we have heard on numerous occasions in the Assembly the 
problems of the Living Sky Health District. 
 
We are hearing via the grapevine — I guess is probably the best 
way to put it — that there is a possibility of the hospital in 
Wynyard being closed. And now if you . . . Let’s look at what 
that would mean to the town of Wynyard. 
 
Wynyard is a town located on the Yellowhead highway. It’s a 
town of about 2,000 or more people. It’s got a number of 
thriving businesses. It’s got a . . . It’s a town with a future, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And for it not to have acute care services 
would be a retrogressive step. It would be a disaster. It would 
be a step backward. It would be a slap in the face to that whole 
area of the province. And it is something that is . . . I can’t . . . I 
guess I can’t express the importance of or how important it 
would be . . . it is to have an acute care facility in that area. 
 
So I might mention at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
was quite often . . . Some other things that are happening in the 
town of Wynyard is a number of years ago the residents of the 
community realized that there was a need for a new long-term 
care facility in their community. They had one but it was built 
many years ago. It was in need of major repair. It didn’t meet a 
lot of the codes that are now in place. 
 
So there was a number of towns and municipalities banded 
together, they made a presentation to the Department of Health, 
and about a year or two ago they got the approval for a new 
long-term care facility which is now . . . construction started 
during the winter. And that long-term care facility is being built 
as an addition to the hospital. So what that meant, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that there were some fairly major renovations 
needed to the admittance area, the emergency entrance, and 

those sorts of things, to the hospital. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at one time . . . or in the very near 
future the Living Sky Health District and the people of the area 
decided that they would go for this long-term care facility in 
conjunction with the hospital, and now what are we hearing 
from that same health district? That they may close the hospital. 
 
It seems to me this is a typical case of one left hand not 
knowing what the other left hand is doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It shows the disarray that this government’s health policy is in, 
and it certainly does not show any forward planning, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say that I would be 
voting against the amendment but voting for the original 
motion. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I tell you, 
it’s a tough set of acts to follow today. These are some very 
passionate and thoughtful speeches, and it is a real pleasure to 
follow the members on this side who have spoken in defence of 
medicare today. 
 
Really that is what we’re talking about today, is the defence of 
medicare. We’re talking very specifically about its future. And I 
found it distressing to listen to the mover of the original motion 
say that medicare itself is not important — not important. I 
think we were all quite surprised to hear these words come 
forth. 
 
Because in fact medicare is important. It’s relevant. And it is 
something that we must, as a Saskatchewan Assembly of 
legislators, concern ourselves with. Not how to dismantle it. 
Not how to split it up into organizations and ship it off and sell 
it off. We’re not talking about how to sell shares in it. 
 
What we have to talk about is how do we build back 
confidence. How do we build back a system that people turn to 
and they say that that’s exactly what they believe in. Because 
they certainly don’t believe in what the members opposite are 
putting forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — What the members opposite advocate, the 
cure they advocate is worse than the illness. Much, much worse. 
 
But what concerns me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the parochial 
nature of this debate. What we are listening to is a debate 
saying, my constituency doesn’t have this; my district doesn’t 
have that. 
 
This is not a what can you do for me strategy. That is not what 
medicare was ever about. Medicare was what can we do for 
others? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order, order. Members 
of the Assembly, the noise level in the Assembly is just making 
it very difficult for the member for Regina South to be heard by 
the Assembly. I’d ask all members to respect the rights of the 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2000 

member for Regina South to put forward his views. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
What I was saying is that we need to move this debate beyond 
its parochial nature. 
 
We can’t simply sit here and talk about, what are we doing for 
my constituency or for my community. And we are long past 
this idea that there has to be a centre, a health care centre in 
every town. It never was designed that way. And I think it’s 
time that we take into account where medicare is at, where 
medicine is at, and what the province’s resources are. 
 
I look at my own city of Regina. We have very good health care 
here. But we are part of a community of a million people. We 
need to make sure that the people who live in Shellbrook, 
Saskatchewan have health care — that they understand their 
next level of care is in Prince Albert; that the next level of care 
is in Saskatoon. 
 
Frankly we need to do that as well. We can’t simply look at 
everything and say, just because Royal University has it, Regina 
General has to have it too. 
 
Saskatchewan has a million people living in it — a million 
people. And we need to make sure that we provide the services 
for that million people fairly. That doesn’t mean that we’re 
going to have every hospital with an MRI in it. It doesn’t mean 
we’re going to have a bone density machine in every major 
centre. 
 
What it means is that we are going to have the best health care 
in Canada here in Saskatchewan, and every Saskatchewan 
people will be able to enjoy it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — That’s what medicare was all about. I 
appreciated the comments from my colleague from Saskatoon 
Sutherland who gave a very thoughtful dissertation on how 
medicare had started. And I think that it’s important we look 
back to that and understand that that is where we came from. 
 
We have to make sure that we remain our brother’s keeper. We 
have to make sure that we continue to provide services, not just 
for those of us who can afford it but for everybody who needs 
it. That’s what the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) and what the federal 
Liberals believed in and what today our coalition government 
continues to fight for. 
 
This is not about for-profit medicine. This is not about I can 
afford it, I get to jump to the front of the line. This is not about 
what are you doing for my town? This is about how do we 
make sure medicare, the principles of medicare, and everyone 
receives the medical care that they deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the time is running on, but I do want 
to address very specifically the comments made by the member 
for Weyburn. In particular the comments . . . and I’m reading 
here from the Weyburn Review, Weyburn, Saskatchewan, 
October 20, 1999. The headline says, and I quote: “MLA 
Bakken given critic duties in shadow cabinet.” The duties they 

refer to of course is her duties in her role as deputy Health 
critic. 
 
I’m going to adjourn debate after this but I want to really give 
the last word, the last word to the member for Weyburn. 
Because I think that she sums it up in this very, very clearly — 
the difference between what our two parties believe in. 
 
And she says, and I quote, I quote: 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan? 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we could come back here 
tonight at 7 o’clock and I could spend from 7 until 11 o’clock 
giving her the reasons. But I say that what she should do tonight 
is go home to her constituency and ask them why they don’t 
want privatized care, because her constituents will tell her. 
 
Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan? That’s what the member for Weyburn believes; 
that’s what the members of the Saskatchewan Party believe. 
That’s not what the members on this side believe. That’s not 
what the people of Saskatchewan believe. And those words will 
be a political epitaph for that party and that member. 
 
And with that I move that we adjourn this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 
 


