





























































Hansard: June 26, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2139 
 June 26, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers. 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present petitions on behalf of citizens in 
my constituency, the constituency of Humboldt, who are 
opposed to forced municipal amalgamation. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
town of St. Brieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today to 
retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are from 
Lanigan and Lockwood. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned about the future of 
their hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Elstow and Allan. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the closure of hospitals and the people concerned 
with health care. And the petition prayer reads this way: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
community of Young. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I too stand on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens with grave concerns regarding health 
care. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Young. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present, collected on behalf of the youth of Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These names are from Prince Albert, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens who are opposed to nursing 
home fee increases. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed on behalf of citizens of Midale, Weyburn, and 
Creelman. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with people from the province worried about the 
state of health care in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
gathered on behalf of youth of Saskatchewan. And it reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This comes from the citizens of Prince Albert, Spruce Home, 
Meath Park, Melfort, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people who are 
unhappy with their highways. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin reconstruction of Highway 
47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction No. 1 
Highway. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Stoughton, Creelman, Manitou, 
Manitoba — some unfortunate soul — Kisbey, Saskatchewan; 
Arcola; Yorkton; and Windthorst, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
to present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
grumbling about crumbling highways. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin reconstruction of Highway 
47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction No. 1 
Highway. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by the good people in the Windthorst, Glenavon, 
Montmartre, Corning, and that’s about it. Thank you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also like to rise to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about hospital 
closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the citizens of Young. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition from 
citizens who are concerned about hospital closures. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals will remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Drake and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition by concerned citizens of this 
province who are worried about the continued decline of 
highways in this province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Paddockwood, Christopher Lake, and Northside. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of the citizens of Drake who are concerned 
about the closure of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition to retain the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Lanigan and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with plans to return 
highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Regina, Spring Valley, and Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals. This particular one is captioned, Save 
our Hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Young, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Ensuring the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals and the Cupar 
Health Centre remain open; 
 
A ban of smoking in public places and workplaces; 
 
The restoration of the Paddockwood access road; 
 
The provision of cellular service to Lake Alma; 
 
The passage of comprehensive tobacco control legislation. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
introduce to and through you to all members of the House some 
special people from my former neck of the woods in 
northwestern Saskatchewan: Barry Moore from Twin Rivers, 
board member; Clem Novlan from the Paradise Hill advisory 
committee; Doug Eaton, the reeve of Frenchman Butte; and 
Marion Hougham from Paradise Hill. As well their pilot, a 
long-time family friend, Stephen Polsich. And they’re 
positively working at providing better health care in 
northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
And just a little story about Paradise Hill. My younger sister, 
when she was about five, would say her prayers and should 

have said, we’ll go to live in paradise with thee. But she would 
always say she would go and live in Paradise Hill with thee. It’s 
a nice place, but not quite that good though. Would all members 
please welcome them to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, two friends of mine that are seated 
up in the west gallery — they’re Father Joe Nabywaniec and 
Valdy Barcicki. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that last Thursday 
evening at St. Anthony’s Parish here in Regina, Father Joe had 
a special mass to celebrate his 25th anniversary as a priest. 
 
And I’d just, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone here, I’d like 
to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just be 
very brief. I want to join with my colleague from Saskatoon 
Sutherland in welcoming our guests from Paradise Hill. They’re 
from my constituency, and I’ll be meeting with them later today 
and welcome them here today, and again ask everyone to join 
with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with a 
great deal of pleasure and pride that I stand today to bring to the 
people of Saskatchewan a good news announcement from the 
Humboldt constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt has been chosen as the site of the 2002 
Saskatchewan Winter Games. The games will be held in 
Humboldt in February, from the 17 to the 23, in the year 2002. 
As many as 2,100 athletes, coaches, managers, and officials are 
expected to be in Humboldt during that period of time. 
 
The games provide a valued opportunity for the growth and 
development of amateur sport by athletes, coaches, officials, 
administrators, and volunteers. As well, Mr. Speaker, on a 
personal level athletes benefit greatly from the sharing of their 
mutual experiences and are often inspired to attain excellence at 
these events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt is an excellent choice for the location 
of the 2002 Winter Games. Humboldt has hosted numerous 
provincial, national, and international events such as curling, 
baseball, recreation sports, and culture conferences. 
 
Humboldt has excellent facilities, but their strongest feature by 
far is the high level of energy exhibited by their people. 
Approximately 1,700 volunteers are required to run a successful 
event, and I have no doubt that the people of Humboldt and area 
will provide that. 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, the town of Humboldt is being supported by other 
local businesses and communities such as Muenster and Bruno. 
I congratulate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the House today to congratulate the town of Humboldt 
on being awarded the 2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first time that Humboldt will host the 
Winter Games which will take place February 17 to the 26. 
Many people and organizations came together to put forward 
the successful bid. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the Co-Chairs of the bidding committee, 
Valerie McNally and Michael Suchan, Councillor Pete 
Pavolich, the rest of the town council, and especially Mayor 
Doug Still. I would also like to congratulate the other 12 
members of the committee who worked tirelessly in order to 
bring the games to Humboldt. 
 
The town of Humboldt should be congratulated for its excellent 
proposal, strong support from the town council, the business 
community, and the people in and around Humboldt. I should 
also mention that the communities of Muenster and Bruno were 
significantly involved in making this bid successful. Bruno and 
Muenster will contribute facilities and volunteers, among other 
things, to the games. 
 
Sports contribute much to our society and the lessons learned 
while playing them are just as valuable off the court or arena. 
And the many athletes, coaches, organizers, and volunteers — 
these games will help to teach these lessons of partnership and 
camaraderie. 
 
Once again, congratulations to Humboldt and area on being 
awarded the 2002 Winter Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wood River By-election  
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday the Liberal candidate at Wood River filed a complaint 
with the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) and the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 
 
The Liberal candidate is upset because the Saskatchewan Party 
radio ads say the Liberals joined the NDP. 
 
I would like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to clarify our 
position on this matter. The reason that we’re saying that the 
Liberals joined the NDP (New Democratic Party) is because the 
Liberals joined the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So if the Liberal candidate wants to file a 
complaint, he should file it with the Liberal leader over there 

for joining the NDP. After all, it was the Liberal leader who 
signed the coalition agreement — the coalition agreement that 
states the Liberals must support the NDP government on all 
matters of the legislature. 
 
That means if the NDP want to raise the PST. (provincial sales 
tax) the Liberals must support them. If the NDP want to gravel 
highways, the Liberals must support them. If the NDP want to 
close more hospitals, the Liberals must support them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It wasn’t long ago when the Liberal leader was going to chain 
himself to the Plains hospital; instead he chained himself to the 
NDP. The Liberals support the NDP, they sit with the NDP, 
they vote with the NDP. As far as we’re concerned, the Liberals 
joined the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a difference of opinion, but I guess we’ll 
find out tonight what the people of Wood River think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Finalists for the Skills Canada-Saskatchewan 
Competitions 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification training is a significant 
part of our post-secondary education and skills training in the 
province. And, the apprenticeships . . . the apprentices that 
come out of our industry-led system are second to none. This 
was demonstrated recently at a Skills Canada-Saskatchewan 
Competition which took place this past April in Prince Albert. 
 
I am honoured to inform the members of the Legislative 
Assembly that the four apprentices who won gold medals in the 
provincial competitions were: Steven Rommen from Nipawin, 
who won the gold in automotive services technician trade; 
Wesley Mix from Blaine Lake, who won gold in the electrical 
motor control trade; Jason Melhoff from Swift Current, who 
won gold in residential wiring; and Cory Mohr from Moose 
Jaw, who won gold in carpentry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these and other Saskatchewan post-secondary 
competitors went on to the national competitions in Quebec at 
the beginning of this month. Cory Mohr, a very talented young 
man from Moose Jaw, came home with the gold in carpentry 
and will represent Canada at the world competition in the year 
2001 in Seoul, Korea. Brad Barber came home with the silver 
medal for architectural computer-aided drawing. And Kyla 
Bast, who is enrolled at Richards Beauty College in Regina, 
brought home the bronze medal. 
 
Congratulations to all of the competitors, the winners, the 
commission, and Skills Canada-Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society Celebration 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I attended 
the annual open house at the historic Claybank brick plant. This 
event is held on the last Sunday in June every year and always 
attracts a large crowd. Yesterday was no exception in spite of 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

cold, wind, and even a little rain. 
 
This plant is a unique example of 19th-century industrial 
technology that managed to remain viable until near the end of 
the 20th century, with the plant closing in 1989. The Claybank 
Brick Plant Historical Society, of which I am proud to be a 
member, has done a remarkable job of restoring the buildings 
and maintaining the equipment on site. 
 
Visits to the plant are up dramatically again this year. However, 
one of the main access roads to this attraction is Highway No. 
339 of which a section is slated to be returned to gravel this 
summer. This is causing a great deal of concern about attracting 
tourists to the plant in the future. 
 
Congratulations to the Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society 
and thanks to the many sponsors who make this attraction 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

HMCS Queen Open House 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
concur with the member opposite. I was at Claybank yesterday 
and it was a very fine event for all of the people of this part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to participate on Saturday in 
an open house at the HMCS Queen, the Navel Reserve division 
in Regina. The festivities included performances by the Naval 
Gun Run and the National Band of the Naval Reserve. 
 
The Naval Gun Run recreates an incident from the Boer War 
when naval guns were hoisted ashore to support British troops. 
The gun is disassembled and hand-carried across a nine-metre 
chasm representing the gap between ship and shore, 
reassembled, loaded and fired — then disassembled, taken 
back, reassembled, and fired again. The entire process takes less 
than three minutes. 
 
I was privileged to be part of the festivities, Mr. Speaker, They 
even gave me the honour of firing the canon during their 
walk-through explanation. 
 
The members of the Naval Reserve Band have been in Regina 
for about a month, Mr. Speaker, for their initial training and 
workups. The band operates from May to August each year 
taking the music and the image of the navy from coast to coast 
to coast. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the band and the Gun Run are off to 
Saskatoon as their next stop on their international tour. 
 
The naval reserve has been part of Regina since 1923; naval 
reservists are part-time members of Canadian Forces serving in 
a variety of operational, logistical, administrative roles. 
 
I would think all members would want to join me in wishing 
this band and the Naval Gun Run well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Allan Blakeney on Health Care 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend Allan Blakeney was back in Saskatchewan talking 
about health care. 
 
You note, Mr. Speaker, you note, Mr. Speaker, I say, back in 
Saskatchewan, because he hasn’t lived here for many, many 
years. He was here to talk about Saskatchewan-type health care. 
But he doesn’t really know about it, Mr. Speaker, because as I 
said, he really doesn’t live here any more. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, while he was the leader of 
the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You have to 
remember that it was under his leadership that the NDP claimed 
the Devine government was going to close five hospitals in the 
Wood River constituency. It didn’t happen. But when the 
members opposite came to power in 1991, they closed four out 
of the five hospitals. 
 
So I guess his theory on government and medicare hasn’t 
changed. The bigger the falsehood, the better they like it. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would remind hon. members to kindly 
choose their words carefully and not use demeaning comments 
or words. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Severance Pay for Ministerial Assistant 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
Mr. Minister, last September when you joined the NDP 
government, one of the first things that you did was hire 
defeated Liberal candidate David Huliyappa to work in your 
office. Mr. Huliyappa was with your office exactly five and a 
half months before you fired him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister: why did you fire 
him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Huliyappa had always 
indicated to me that he was not interested in a career in 
government and was here for a short time. He had always 
indicated to me that he was more interested in pursuing a career 
in business. 
 
After him serving five and a half months with me, we agreed 
that this was not a good match and that he would indeed be 
better off in the business world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, David 
Huliyappa worked in your office for just five and a half months 
when you fired him. He received over $9,000 in severance. 
That’s over two months salary, and after just five and a half 
months of work. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did Mr. Huliyappa get over two months 
severance — over $9,000 — after just five and a half months of 
work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would advise the 
hon. member that I was not involved in those negotiations. I 
advised . . . I’m advised that he would be leaving my office. 
And I was told that there is a policy in place for those who are 
leaving the employ in minister’s staff, and that that was the 
procedure that was followed and that he would qualify for the 
normal severance of ministerial staff. And I was not involved in 
that part of the negotiations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, David 
Huliyappa received over two months severance, over $9,000 
after less than six months of work. That is completely out of 
line with what other public sector employees could get. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you think that this is an appropriate level 
of severance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I would advise the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, that as we all know, in the private sector severance is 
normally paid. And that this would be in line with private sector 
rights, that upon a termination there is a policy in place. 
 
I did not lobby in this regard nor was I involved in it. I was told 
that the normal course was taken and the normal policy was 
followed which is in line with what one might expect in the 
private sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, a few years ago you brought in a salary scale and 
policy for ministerial assistants. We don’t recall ever, ever 
seeing a ministerial assistant receive such a generous severance 
package especially after such a short period of work. 
 
Mr. Premier, what is the policy for providing severance for 
ministerial assistants? And why was an exception made to give 
Mr. Huliyappa such a generous severance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, you will recall that when 
Mr. Huliyappa was hired, as I’ve said, he told me he was not 
interested in staying in my office for a long time. The hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena said that it was outrageous that 
a candidate from the recent provincial election should be hired 
on staff, and that it should have been done through the Public 
Service Commission. She then turned around and hired another 
candidate from the same constituency for the Saskatchewan 

Party, and again without the Public Service Commission’s 
involvement. 
 
This is gross hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. Everything that was done 
was done in the normal course. They complain . . . they 
complain about a candidate having been hired. They turned 
right around and did the same thing. And I’m wanting to know: 
they said that they would reduce the salary. How much of the 
salary have they returned to the Public Service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Living Sky Health District 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. Madam Minister, the preliminary budget of the 
Living Sky Health District proposed closing the Lanigan 
Hospital and converting the Watrous and Wynyard hospitals to 
health centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health told the media last week 
that the concerns of the public has decreased since the Premier 
announced no hospitals will be closed during the review of the 
health system. 
 
But that certainly is not the case. The mayor of Lanigan is very 
concerned that the Lanigan Hospital may not be closed but 
instead will be downgraded into a health centre, as the minister 
suggested to him in a conversation earlier this month. 
 
Madam Minister, will there be hospitals downgraded to health 
centres when these budgets are finally approved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
members will know, the Living Sky Health District provided its 
health plan to the government sometime before other health 
districts did, given that they have a very serious deficit and debt 
problem in their health district. As a result of trying to balance 
. . . get to a balanced budget in the district, they have put 
forward a number of possibilities to deal with their financial 
situation. We have indicated that while the Fyke commission is 
going on, that there will not be any hospital closures in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that there will not be major 
disruption to the health system. 
 
What I can say to the member is that there won’t be any major 
facility closures while the Fyke commission is going on. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no difference between 
closing a hospital and converting it to a health centre. Either 
way the community will lose services and they will lose 
24-hour emergency services. 
 
Mayor Vigoren says that the services are vital to Lanigan. This 
large community built on agriculture and mining serves a large 
area, and a full-service hospital is required. In fact, he believes 
this hospital is so important that the town will consider legal 
action against the health district if these emergency services are 
removed. 
 
Is that what a community has to do to get your attention? The 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

people of Lanigan just want a straight answer. Madam Minister, 
will the Lanigan hospital be downgraded into a health centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can tell the member is that there are health centres in the 
province of Saskatchewan that provide acute care services, 
provide palliative care services, provide rehab services, and 
provide convalescent services, as well as lab and X-ray 
services, 24-hour emergency care, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member would have us believe that health 
centres aren’t providing these kinds of services, and I want to 
assure the member that those services are being provided in 
health centres across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s words that no hospitals will close while the health 
review is on are ringing hollow in the Saskatchewan people’s 
ears. They think that we’re simply playing games with words. 
 
Both the Premier and the Associate Minister of Health refused 
to answer this question on Friday. They would not say whether 
hospitals will be downgraded to health centres. They would not 
say if there’d be long-term care homes closed as proposed in the 
health district budgets. 
 
It’s a simple yes or no answer. You have the health district 
budgets. You have the final approval on them. Madam Minister, 
you have the say that no hospitals will close or be converted. 
But will there be health centres and long-term care homes 
closed in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a news clip 
from February 3, 2000, and it’s called: “Closing rural hospitals 
has become an issue.” And you know what? The opposition . . . 
in fact the Health critic has said: “I would guarantee there’d be 
no hospital closed until this study is done so that we know 
what’s going on.” 
 
Well I can tell the member that the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan has guaranteed that there will be no hospital 
closures while this commission is going on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can also guarantee that at the end of the 
day, at the end of the day, an NDP-Liberal coalition 
government believes in a publicly funded and publicly 
administered health care system. 
 
And I had the opportunity to witness some of the Canadian 
Alliance goings on on the weekend, and I know that all the 
people over there are supporting Stockwell Day and his version 
of health care. Well, we’re not interested in private surgical 
clinics in this province. We’re not interested in private health 
care in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, at the end of the day is Lanigan or Watrous 
hospitals going to be converted to health centres? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have indicated that while this 
health review is going on there won’t be a hospital closed. And 
what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that there was only one 
district in the province of Saskatchewan that was 
recommending a closure of a hospital and that was the Living 
Sky Health District. And we have said that the Lanigan Hospital 
will not be closed while the Fyke commission is doing its work. 
 
What I can also say is I have an extremely interesting article out 
of the Herbert . . . which is the Herbert, Saskatchewan 
newspaper dated May 24, 2000. And you know what this small, 
rural newspaper editorial has to say about people who 
continuously talk about Alberta envy. He has to say: 
 

It’s time that we appreciated the many, many good things 
in the province of Saskatchewan and appreciate that we, in 
10 out of 16 surgeries in this province, rate number one or 
number two in the country. 
 

But you’d never know it from listening to those people over 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the round table committee meeting to discuss 
municipal amalgamation in the province has been at work for 
almost two months. We are hearing of some options coming 
forward that would allow municipal governments in 
Saskatchewan to amalgamate on a voluntary basis. 
 
When the round table process began there was an approximate 
deadline of mid to the end of June for a plan of action. Mr. 
Minister, where is the round table process at in its discussion on 
municipal amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite, it’s a good question he 
asks. The round table has met on five occasions and the 
conclusion of the round table was to take the discussion then to 
the communities across the province. 
 
And so SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) are just completing the regional meetings across 
the province today, of which I’m attending 11 of those 13 
meetings. And on July the 11th, we’re coming back to talk 
about the kinds of things that we’ve seen and witnessed from 
our discussions across the province, Mr. Speaker. 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — The extended time frame of the round table 
discussion is quite a switch from the minister’s strong words 
earlier this year, when he said if SARM and SUMA did not 
come up with a game plan of their own he was going to do it for 
them. And we know the Premier had to reign the minister in or 
he would have brought the whole province down with his plan 
to force amalgamation on municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the light of this new co-operative approach you 
have adopted, how long are you giving municipalities to meet 
your agenda for less local government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite there never was an agenda for working on municipal 
reconstruction in this province. 
 
The discussion, Mr. Speaker, was that we would at one day 
come back to the round table and we would have a discussion 
about the kinds of direction in which the province wanted to go. 
And so we said to the municipalities here are some reports that 
are available for you, of which the municipalities participated, 
in Garcea report, and today that report has been tabled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we have come forward around the round table and said to 
the municipal leaders, you provide for us the kind of direction 
that you wish to go in, if you wish to go down a particular 
direction, and we’ll provide the legislative reform for you to 
proceed in whichever area you wish to go. And that’s what 
we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, today, which is exactly we intended 
to do in the first place; and we’re simply following that process 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very interesting the 
minister would be encouraging municipal governments to 
combine services, move toward smaller governments, when he 
is expanding his own department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Municipal Affairs has a job 
posting for communication consultants. They say they have 
several positions open. They don’t specify whether it’s two 
positions or 10 positions — just several. 
 
If these communication consultants are needed to promote your 
own agenda for forced amalgamation, Mr. Minister, how many 
communication consultants are you hiring, what are they 
needed for, and why are you expanding the number of your 
hacks in the department when you are forcing municipality 
governments to find more efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to respond to 
the member opposite when we get into the estimates and 
provide more fully for the member opposite the kinds of 
structure that we have in municipal government today within 
the department, and the kinds of changes that have been made 
which nowhere near suggests what the member opposite is 
talking about. 
 
I’d be happy to provide that information to him in estimates 

when we’re there, Mr. Speaker, in the next little bit. 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Investigation 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s Monday, and that can only 
mean one thing. The NDP member for Saskatoon Southeast is 
being asked to explain and defend another inappropriate 
comment. 
 
Two weeks ago she suggested the NDP should put more 
priority on the back alley behind her house than on the 
dangerous, crumbling highways in southwest Saskatchewan. 
Then last week the same NDP member called attempts by the 
Saskatchewan Party to ask legitimate questions about the 
misuse of taxpayers’ money at SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) a witch hunt. 
 
Now she says our attempt to question the Provincial Auditor 
about the SIGA affair were motivated by racism. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that the position of your government — that a 
legitimate attempt by the official opposition about questions of 
an important public policy matter was motivated by racism? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the real issue here, the real 
issue here, was why is it that at Public Accounts last week the 
official opposition attempted to prevent the Provincial Auditor 
from having an opportunity to investigate the situation at SIGA, 
prepare a report, and make recommendations, as the Public 
Accounts Committee is mandated to do. 
 
That member and that party, Mr. Speaker, attempted to interfere 
with that process which is set out in the order of reference for 
the Public Accounts Committee, and now that member is trying 
to confuse the issue by suggesting that someone else was trying 
to cover up the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only attempt at a cover-up in this whole affair, where the 
minister of Liquor and Gaming took very swift action, has been 
by the members opposite for their own political reasons, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, on Friday the Provincial Auditor released his 
annual operations report. Here is what the Provincial Auditor 
says on page 3. I quote: 
 

Members (of the legislature) can ask our Office questions 
on what we plan to do and (on) what we actually did. Such 
questions can be asked at any time and at public meetings 
of the . . . Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Mr. Premier, last Thursday in the Public Accounts Committee, 
the Saskatchewan Party simply tried to ask the Provincial 
Auditor about a letter he had written to the Gaming minister. 
The letter advised that the former CEO (chief executive officer) 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

of SIGA had improperly retained $360,000 in taxpayers’ 
money, and that the SIGA board had given him a retroactive 
pay raise. 
 
Mr. Premier, would you explain why the NDP thinks that 
asking legitimate questions about this important matter amounts 
to a racially motivated witch hunt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The question here, Mr. Speaker, is why the 
official opposition wants to politicize an ongoing investigation 
— that’s the question here. 
 
What the member says is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. The 
mandate of the Public Accounts Committee, as determined by 
this House, is to examine reports of the Provincial Auditor once 
they are prepared. It is not the mandate of the member opposite 
to sit the Provincial Auditor down and ask him questions while 
he’s still investigating and prior to the preparation of his report 
and the making of recommendations. 
 
What the member opposite is doing, Mr. Speaker, is simply 
grandstanding for political purposes. That’s what the member 
opposite is doing, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to play politics 
with the role of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to follow the rules of this House and of the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if these people cannot follow the rules of this 
House, they cannot be trusted to govern the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the Provincial Auditor 
has expressed serious concerns about the misuse of $360,000 in 
taxpayers’ money at SIGA. Why didn’t the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast accuse the auditor of being on a racially 
motivated witch hunt? 
 
The Gaming minister ordered the former SIGA CEO to be fired, 
and then ordered a full investigation. Why didn’t the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast accuse the Gaming minister of being 
on a racially motivated witch hunt? 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party was asking legitimate 
questions about a serious misuse of taxpayers’ money. And we 
were attempting to ask those questions at the most appropriate 
time, in the most appropriate forum — the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you instruct the NDP member from Saskatoon 
Southeast to stand up and apologize for her irresponsible and 
completely unfounded accusations of racism? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the difficulty here is that the 
member opposite and these people opposite have learned 
nothing from the 1980s. Because in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, we 
had a situation where not only were the rules of the Public 
Accounts Committee not followed, we had a situation where the 

Public Accounts Committee didn’t meet. 
 
We had a situation when we took office, Mr. Speaker, where a 
budget had never been prepared for the Legislative Assembly, 
and the House was shut down and the government ran on 
special warrants. 
 
The difficulty here, Mr. Speaker, is that the member opposite 
and his party are trying to circumvent the rules of the Public 
Accounts Committee and prevent the Provincial Auditor from 
doing an investigation, preparing a report, and making 
recommendations. 
 
And on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
follow the rules because we did learn a lesson from the 1980s, 
which is that if you operate in the fashion being suggested by 
those members opposite, you end up $15 billion in debt, and 
we’re not going to let that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, in December I stood in this legislature and spoke 
out loudly against racism. I was responding to a radio call-in 
show in which both the Premier and the Leader of the Liberal 
Party had been targets of racial slurs. 
 
Mr. Premier, racism is a despicable, dehumanizing, disgusting 
element of our society. We should be working together to 
eliminate it. Racism should not be used loosely and without 
basis by anybody. 
 
And yet that is exactly what the NDP member from Saskatoon 
Southeast did on the radio on Friday. Instead of responding to 
questions with good and factual arguments, she chose to play 
the race card. 
 
Mr. Premier, if the member from Saskatoon Southeast won’t 
apologize for her unacceptable actions, will you stand in the 
legislature today and apologize yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course the member 
was grandstanding in the Public Accounts Committee, and he’s 
grandstanding here as well. 
 
What the member is saying, Mr. Speaker, is not of course in 
accordance with what actually occurred. The member is not 
presenting it in a factual way. As Minister of Finance, I’ll just 
say this, Mr. Speaker; the only people that should be 
apologizing in this House are really the members opposite. And 
what they should be apologizing for, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that when they were in office, they ran up a $15 billion debt, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re still paying $2 million a day interest on 
that debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to follow the rules of the legislature. 
We’re going to follow the rules of the Public Accounts 
Committee. We’re going to keep presenting budgets in a timely 
fashion. We’re going to keep the budget balanced. We’re going 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

to keep cutting taxes, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to make 
sure that the mistakes that were made in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier do 
you have no regard for the kind of damage that this kind of 
behaviour can cause? 
 
And is your government so politically bankrupt that throwing 
around accusations of racism is the best you can do? 
 
Will you apologize for the member from Saskatoon Southeast? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member is drawing a very 
long bow in order to take attention away from what the member 
attempted to do in the Public Accounts Committee last week 
which was to prevent the Provincial Auditor from: (a) 
investigating and completing his audit; (b) preparing a report; 
and, (c) making recommendations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member last week in this House was 
attempting to draw attention away from his effort to circumvent 
the Provincial Auditor. That’s what the member’s trying to do 
today with this very long bow that he’s drawing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re not going to let him get away with it, Mr. Speaker, 
because the reality was he’s trying to prevent the Provincial 
Auditor from doing his job; we’re not going to allow him to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Cycling Across Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re now in 
the latter part of June, and our thoughts are turning to summer 
activities. For many that means leisure activities of hiking, 
swimming, gardening, and biking. 
 
Every member of this House has worked hard over the past 
several months, and I think we have earned some R and R (rest 
and recreation). At the same time, however, we can also focus 
our efforts beyond our own personal gain to raise awareness of 
the province. 
 
I rise to advise all members of this House that I will be cycling 
across Saskatchewan in July. 
 
I do this for two reasons. First, as Provincial Secretary, I am 
responsible for the anniversaries secretariat. The secretariat did 
excellent work in preparing our province for the new 
millennium celebrations. Now the secretariat is working hard to 
raise awareness of Saskatchewan’s centennial in 2005. 
 
I am dedicating my bicycle trip across the province to our 
millennium and centennial celebrations. 
 
My second objective, Mr. Speaker, in committing myself to this 

trip is to offer an opportunity to all members of this House to 
join me as I cycle across Saskatchewan. It might be an 
important bonding experience for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, planning this trip has sparked my imagination. I 
will be cycling my way through villages and towns, past waving 
grain fields and farmsteads, alongside many of our young 
people on their bikes, while enjoying Saskatchewan scenery. 
 
Be it sunshine or cloud, breezes or calm, Mr. Speaker, I will set 
out from east of Langenburg on the Manitoba border, bright and 
early on Sunday, July 9, to follow the Yellowhead west. 
 
This journey will take me through the great Saskatchewan 
communities of Yorkton, Foam Lake, Wynyard, Lanigan, 
Saskatoon, Radisson, Maymont, Maidstone, all the way to the 
Alberta border at Lloydminster. And yes, Mr. Speaker, best of 
all, through the Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I offer an open invitation to you and every 
member of this House to join me for the whole odyssey or for 
portions along the way. I know I will find this experience 
exhilarating, refreshing, and I offer the same opportunity to all 
members of this Assembly. 
 
The entire trip is approximately 550 kilometres and I welcome 
company along the entire route. I already have some members 
of my department who have indicated they will accompany me 
for what will surely prove to be the experience of a lifetime. 
 
During the past session, the city of Regina has been the host to 
us as legislative members. Gabrielle Roy has said of the 
prairies: 
 

The one curious thing on the prairie — one can feel 
infinitely small and at the same time infinitely uplifted. 

 
I implore my colleagues in the House to leave the cities for a 
few days and experience Saskatchewan naturally. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we just 
heard, Mr. Speaker, was not a ministerial statement but rather a 
personal statement, a sort of what I’m going to do on my 
summer holidays report before it’s even been done. 
 
Although the statement, Mr. Speaker, was made by a minister, 
it does not deal with government policy or a change in 
government policy. Rather it’s the minister’s holiday report. 
 
I can certainly understand why the minister would like to get 
out on the road where no one can find him. I doubly understand 
why he wants to bike rather than drive the highways. He, as a 
Liberal cabinet minister, is responsible. 
 
I have some advice for him: take your hiking boots, you’re 
going to need them. The minister, rather than biking, perhaps 
should volunteer to patch potholes. Lots of sunshine and 
exercise, and it would certainly be a lot more productive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely happy 
today to stand up and respond on behalf of the government to 
question 198, and by leave 199, 200, and 201, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Those answers are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add one 
or two comments on this particular Bill, the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
There’s a lot of discussion that’s already taken place on this 
particular Bill. There’s a lot of questions that we would like to 
bring up and we’re going to have an opportunity, I’m sure. But 
for the record, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things that I 
think should be included on this particular . . . on the second 
reading debate pertaining to Bill 64. 
 
This is — fiscal stabilization — as you know, Mr. Speaker, is 
something new. It has been introduced and therefore we’re 
going to require a lot of clarification on some of the things that 
we’ve been asking about and some of the things that our 
constituents have been asking about too, because as you know 
this new fund kind of appeared out of the blue. 
 
One of the things that is very troublesome is the fact that this 
fund, now at roughly $400 million, will be put into a fund 
called Fiscal Stabilization. Well this particular fund . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave for the introduction of a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
former constituent and a long-time friend, Mr. Art Halushka 
from White Beach. I know Art is in town today for some 
medical appointments, and he’s taken time out to enjoy 
question period and take in the proceedings of the House. So I 
ask all the members to offer him a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 
continue with one or two of the concerns I had with this 
particular Bill before it moves forward. 
 
One of the things that it would seem to me, is that setting aside 
a Fiscal Stabilization Fund would seem to be the correct thing 
to do in terms of making sure that some of the unexpected 
emergencies or unexpected eventualities of government 
spending are looked after. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there is a concern that this amount of 
money, which is really coming out of the liquor and gaming 
fund, has been allocated in such a way that there really is a 
question whether it’s going to be more accountable or not. 
 
The minister has promised that this fund would become more 
accountable, and those questions we’ll bringing up certainly in 
Committee of the Whole. And I understand that estimates will 
have to be questioned in this particular issue as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the stabilization fund . . . and I think the 
largest concern I have about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is the 
fact that, while this money is being set aside as a reserve, first 
of all there is no money in this reserve. It’s an accounting entry 
that will allow the government, at their discretion, to withdraw 
and use in any particular area that they feel that is needed in this 
particular year. 
 
Another question is we don’t understand whether this is a 
continuing fund, whether there’s going to be money going to be 
allocated to it each year. And because of this fund being set 
there, there’s a lot of budgets that are running pretty short. 
There’s a lot of downloading onto other parts of our system. 
Municipal government is struggling to maintain the services 
they can; of course our health districts and our school districts. 
 
Those are the items, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be 
addressing as we get later on into this. That’s the only 
comments I have that I want to put on record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur la faune 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’d like to ask members to 
come to order while we address Bill No. 52, please. And I 
would like to invite the Minister of the Environment to 
introduce his officials. 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
introduce, to my immediate left we have Stuart Kramer who’s 
my deputy minister; and to my right we have Dennis Sherratt 
who’s the director of the fish and wildlife branch within SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good 
afternoon, Mr. Minister. And welcome to your officials. 
 
Just a couple of questions, hopefully fairly brief, with respect to 
Bill No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Minister, with regards to the big game damage 
compensation fund. Now I understand that this fund was 
discontinued approximately two years ago. Could you please 
confirm that there are no more claimants who are waiting to 
receive compensation for this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to report to 
the member that the program is all wound up for payments, and 
there are no outstanding claims against the big game damage 
fund. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that there is a compensation fund that replaced the 
big game damage compensation fund. I understand as well that 
this one is funded jointly by the provincial and federal 
governments. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
could you provide me with the breakdown of the various levels 
of government shares in this funding? What contribution does 
the provincial government make? What contribution does the 
federal government make? And has the fund been in shortfall in 
any form or fashion since its creation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to report, in 
terms of the compensation, the costs are shared on a 50/50 basis 
between the federal government and the provincial government. 
 
In terms of the actual prevention of some of the damage, 100 
per cent of that is being paid for by the province and by some of 
the actions that the province is doing. We’re having a fencing 
program. We’re looking at feeding programs to stop the deer 
from coming into farm fields, and so on and so forth. 
 
And quite frankly, the last couple of winters have been mild, so 
there is no funding shortage and the program has been operating 
well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
new section 44 makes reference to the fact that wildlife officers, 
conservation officers can now lay a charge for possession of 
wildlife for the purpose of trafficking. 
 
Would you please indicate to me if there has been any 
expansion of peace officer authority, if their duties have been 
expanded, or if they have in any way had more power vested in 
them in order to be able to do these investigations and in order 

to follow up specifically with the trafficking in wildlife. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the best 
way to explain that is no, it does not give the conservation 
officers a lot of wide-ranging powers. 
 
It’s much like a drug charge. When you actually see somebody 
trafficking in drugs, that’s one charge. And then you have 
another individual being charged with possession for the intent 
of trafficking; that’s a separate charge as well. 
 
And that’s basically what we’re trying to do here. Many times 
we catch people that are trafficking in wildlife, and that’s 
certainly not permitted, it’s not allowed, so you have a charge 
for that. But on many occasions you find people that have the 
animals or whatever that they are trafficking, they have it in 
their possession, so now you’re not only able to charge them for 
the actual trafficking violation, you can now charge them with 
the possession with the intent of trafficking in wildlife parts, 
etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a quick 
question, Mr. Minister, with respect to the two plans referenced 
in the Act — the management plan and the recovery plan. Now 
I notice that the management plan indicates that part of the 
purpose here is: 
 

to prevent a vulnerable native wild species designated and 
listed in the regulations pursuant to section 49 from being 
at increased risk. 
 

And then we look over at: 
 

‘recovery plan’ means a document that outlines specific 
steps to be taken for the recovery and conservation of 
designated species. 

 
Can you explain briefly, Mr. Minister, what the difference is 
between a management plan, a recovery plan, and how the two 
of them would work together. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the best 
way to explain that, if I can draw a very clear picture. And it is 
certainly a challenge for me to do that because there’s so many 
different interpretations here. The best way to do it is to explain 
to you on a scale of one to five, with one being the least 
threatened and five being the extinct. And that’s the best way to 
colour the whole presentation and to draw a clear picture. 
 
I guess in terms of managing all the species — and that includes 
wildlife and animals, and the wildlife especially — the situation 
that we have is that the least threatened, the animals that we 
know that there’s a problem with but is not as severe would be 
classified under vulnerable. The second area we have to really 
watch is the threatened area. Then you have the endangered 
area. 
 
And the fourth level of concern would be the extirpated species, 
species that may have lived in Saskatchewan at one time and 
don’t live here any longer. And of course the fifth and the most 
extreme problem would be the extinct species. 
 
So how we do that is we classify them from one to five, with 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

one being the least endangered, with five being extinct. And 
that’s how I like to begin to compare what we’re trying to do. 
 
So in terms of the vulnerable, which we know are some 
problem, they’re in the least category of challenges when we 
talk about some of the species at risk throughout the province. 
So we do have a management plan for them. The vulnerable 
species are of concern. I want to watch their numbers; I want to 
make sure nothing significant happens to them. So they’re 
managed in that sense. 
 
A recovery plan really deals with the threatened and the 
endangered species — the ones we know definitely are 
threatened, they’re endangered, there are some serious problems 
there. And that’s how we make the classification between 
endangered and certainly between vulnerable. And that’s why 
we have two different approaches between managed approach 
and certainly the plan to recover some of the numbers. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Okay. Now generally how much time would elapse from when 
an at-risk species is identified and it would be included in the 
management plan? And then what is the process for moving it 
from the management plan through to the recovery plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the 
best way to answer the question to start with is that SERM is 
going to do all that they can to ensure that the managed species 
at risk stay in the category of being managed. Because of course 
you know once they become into the second component of the 
recovery plan, and then of course that’s something that we don’t 
want to see. 
 
To answer the question how long is the transition to go from the 
damage plan to the next level, is roughly about two years. And 
the recovery plan is not where you want to be because that’s 
where you go into the more significant challenges facing 
wildlife and plants, and so on and so forth. 
 
And how do we manage to try and resist all the problems we 
have in terms of having many of these species stay in the 
management plan? We have such things as higher fines. There’s 
no capture. And, quite frankly, we also monitor how well the 
species is doing. So it is a significant task and SERM has taken 
that task very seriously. 
 
So in relation to your question, we want to keep as many of the 
species at risk in the management plan as opposed to the 
recovery plan because that’s not the direction . . . it does not 
indicate success at all. And again, we’re doing all we can to 
alleviate that particular problem by going through the no 
capture, higher fine scenario. 
 
But what I will also point out is that it is quite important that all 
people across Saskatchewan realize that they have a role as 
well. SERM does a great amount of work but there’s a lot of 
friends and allies out there that help us with some of the work. 
And we sincerely appreciate that as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
through you to the minister, the National Accord for the 

Protection of Species at Risk in Canada was signed with the 
federal government back in 1996. And I note that the principles 
for the vulnerable and at-risk categories are based on that 
accord. 
 
Can you explain, Mr. Minister, why it took us four years to get 
to the point that we’re finally at today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Saskatchewan certainly is not holding 
their effort back on this at all. The accord, as you know, was 
signed in 1996, and a Saskatchewan Act was passed in 1997. 
 
And to answer the question on behalf of the federal government 
is not in my purview to do so, but I will put a small plug in, in 
the fact that we took an extra year to consult between 1996 to 
1997. We feel consultation is very, very important and we met 
with a bunch of stakeholders and all the people involved in this 
process. 
 
And in small defence of the federal government in reference to 
this particular Act, is that they had across Canada, consultation 
process going, and that certainly takes a heck of a lot more time 
than across Saskatchewan. But needless to say, I think 
Saskatchewan by far has been very active and there has been a 
lot of work done in reference to this particular problem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair, 
through you to the minister. Mr. Minister, can you give me an 
indication of how many species in Saskatchewan are designated 
in the following categories: designated, endangered, extirpated, 
threatened, and vulnerable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that there are now 15 species that are listed in the wild species 
at a risk, and there’s another 33 that have been assessed and 
being looked at. 
 
And we don’t have the breakdown as to which species are . . . 
certainly in terms of the managed species and the at-a-risk 
species in terms of being threatened or endangered. So we’ll get 
that information to you. 
 
But in a nutshell, there’s 15 that we have identified, and we’re 
looking at another 33. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would 
appreciate the breakdown of those species as per those 
categories. And I have no more questions, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Wildlife Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Bill No. 5 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
wanted to indicate that I have no questions on Bill No. 5. 
 
And I would take this opportunity to thank the minister and 
thank his officials for their assistance here today, and also for 
all of the assistance that they’ve provided us over the course of 
this session, not only with the various Bills but with estimates 
as well. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that we: 
 

Amend Clause 1 of the printed Bill by striking out “The 
Parks Amendment Act, 1999” and substituting “The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2000”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
officials. I have a few questions regarding the Bill — Bill No. 
60. With regards to forest remanagement agreement licences, 
generally how much time elapses from when the transaction 
occurs to when you are notified about it? 
 
Okay, my question, Mr. Minister, is with regard to forestry 
management agreement licences. Generally how much time 
elapses from when the transaction occurs to when you are 
notified about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Again I apologize for not hearing your first question, and I 
thank you for giving us a second opportunity. 
 
Just to point out that we would be aware, right from the start . . . 
It’s important that the minister of SERM be made aware of 
these transactions. So in reference to your question, how much 
time would elapse in reference to a transfer of the FMA 
(forestry management agreement) — we would be aware right 
from the start. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
I noted that any FMA transactions are not to be undertaken 
without the minister’s consent. Is this correct? Might there be 
an instance where you would not give your consent, and if so, 
could you please give you me more details on your 
explanations? 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the 
purpose of this whole Act is to ensure that the minister has an 
opportunity to look at the new owners and what their new plan 
is. 
 
And in terms of the question as, would you reject it and why 
would you say no to it, I think the most important thing is that 
our role in SERM is to ensure that the environmental laws and 
rules and regulations and policies that we have established as a 
province are followed. And I think the companies have done a 
tremendous job in doing that. So in relation to that particular 
aspect, we would look at that as well. And we don’t see, or 
foresee anyway, a lot of companies not following some of the 
environmental rules and regulations when they assume a FMA. 
 
Secondly in terms of the facilities, if there’s wide-scale 
facilities being closed, if there’s a change of plans, drastic 
change of plans, these are some of the reasons, I think, that we 
would try and look at saying, no, we don’t approve of that 
particular transfer because the cost is too great to the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I would say at this stage of the game that 
that would be in extreme cases. 
 
Again, I don’t foresee industry taking over a huge investment, 
not being aware of the some of the rules and regulations around 
sustainable forestry practices. I don’t see them taking over a big 
investment trying to look at closing facilities and creating this 
huge economic problem for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think the clause merely gives us the avenue to say look, 
listen, if you’re going to transfer ownership, we’d like to have a 
look at this, see how things are going, and go from there. The 
whole intent here is to just be made aware through the Act that 
these things are happening. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
In those instances where a transfer of ownership, a similar 
transaction occurs, isn’t it the legal obligation of that company 
to transfer the FMA licence as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just for your 
information that when a company is sold, is the FMA 
automatically transferred? And that’s the whole purpose of this 
exercise of this Act is to make sure that the minister has that 
information, to make sure that the minister is aware of what’s 
going on. 
 
In any event if an FMA is being transferred from one company 
to another company, there is no cost to the province of 
Saskatchewan. We want to make sure that as a minister we have 
the opportunity to protect Saskatchewan’s interests on the 
environmental aspect as well as the economic means, so it’s our 
purview to this Act to try and do that. 
 
So your question is: is the FMA automatically transferred? The 
obvious answer is, if there’s no problem with the minister, then 
that option is available to them. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Naturally the communities that will be impacted by the FMA 
licences have some concerns about their own livelihood. It also 
is my understanding that in those areas there exists a number of 
small businesses that also depend on the forests for industry. 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

In those instances where it has been decided that due to a 
merger or takeover a company’s FMA will not be transferred, 
would that FMA then be offered to a small business in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question; 
it is a very good question. 
 
I think the situation that we want to look at is that when the 
province announced last April, or a year ago last April, of the 
expansion to forestry — and certainly there’s a number of 
companies that came to Saskatchewan or were here already and 
looking at expansion, and when they announced that 
three-quarters of a billion dollar investment in the forestry 
industry and they announced a number of partners and a 
number of projects — I just want to point out that from our 
purview of SERM, the primary focus that we have in the whole 
aspect of forestry is to ensure that the forests are managed well. 
 
And I would even go so far as say that industry also shares 
some of that load and some of the responsibility. But it’s more 
so the province’s responsibility to ensure that some of these 
policies we set up are followed to a T. 
 
And so in relation to your question, is in the event that a 
takeover is imminent, would people in the area have an 
opportunity to take the FMA and use it for their own purposes, 
the whole point that I want to make is that it hasn’t happened. 
The chances of that happening are very slim. It’s a hypothetical 
situation as well. 
 
But what I think I would say to that is that we are trying our 
best as a province. And I know that the Economic Development 
minister and the Minister of Northern Affairs and the Minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs, they’re all working together to ensure 
that as many people in Saskatchewan have an opportunity 
through forestry. 
 
And I might add that, again, it may be proper for the minister of 
SERM to do that; but I might add that the 10,000 new jobs and 
the three-quarter of a billion dollar investment is on track. 
There’s new mills opening up. There’s new opportunities. 
There’s value-added processes. And it’s all being done in a 
sustainable fashion. 
 
So again to your question — is the forestry opportunity 
available to people in certain areas — the obvious answer is 
yes. And we certainly hope that large industry and small 
industry can work together to accomplish some of the admirable 
goals set by the province; all the while being fully aware that 
the environment and resource management position is we must 
do this in a sustainable, environmentally friendly fashion. And 
that’s where our primary role comes in. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
I also understand that this Bill has provisions that will allow 
SERM officials to confiscate a wild rice crop where dues and 
fees have not been paid and the producer’s permits or licence 
have been cancelled or expired. Is this correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 
to point out that our intent here is to not go after a bunch of wild 
rice growers — our intent is to clarify the ownership. The 

collection practices are going to stay the same. And again we’re 
working with the outfitters . . . sorry, the wild rice growers in 
the province. And I think this minor change is something 
simply to help us clarify the ownership and to reduce some of 
the arrears that may be out there. 
 
And just to point out that the collection processes haven’t 
changed. It’s not a significant problem. It’s basically a minor 
housekeeping issue. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
When you say ownership does that mean then that the 
government will then now become the owner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Again the 
question in terms of what will happen to the crop, quite frankly 
this was . . . we had a written letter from the Saskatchewan 
Wild Rice Council asking us to do this, because we wanted to 
clarify who owns certain crop. 
 
And I would say to you that if SERM is going to confiscate the 
crop, then the proceeds of the crop would go towards settling 
the arrears of that particular patch. And then of course our intent 
is to again transfer it over to another wild rice operator that 
would follow the rules and certainly pay their permit fees and 
some of the costs associated with accessing that particular part 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, good 
afternoon. Mr. Minister, in regards to the owners and operators 
of the wild rice industry, I’m wondering if any of those owners 
have received monies through the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation to assist them in getting their business running, or 
whether SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) 
money was given to any of those industry members to assist in 
their operations in any way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that we are not aware of the financing arrangements of some of 
the people that do apply for the wild rice permits. We simply 
issue the permits based on what is shown as available, and we 
ensure that we collect the fees. 
 
So in terms of who is financially supporting some of these 
ventures, we don’t have that information. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you had indicated to my colleague here from Spiritwood that 
you were going to see to it that if there were any arrears and so 
on that were outstanding with these wild rice operations, that 
the crop then would be used at your determination to pay off 
those arrears; and subsequently any other determination that 
your department felt would be necessary in as far as ensuring 
that operations are viable and run well would be done in a 
manner whereby the department could transfer ownership of 
these operations to another owner. 
 
There’s a lot of questions surrounding how that might be done, 
Mr. Minister. As far as your ministry, your department having 
the authority to do that is really questionable for me, especially 
if these are operations that do not have public funding to sustain 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

them. 
 
And so I would ask you, Mr. Minister, how would a 
determination be made as to who would then be having the right 
to pinpoint who the new operator would be. Who makes that 
determination and on what basis do you make it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
again that SERM doesn’t really look at the whole avenue of 
who we should allocate and who we shouldn’t . . . we should 
not allocate to. What I want to point out to the member is that 
we generally operate on a first-come, first-serve basis and all 
the allocations and permits for wild rice do go to the field staff. 
And again, we try our very best and I think it’s very consistent 
that we come and go on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. But it is your 
department that has just indicated in this House that you would 
make the determination that there was going to be a transfer of 
ownership if in fact one of the operations was not operating in 
viable way or an environmentally sustainable way. 
 
So you are going to be taking a determination to take that step, 
from what I heard you say. And even if it is not your 
department, it is obviously your government who will be doing 
that. And so I think there needs to be an accountability and 
responsibility to the public for you to state today how that 
determination is made on behalf of your government. 
 
And I’d like your personal comment on whether you think it’s 
government’s role to make that kind of a call, judgment call, 
and to interfere in private business where it is private business, 
and like I’ve mentioned before, especially if there is no 
government money in this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I think in terms of the sustainable 
fashion and in terms of the application process, I may have got 
the issues of forestry versus wild rice issue mixed up. 
 
In terms of the FMA transfer that we were speaking about, 
about five minutes ago, I made reference to the fact that if we 
do look at an FMA being transferred, we look at things as 
ownership and some of the facilities that we’re looking at, and 
the viability, and certainly some of the environmental 
challenges that we face. And that was where the question came 
up in terms of the economic position of some of these 
companies. 
 
In relation to wild rice, we don’t look at the environmental 
implication of the applicant. Again the applicant could be 
anybody that goes to a SERM office and says, I hear this 
particular area is available and I’d like to apply for it. Here’s 
my money. I’m also a member of the Wild Rice Growers 
Association, and so on and so forth. So we don’t really 
distinguish whether candidate A or candidate B has a better 
financial position. All we know is that again, we go as best as 
we can to a first-come, first-served basis. 
 
In terms of the seized crop, the area — that will be offered for 
tender through a local newspaper. It will be posted in the SERM 
offices, and also in some of the wild rice processing plants and 
public places as well. So the intent is not to choose who we 
want to have these areas. We simply want to say, look, listen, 

there’s a problem here. We want to clarify who the ownership 
of this particular patch is; there’s some arrears, we want to get 
those arrears settled up, you know. 
 
And somebody else will come alongside and take the 
opportunity because wild rice, as you’re aware, is a growing 
industry. It is an exciting industry. 
 
And I know my hon. colleague, the member from Cumberland, 
has done a great amount of work in that regard. And they also 
brought the Deputy Premier out to La Ronge to meet with some 
of the people that have made a significant gain in the wild rice 
industry. 
 
So really our intent is to not stifle the wild rice industry at all. 
The deal here is to make sure that the opportunity is available, 
that the Wild Rice Council is supportive in reference to this 
particular exercise, and that if an opportunity does come 
available that we don’t try and pick and choose who we want 
there. And we try to follow the rules and processes as fair as we 
can and that’s exactly what the Act is intended to do. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
In regards to the wild rice crops and where the dues and the fees 
have not been paid — I’m assuming by your information that 
you’ve given today that there’s been some problems regarding 
that — how long has this been going on and is there a grace 
period for the producers in that respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As you may 
know, the industry has been going fairly strong since 1980, and 
this problem has been apparent since the early ’80s. And just to 
point out that the Wild Rice Council has asked us to do this 
particular amendment because they want to make sure that the 
15 per cent of people that are out there that aren’t paying their 
permit fees, and so on and so forth, that the issue is not sitting 
there for another 20 years. 
 
So this is the reason why SERM is now in the process of putting 
this particular exercise to this Act. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Have you talked to the wild rice producers to find out 
what the reasons are for them not paying the fees? And are the 
fees so high to begin with that they’re not paying them, and that 
is the reason why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that 85 per cent of the wild rice growers in 
Saskatchewan are great — like they follow all the rules, they 
pay all their permit fees, and everything is going well. 
 
And this Act is simply addressed to try and find some solution 
to some of the people that are out there that may or may not be 
involved with the particular industry, and it’s hard to find out 
what’s going on some days. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why the wild rice growers are 
saying look, listen, put this clause in, we want to clarify who 
owns certain land, some of these people have not paid the 
arrears for a number of years, get to the bottom of it, and get 
this whole issue settled. 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

The average wild rice permit costs . . . from SERM’s 
perspective is that they average about $200, and some of the 
sizes of wild rice crop can go up to a thousand acres and some 
as small as 100 acres. So quite frankly, it’s not a significant fee. 
It’s a very good fee, it’s a fair fee, and again we’re doing our 
very best to support this industry the best we can. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
When you’re saying $200, it’s $200 per what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Per year. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Per year. For as many lakes as they have or 
just for one or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — It’s $200 per year, per permit. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What other provisions are in place, other than 
confiscating your crop, that would encourage producers to keep 
their licences current and their fees paid up to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
point out is that the question was, are you working with these 
people that are in arrears? 
 
I want to point out that confiscation is the last of the options 
that we have. We are working with the Wild Rice Council 
throughout the province, advising their members, look, listen, 
this is something that you guys want to do, to do one thing and 
that’s to clarify some of the owners of some of these patches, 
and that’s what they’re trying to do; but let these members 
know that if they’re not keeping current with their permit fees 
and not letting us know what’s going on, and they continue not 
addressing the problem, that this is intended to help the Wild 
Rice Council itself and the industry. 
 
So the question we . . . or the answer I have is, confiscation is 
our last step. We have been consulting with the Wild Rice 
Council throughout the province. These arrears problems have 
been going on for 20 years. We want to clarify who owns some 
of these patches. And I even believe we should go so far as to 
say to some of these people, is that to contact them directly, 
one-on-one, saying this particular patch that you had at one 
time, you’re in arrears this amount, are you aware of that? And 
if you’re aware of that, can you pay that? 
 
I think that’s one of the options that we are looking at. There 
has been some extensive consultation. It’s not something that 
we want to do; it’s just an avenue we have now to support the 
wild rice industry, at the request of the Wild Rice Council of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
In regards to the licensing, that licensing is done on a 
year-to-year basis. I’m wondering if the arrears that is incurred 
by the member is added on to the licensing before he can get his 
licence for the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, this particular problem is facing 
about 15 per cent of all the growers out there. And as I 
mentioned before, clarification is one of the intents . . . or the 
objectives of this Bill — we want to clarify who owns what, 

where. And again, 85 per cent of the wild rice growers out there 
are good growers. They do well. They pay their permit fees. 
They pay all the necessary dues. And they’re, quite frankly, an 
incredible asset to their industry. 
 
The problem we have on the 15 per cent is we need to get 
clarified who owns what. And if they don’t have any other 
options available on a particular patch, that they give it back to 
SERM for allocation to other people on a first-come, 
first-served basis. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
When you’re saying, 85 per cent are good ones and 15 per cent 
are bad ones, can you give us some numbers as which relate to 
the 85 per cent versus the 15 per cent that are bad ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all, I just want to clarify 
the position is that we don’t want to point out that there’s 15 per 
cent of the wild rice growers industry out there that are bad. 
 
The fact of the matter is these growers could be really good 
growers. All we’re trying to point out is there’s 15 per cent of 
the growers out there that are in arrears with their permits and 
their fees. We want to make sure we get to the bottom of that 
and find out to clarify who owns some of these areas, the 
arrears, then get them addressed, and can we help, again, the 
other 85 per cent who are, again, decent producers that are 
following the rules and certainly paying their permits. 
 
So, I think to clarify — there isn’t 85 per cent bad and 15 per 
cent good in terms of the industry; there’s 15 per cent that are 
consistently not paying their fees on an annual basis. And I 
want to make sure we get to the bottom of that and that’s what 
this whole exercise is intended to do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy Chair, can 
you give us numbers that are involved in the rice growing 
association, like, actual numbers of how many people are wild 
rice growers? And out of that there’s 15 per cent that aren’t, so 
that would give us a number of how many people are in arrears. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There are approximately 200 active 
wild rice growers in the province of Saskatchewan. And they’re 
very active in terms of developing the industry. So if you take 
15 per cent of that, which is a high number, roughly 30 people 
are in arrears. 
 
And again, we want to clarify what these 30 people are doing 
— if they still own the patch or if they want to give the 
particular patch up that they have. And these are the questions 
that we’re trying to find out. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
As I understand that, to an outfitter who was selling their 
outfitting business, he is allowed to sell his licensed property as 
part of his sale. 
 
In regards to the wild rice growers, I understand that he cannot 
sell his rice-growing properties as part of the water sale. Could 
you clarify this for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
clarify the position. The reason to your question is that wild rice 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

is considered a self-generating crop. This is a cross-Canada 
approach in allocating wild rice opportunities. 
 
So in relation to your question about why an outfitter can sell 
his operation and use some of the resources on his allocation as 
part of his business opportunity and why a wild rice grower 
cannot, is it’s classified as a self-generating crop which is a 
resource that the Crown owns even though the person has 
applied it. 
 
And the difference between them and the outfitter is, the 
outfitter of course is hunting wildlife. And it’s certainly 
something that is a significant difference between wild rice and 
wildlife. And that’s the reason why you have the two rules. 
 
And again with the wild rice argument is that this has been a 
cross-Canada approach when it comes to wild rice, and there is 
a long history to the reason why they are doing it. And we’ll 
certainly share more detailed information with you if you so 
wish. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Deputy Chair. In 
regards to the sale of wild rice crops, you’re saying that he 
cannot sell that. Yet the person that has the permit owning it, 
the rice, to put wild rice in those lakes, they’re putting it in, it’s 
their manpower putting it in, but yet they’re not allowed to sell 
that as part of the sale when they go to sell their operation. And 
my question is, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again to clarify the position, is that this 
is a standard Canadian approach in reference to wild rice, and 
Saskatchewan is abiding by that approach. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
In regards to that, then I think it should be looked at differently. 
Because if you compare that to an outfitter, and there are 
outfitters right next to these wild rice growers, and the laws are 
different for both those two operations, and they should be the 
same because they work side by side and they work on the same 
regards. 
 
With that, I don’t have any more questions, Mr. Minister. I 
don’t know if my other colleagues have any. That’s my last 
question. 
 
I want to thank the minister and the officials here today. Thank 
you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. I just wanted 
to thank all the members in the opposition for their questions 
and sincerely appreciate their support and collaboration on these 
very important issues. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Hon. Minister of 
Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have with 
me today to my left, Mr. Kirk McGregor, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. And 
to my right, I have Mr. Len Rog, who’s the assistant deputy 
minister in the revenue division. Behind Mr. Rog is Mr. Rob 
Dobson, who’s the director of education and health tax in the 
revenue division. Behind me is Mr. Jim Nelson, who is the 
director of audit in the revenue division. And behind Mr. 
McGregor is Mr. Arun Srinivas, who is the senior taxation 
policy analyst in the taxation and intergovernmental affairs. All 
of these individuals work for the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. And, Mr. Minister, may I welcome your officials 
here this afternoon. I have a few questions I’d like, mainly for 
clarification if I could, Mr. Minister, regarding Bill 82, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
I guess my first question is . . . from what I remember from 
your presentation both at the budget and also in reading the 
second reading, there was the item of the flat tax and we’ve 
talked about this being reduced from a 2 per cent flat tax to 1 
per cent. 
 
When I read the amendments I see 1.5 per cent there, and I 
think I understand. But I would ask you to clarify that, because 
when people read the amendment and hear from the things that 
are being said, they’re going to say in the year 2000 it is not 1 
per cent, it is 1.5 per cent. So please clarify that discrepancy. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. What the member 
says is quite correct. The rate is being changed from 2 per cent 
to 1 per cent effective July 1. But because the rate will be 2 per 
cent for the period January 1 to June 30 and 1 per cent from 
July 1 to December 31, over the average of the year 2000 the 
rate will be 1.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, when people do 
their tax for the year 2000 they’ll see this 1.5. Do you think 
there’s going to be some confusion and some need to say, hey, 
that’s not what was told to us earlier. How best to approach that 
when our constituents come to us and say that is not what we 
heard earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well just to say that then there would be 
some confusion, because we have been very clear and 
consistent throughout that the flat tax will be reduced to 1 per 
cent effective July 1. This is consistent with the way taxes have 
changed in other years. 
 
For example when the debt reduction surtax was cut in half one 
year . . . a number of years ago, the same thing occurred. 
There’s the 25 per cent reduction because the change occurs 
midway through the year. So if you cut something by 50 per 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

cent but you’re doing that for half the year, that ends up 25 per 
cent throughout the year. So it’s a very simple matter of 
calculation. Certainly it’s been done before. 
 
The other thing I would explain to people is that on January 1 
the flat tax will be eliminated, so after January 1 it will be zero 
per cent. I’ll welcome the opportunity to talk about the 2 per 
cent, the 1.5 per cent, and ultimately the zero per cent. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 
like those kind of numbers when we’re talking about reducing 
taxes. That I think is certainly the right direction to go. And I 
hope you’ll be able to show very quickly that there is in fact an 
expansion of economic activity, and the resulting economy will 
show a positive aspect to this. I’m confident that it will. We’ve 
done studies from our perspective and I have to agree that that 
is certainly the right direction for the flat tax. 
 
One of the other questions that I have, Mr. Minister, pertains to 
the subsection 8.3, and that is 8.3(1) when we’re talking about 
the . . . you’re adding a section in there, the post-secondary 
graduate tax. I know that in the amendment it’s just adding one 
more item under the amount equal to the aggregate of. 
 
Can you explain again the value of this post-secondary graduate 
tax with the idea that . . . do you believe it has gone far enough? 
Do you believe that that tax is going to accomplish what your 
objective is with this post-secondary graduate tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think it will be helpful, but I think 
that what is more important is the larger tax cut that will occur 
with the introduction of the new system on January 1, 2001. 
 
This year, the year 2000, what will happen is that a graduate of 
a post-secondary institution will receive a tax credit of 
approximately $3,180. So that on that portion of their income 
for the year 2000 in addition to other tax credits, personal 
exemptions that they may have, their income would not be 
taxable and that portion of their income would not be taxable. 
 
So it’s a bit of encouragement. Next year when the new system 
comes in, whereas I as a non-senior for example might have a 
tax credit of $8,000, under the new system if I was a graduate of 
a post-secondary institution I’d have an additional 3,180, so I’d 
be up to about $11,180 before I start paying income tax. So it’s 
just a bit of an encouragement for young people to stay here. 
 
But I’m not sure it will as much impact, Mr. Deputy Chair, as 
the overall reform of the taxation system of which this is one 
part. I think you have to take all of the parts together, and 
hopefully they’ll encourage economic activity as the member 
says, and therefore job creation. And I think most of us would 
agree that probably the main thing that people look for are job 
opportunities on graduation and that’s what we’re trying to 
encourage. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
To encourage people that have graduated to stay in the province 
is certainly the correct thing to do. And I know that your tax 
plan is a program plan that over the years will see an increasing 
amount of income tax reduction. At least that’s projected and 
planned; I think you’ve explained that. 
 

To a student that’s just coming out of university who has a very 
large debt load, who is looking at employment for the first time 
and trying to find the best return he can, or she can, to try to 
both get established in that world and also to pay off the debt 
that he or she has occurred, it’s very important to have 
something that is an immediate, recognizable, achievable 
reduction. And I guess my comment was that this, from the 
constituents that I’ve talked to that are at university, is not 
going to be able to do the job. So that I’m just stating that as 
one of the observations. Mr. Minister, you may or not want to 
comment on that. 
 
Another question, if I could. I’ll move to something a little bit 
differently and that is the tax credit that is being shown under 
one of these amendments. You talked about the cheques that 
will be sent out for the tax credit will be coordinated with or 
along with, I think you said, the GST (goods and services tax) 
tax credit cheque. Is that correct and would you comment on 
that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The first part of the question, whether 
the tax saving to students would be sufficient to encourage them 
to make a decision to stay here or to move here — because it 
applies to people who might have gone to university or taken a 
trade elsewhere and might want to move to Saskatchewan, they 
could be from Newfoundland, for example, or Manitoba — no, 
in and of itself I’m not sure that it would make a difference. I 
think it’s part of a package and as part of a package, I think it 
could. 
 
The package would be that students get tax credits for things 
like, when they’re going to school, if they pay tuition during the 
taxation year, we have a bursary program that pays . . . forgives 
some of the loans that needy students would have to otherwise 
pay back. And all of those things plus lower taxes generally, I 
think, would be important. So I would say to the member it’s 
part of a package. 
 
With respect to the Saskatchewan sales tax credit, yes, that is 
going to be paid by the federal government with provincial 
money but in one cheque which is the GST cheque. And right 
now, as the member probably knows, people that are eligible 
for the GST cheque get a cheque four times a year. So quarterly, 
every three months — July 1, October 1, January 1, and April 1. 
 
And what will happen is that if you’re entitled to a GST cheque 
you don’t have to do anything at all. You automatically will get 
the PST credit but it will be put into the same cheque so that 
your GST cheque will go up. You know, for example, if it used 
to be $49 for the federal, then let’s say that you might get 
another $20 a month or whatever it would be provincial, so that 
you would get a cheque of $69. But you’d get one cheque. 
Those numbers aren’t correct by the way, I’m just using them 
as an example. 
 
And the GST cheque now says Government of Canada on it 
because all the money comes through the federal government. 
When the PST tax credit comes in, it will say Government of 
Canada and then it will say Government of Saskatchewan. And 
it will have an explanation of, here’s the total amount of your 
money that you’re getting with this cheque. Government of 
Canada is putting in this much, Government of Saskatchewan is 
putting in this much and the person will be able to see. 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

And the PST tax credit actually started on April 1 of this year, 
but nobody has got that money yet because the federal 
government wasn’t able to add the money to the GST cheques 
until October. So in October, people entitled to the GST tax 
rebate will get their GST cheque but they will also get their PST 
and they will get three cheques in one for PST at that point. 
 
And then of course on January 1, they’ll get their quarterly 
cheque for the PST along with their quarterly cheque for the 
GST. And then that will just continue indefinitely. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just for 
clarification then, the conditions that will trigger the GST rebate 
will also trigger the PST rebate from the provincial government, 
all coming out then in one cheque. 
 
Who is going to be doing the coordinating? Who’s going to be 
doing the administrating? What costs are involved here? And 
are we going to be paying, administratively, our share, or is that 
going to be picked up by the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The program will be administered by the 
Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, which is what is 
commonly referred to as Revenue Canada. That is the federal 
agency of the Department of National Revenue. 
 
And in terms of the costs, the details of the costs have not been 
worked out yet, but I would say that they would be relatively 
minimal because what we’re trying to do here is, in fact, avoid 
the cost of sending these cheques out ourselves and the 
accounting. And also dovetailing the entitlement with the GST 
entitlement, so that it’s a fairly simple matter administratively. 
 
And the reason I say the costs would be fairly minimal is you 
have to bear in mind that the federal government is 
administering our entire income tax system for us. And what 
that means is that, basically, in addition to the many, many 
other things they do for us, we’re asking them to do one, in the 
scheme of things, relatively significant but at the same time not 
the biggest part of what they do for us. 
 
So it will be included in the costs we pay for them. I don’t think 
it will substantially increase the cost, I think there will be some 
increase, but because they do this for us already, it’s in the 
normal course of business that they would also take on this 
responsibility. 
 
And we’ll talk to them about whether they’re entitled to some 
additional compensation because of that. But we don’t 
anticipate the costs to be all that great, and certainly cheaper 
than if we did it ourselves. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister. Just another question 
if I could, Mr. Chair. Did you do any analysis to see if that was 
a more efficient way of doing this? Why not just a tax credit at 
the end of the year so that it came to them . . . to that person at 
that particular time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Two reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
first is when you’re paying out this cheque — the PST rebate — 
it is to lower-income people. And those people need to have 
those funds every three months as opposed to once a year. They 
will spend that money when they receive it. And we want to get 

it in their hands as soon as possible. That’s the first reason. 
 
The second reason is the closer we are consistent with the GST, 
the cheaper it will be for us to do. And the GST comes out four 
times a year, so it’s good that the PST come out at the same 
time. That will be cheaper, and it will be more helpful to 
low-income people. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Chair. I like that 
response. I think getting money out into the hands of the people 
is an important thing. And, if it’s not going to be too costly, and 
as you have told us it might work in administratively well with 
other things that are being done by the federal government, I 
would commend that. 
 
One last comment if I could, Mr. Minister. It goes back to 
trying to attract people here into this province and we were 
referring particularly to the students — graduating students — 
giving them a sense of something that they can use immediately 
and also developing the economy so there is opportunities here. 
 
But we don’t want to try to discourage them. For instance the 
student loan provision, the interest on student loan provision, 
actually worked the opposite way because there was a reduction 
of the benefit there. And I think it’s important to keep moving 
forward in the direction of having students look to see if there is 
an opportunity here before they decide to move out, away. 
 
Mr. Chair — and I’ll give you an opportunity if you wish, Mr. 
Minister — but, Mr. Chair, I really don’t have any further 
questions. And I would like to thank your officials — if they’re 
going to remain for others, we’ll do it again — but thank you 
and the officials for this particular part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you. I just will respond very 
briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying this — that the member 
referred to the change on the interest subsidization. And the 
member’s right, that we have reduced the amount of interest 
subsidization to the students who have graduated and have 
loans. And we’ve replaced it with the tax credit. 
 
But the difference is — and I support this — that we used to 
pay the interest subsidy to students whether they stayed in 
Saskatchewan or not. And so you could move to British 
Columbia or Alberta or Manitoba, and we would be paying 
taxpayers’ money from Saskatchewan to give a student that we 
had educated, that had been required to leave the province, a 
subsidy. 
 
What we’re doing instead is subsidizing those students who 
choose to stay in Saskatchewan. We’re directing more money to 
do that. And so I think that it is a good thing to do from the 
point of view of the taxpayers, and to encourage people to stay 
here. 
 
And so I’ll respond it that way. The member indicated he didn’t 
have more questions. I don’t know if others do, Mr. Chair, so 
I’ll sit down at this point. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d just 
like to thank the member from Lloydminster and his colleagues 
in the opposition for their co-operation with respect to this 
legislation, and also I’d like to thank my officials for their help. 
And with that I’d like to move that we report Bill No 82 without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Income Tax Act, 2000 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. 
Mr. Minister, I have a few questions here again, mainly for 
clarification like we’ve had in the past. Just very recently, dated 
June 23, you sent to me and I appreciate it, a list of some of the 
House amendments that you plan on moving forward, with 
these particular amendments. Rather than going through them 
specifically at this point, could you tell us why some of these 
amendments need to be put in place? And can you tell us in a 
summary fashion whether it’s going to be beneficial to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan? Are these amendments going to 
cost us more in the long run? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the 
member for the question. There are a variety of House 
amendments to the Bill which simply means that we’ll be 
asking the House to approve wording that is different than the 
wording that was presented earlier. 
 
And I would say to the member, I’m not sure I would describe 
any of this as being of particular assistance necessarily to the 
taxpayers; I don’t think they’re detrimental either. Really what 
they are, are technical housekeeping amendments which are 
designed for the benefit of the Canada Customs and Revenue 
Agency and the Department of Finance provincially in terms of 
the agreement between the two of . . . those two departments as 
to how taxes should be collected. 
 
And the reason for them is that we have the federal government 
collect our provincial income taxes by way of agreement 
between the province of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Canada, represented by the Department of Finance in 
Saskatchewan, and the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency 
in Ottawa. 
 
And they in Ottawa have simply said to us, you know there are 
certain ways that we would like to collect these taxes with you 
or for you, and these are the rules that we feel should be 
followed. We don’t have any particular problem with those 
rules. None of what they’re suggesting changes substantively 
the tax plan as presented in the budget or in the Bill as it’s been 
introduced in the House, but we do have to arrive at an 
agreement with the federal government in terms of the wording 
of the legislation, and that’s what these House amendments do. 
 
I’m quite sure that the taxpayers generally probably are not 
concerned with the amendments. They’re concerned with the 
substantial aspects of the Bill in terms of what are the tax rates 
going to be, what are the credits going to be, when is the flat tax 

going to be abolished, and that kind of issue. But the 
amendments don’t speak to those kinds of substantive, 
important questions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Chairman. When I 
received the amendments that you sent over on Friday, of 
course I went through them very carefully. And I had to miss all 
my golf dates on the weekend of course — I’m sure you’ll 
believe me on that. 
 
But in fact, there is some . . . there is rather a lot of 
amendments. And being new at this, it seemed to me that this 
was maybe somewhat unusual, because this is very late in the 
day. Your Bill had already been put forward. It had already had 
first and, I think, second reading. And all of a sudden we have 
these amendments. 
 
Can you tell me, was there no way to identify the problems 
associated with the federal government aspect of the tax? And 
in fact when you were drafting the Bill, were you not aware of 
some of these things needing to be put in place at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we were not. The difficulty here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was that the consultation with the federal 
government occurred of course after the budget and didn’t 
really finish until fairly recently, at which point the 
amendments were drafted. 
 
But I think the member can appreciate that we wanted to 
present the suggested new taxation system to the legislature 
before we told the federal government what the changes would 
be. 
 
And in fact, out of respect for the legislative process and all 
members of the Legislative Assembly including the opposition 
as importantly as the government members, it’s important that 
we not tell the Government of Canada what we’re doing 
tax-wise before we tell the legislators here and the people of the 
province. 
 
So the budget was presented; the Bill was drafted initially. But 
after the budget was presented, a fairly lengthy period of 
consultation went on with the federal government in terms of 
the technical aspects of the Bill. 
 
And I’m advised by the officials that it’s quite customary, in 
fact, to have quite a degree of consultation with the federal 
government about the technical aspects. And as I say, this 
simply couldn’t be done before the budget, and then took some 
time after the budget. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Pursuing that just a wee bit further, the administration of our tax 
system here, as you’ve indicated, is coordinated with the federal 
Customs and Revenue. 
 
And I know that you’re focusing our direction on de-linking 
with the federal government. But will that mean that there is 
less administrative carry-over or liaison with the federal 
government? Will it mean that they are still administratively 
very involved in what goes on here in this province, even 
though we are going toward de-linking? 
 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we will de-link the taxation system in 
the sense that we’re going to go to a tax on income system and 
lower taxation rates. That’s one part of the equation. 
 
But in terms of the administration we’re not going to change the 
aspect that says that Revenue Canada, as we commonly refer to 
it, will continue to collect the taxes rather than setting up a 
separate bureaucracy in the Department of Finance. So for the 
most part we’re asking the federal government to continue to 
administer the taxation system on our behalf. 
 
I should add that there are sometimes instances where the 
federal government doesn’t wish to administer everything 
associated with our tax system. For example, the manufacturing 
and food processing, one of the targeted tax incentives we had a 
few years ago, they said you should administer that yourselves. 
And it’s always possible that that could occur and that we 
would have to administer part of the tax system ourselves. 
 
But for the most part we would like as much as possible it to be 
administered out of Ottawa so that there’s a single 
administration. Mind you we will have to . . . you know we pay 
them a certain amount of money to do that as we negotiate with 
them from time to time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
just maybe a bit of a clarification if I could then on a couple of 
these amendments. 
 
One of them is the amendment dealing with the 
Saskatchewan-based business income and business income 
earned outside of Saskatchewan; that’s one of the amendments. 
And a similar amendment, at least the way I read it, is this 
multi-jurisdictional trust and how the taxes are applied in terms 
of in and outside of the province. 
 
Again it’s very complicated, very complex. And I think it 
would be useful if you would again reinforce the fact that there 
is no really major change here. And the consequences of these 
amendments in fact are not going to create a large or any kind 
of a tax increase on our people that are involved in those 
clauses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes I can confirm, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that that is the case. These amendments certainly do not 
increase any taxes. 
 
In fact some of them, including the one, one of the ones at least 
that the member’s mentioned is to ensure that people are not 
doubled taxed, that they’re only taxed in Saskatchewan on 
income earned in Saskatchewan as opposed to income that they 
might have to pay tax in a different jurisdiction where they have 
income from more than one province. 
 
So we’re trying to make sure that we don’t tax people more 
than we’re supposed to. There’s certainly nothing in here that 
will increase taxes or do otherwise than implement the system 
that was announced in the budget which will be a system of 
lower income taxation starting this year. But with respect to this 
Bill, this really describes what happens starting January 1 next 
year when the various surtaxes are abolished and we go to the 
three-rate structure with a system of tax credits which are 
amounts of money that people won’t be charged tax on. So that 

isn’t affected by the amendments that are being presented today. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, Mr. Chairman. I 
assume the same assessment of neutrality, more or less, applies 
to the spousal credit — the tax credit aspects of those 
amendments. And if I could, while I’m on my feet, Mr. 
Minister, I’ll just comment on the one that struck me as of 
maybe most interest, that’s the senior credit, as I’m getting 
closer to that aspect. 
 
One of the questions that struck me as I was reading through 
that. What happens, for instance, if a senior leaves the province 
during the year? Would he still be able to — he or she — be 
able to claim that tax credit? Because in my constituency there’s 
a great number of people deciding, almost on a daily basis 
toward the end of the year, whether they should be moving to 
the other side of the border or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the first part of the question, 
you’re right to assume that the amendments with respect to the 
credits . . . And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the member meant 
for the spousal credit, the amendments simply are for clarity. 
They don’t change substantively what the tax plan would do. 
 
With respect to the question of the senior who might move out 
of the jurisdiction, whether in Saskatchewan or anywhere else, a 
person pays taxes according to where they have their residence 
on December 31 of the year. So that if someone moved out on 
December 31 to another province — say Alberta — they would 
then pay tax at the Alberta rate. If somebody moves into 
Saskatchewan by December 31, they would file tax and pay tax 
at the Saskatchewan rate. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I don’t 
have any further questions and I know we’re going to be 
moving on to another Bill. I would like to thank the minister, 
and if the same officials will be here, I’ll thank them then, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I already 
explained to the hon. member from Lloydminster by letter and 
then today that there are a series of House amendments and the 
reason for them, and that they are administrative in nature. 
 
And the first one is to clause 8 of the printed Bill. And I move 
the following amendment to that clause that we: 
 

Amend the description of TS in subsection (4) of Clause 8 
of the printed Bill by adding “on the individual’s income 
for the year” after “by the individual”. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
the following amendment to clause 9 that to: 
 

Amend the description of TS in subsection (2) of Clause 9 
of the printed Bill by adding “on the trust’s income for the 
year” after “by the trust”. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
respect to some of these amendments, they’re fairly lengthy, but 
I provided the wording of them to the hon. member from 
Lloydminster last week. And I’m going to suggest, if I could 
ask leave, to take the amendment as if it had been read. And if 
that is agreed then I’ll submit the wording of the amendment to 
the Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has previously shared 
the wording of this amendment and he’s asking for leave to take 
the amendment as read, it being lengthy. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
the amendment to clause 12 as drafted on the motion that I’m 
going to submit to the page to be tabled. Thank you. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just for 
the record, I think, at this point, I’d like to ask for leave to 
follow the same procedure with respect to this clause, and 
perhaps with respect to the rest of the amendments which tend 
to be quite lengthy. And if I can have leave, then I’ll then make 
the motion. 
 
The Chair: — I’m going to ask, if the leave is agreed, with the 
caveat that if there’s ever any displeasure, members will just 
speak out. But is leave granted for all of the amendments to be 
taken as read? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 13 of the printed Bill be amended in the fashion 
described in a motion that I’m going to give to the page to be 
tabled with you. 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 19 of the printed Bill be amended in the fashion set 
out in a written motion that I’m going to table with you. I so 
move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 20 of the printed Bill be amended in a manner set 
out in a motion which I’ve signed and which I’m now going to 
table with you. I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 and 22 agreed to. 
 
Clause 23 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 23 of the printed Bill be amended in the manner set 
out in a written motion that I’m going to table with you. I so 
move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 23 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 24 to 45 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 46 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 46 of the printed Bill be amended in a fashion that is 
set out in a signed and written motion that I’m now tabling with 
you. I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 46 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 47 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 47 of the printed Bill be amended in a fashion that I 
have set out in a motion which has been signed and circulated 
and that will be tabled. And I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Clause 47 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 48 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that clause 48 of the printed Bill be amended in the manner 
described in the written motion which has been circulated and 
which I now table. And I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 48 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 49 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move 
that Clause 49 of the printed Bill be amended in the manner set 
forth in the motion which has been circulated and which I now 
table and I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 49 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 50 agreed to. 
 
(1630) 
 
Clause 51 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that Clause 51 of the printed Bill be amended in the manner set 
forth in a written motion which I now send to you. I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 51 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 52 to 147 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the member from Lloydminster and the official 
opposition for their co-operation moving the legislation 
forward. And also I’d like to thank the officials from the 
Department of Finance for their assistance. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Income Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair of Committees, Mr. Minister, I 
don’t have any other questions that we haven’t discussed 
further. So, Mr. Chair, I don’t have any further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with 
thanks to the opposition and to the officials, I move that we 

report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Carrot River Valley 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
two very special guests in the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon. Mr. 
Alan Appleby, the Saskatchewan coordinator for the World 
Wildlife Fund, and accompanying him today is Mr. Bill Van 
Geist. He is the campaign consultant for the World Wildlife Fund. 
 
And they’re just in today wanting to take part in . . . observe the 
session this afternoon. And I would ask that everyone welcome 
them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 84  The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, I guess we’ve recorded over the last some time some 
of our concerns with the education and health tax amendments. 
So they are in fact on record, but I would like to add maybe just 
one or two comments, if I could, based on these. 
 
The first observation I’d have, Mr. Minister, is the fact that with 
the expanded PST — both on budget day, or the day after 
budget day, and on July 1 — there’s a great deal of confusion in 
a lot of segments of our different industries that are not sure 
whether there is tax to be paid or not, and there’s a lot of 
confusion when they phone in for information. 
 
Confusion still reigns in a lot of areas and one example would 
be some of the questions that probably were put to you in your 
recent trip to Lloydminster. And I guess for the record, Mr. 
Minister, I would thank you and your officials for making that 
trip to Lloydminster to look at a very specific problem that is 
maybe unique but it certainly has to be addressed, and I thank 
you for that time. 
 
But overall there’s still some confusion there. What can you 
recommend to us as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) who get these calls? What can you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan about this confusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to say to the 
member that, in specific answer to the question, the easiest 
thing to do is probably to phone the 1 800 number of the 
Department of Finance revenue division. And that number is 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

1-800-667-6102. I’ll repeat that — it’s 1-800-667-6102. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that the member is correct, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that there has been a lot of confusion. And the 
reason is that tax reform has involved the largest change to our 
tax system in many decades, and so there have been a lot of 
calls. I think at one point we were getting sometimes up to 
1,500 calls a day and very difficult to deal with everything all at 
once. And the number of calls certainly has doubled over what 
it normally is. 
 
But having said that, most of the confusion has been sorted out 
and I don’t anticipate that this situation will arise again simply 
from the point of view that we’ve been through it now. And I 
don’t think that we’re going to see this kind of change, the 
magnitude of change, in future budgets. I think that we’ve gone 
through this. It’s been a big change. There’s been confusion. 
 
I think the Department of Finance has actually done a very good 
job, but it’s been a very large change. 
 
But in any event, if there is any remaining confusion the best 
thing to do is to phone the Department of Finance. And the 
officials there are very good. They will sort out the confusion 
and clarify anything that still needs to be clarified. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister, that’s an important 
phone number because, as you know, probably your office as 
well as all of the MLAs’ offices are getting a lot of calls. So it’s 
good to publish that number and to have people access that 
information. 
 
Mr. Chair, I just have one other comment or question — and 
we’ve dealt on this before and so I’m not going to go at length 
— but I wanted to register my concern about the fact that the 
PST had been expanded. Basically I think less . . . a reduction 
of taxes at any time is the direction to go. With an expanded 
PST maybe I could have understood it if it had been reduced to 
a 5 per cent, but stayed at 6 per cent gave me some concern 
when I read the budget. 
 
So just for the record, I wanted you to hear that concern from 
me and ask for your comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
guess I would just say this, that what we’re doing is reducing 
income taxes under the new plan by $440 million. And we’re 
increasing the sales tax, that’s true, by expanding it. We’re not 
increasing the rate; it’s still 6 per cent. But we’re charging it on 
more things. That will bring in $160 million extra revenue PST. 
 
But we’re cutting income taxes by $440 million so that there’s a 
much bigger income tax cut than there is a sales tax increase. 
And that’s the rationale, that overall we’re cutting taxes over 
three years. And that’s why the flat tax is being abolished and 
so on. 
 
The reason we did not follow the advice of the Vicq committee 
which suggested that we should go to 5 per cent is: in order to 
pay for the 5 per cent, they wanted us to tax natural gas used in 
heating, home electricity, children’s clothing, licence plates that 
you buy for your automobile, package policies, Home Paks, 
other kinds of insurance, restaurant meals, some other things. 

You had to tax an awful lot of things — I’ll put it that way — to 
lower it to 5 per cent. 
 
I think we should always have a goal to have a reasonable sales 
tax. And at one time it was 7 per cent, then it went to 8, then it 
went to 9, then it went back down to 7, and now it’s at 6. It 
would be nice, ultimately, sometime — I’m not promising this 
for the next budget — if it could be 5 per cent. I think that 
might be a reasonable goal. Or if we were rolling in dough, then 
I guess maybe lower than that. 
 
But what I’m trying to say is the reason we have left it at 6 per 
cent, expanded it somewhat, is to bring about the very large 
income tax cut, and that’s the major thrust of the tax reform. 
We think that that will make Saskatchewan more competitive 
and help us grow the economy. And that’s why we went in that 
direction. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair of 
Committees. I guess we’ll continue to have dialogue on that and 
probably have differing opinion. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, I really don’t have any further comments or 
questions other than what we’ve already put on record, and 
there’s no use to go over that again. So, Mr. Chair, I have no 
further questions on this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1645) 
 
Clause 19 
 
The division bells rang from 4:45 p.m. until 4:55 p.m. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Lorje 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Hillson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 

Nays — 20 
 

Hermanson Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Peters Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Kwiatkowski  
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


