





























































Hansard: June 20, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1971 
 June 20, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to save Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioner will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Young. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about medical services. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Cupar 
Health Centre remains open and physician services are 
retained in the community of Cupar. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Dysart, Cupar, and Lestock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the health care in the province. And the prayer reads 
this way: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by folks from the 
community of Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the future of health care in this province. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Plunkett, Colonsay, Viscount, 
and Young. 
 
I so present. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people in the Lanigan and Watrous areas concerned about 
health care in their area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Imperial and Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people concerned about the crisis 
in health care in our province. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this is signed by people from Allan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about hospital 
closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
From the citizens of Young, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens concerned about health care in our province. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Nokomis Health Centre remains open. 

 
And the petitioners are from the town of Nokomis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
collected on behalf of the youth of Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf 
of the citizens concerned about the retention of medical 
services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Centre remains open and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the communities 
of Dysart and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
hospital closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The signatures on this petition come from Viscount and 
Meacham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to rise on behalf of my constituents and present a petition 
opposed to nursing home fee increases. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the large increases in nursing home 
fees. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by the good citizens of Arborfield, Carrot 
River, Mistatim, and Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition requesting that smoking be banned in all public places. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban on smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions were collected by youth of the province and it 

appears they are all from my riding except for one, who is from 
Pense. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

The amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
Funding for the Swift Current Regional Hospital; 
 
Cellular service in Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, Cudworth, 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea; 
 
The maintenance of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals; 
 
A ban on smoking in public places and workplaces; and 
 
The restoration of the Paddockwood access road. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day 69 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: what are the detailed losses recorded in the 
horse racing at Regina exhibition association and 
Saskatoon Prairieland Exhibition; who are the board 
members and what are their salaries for both of these 
organizations? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall again on day 69 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: how much money did the horse racing industry 
receive in grants in the last fiscal year; who was on the 
advisory board for the horse racing industry, and are they 
appointed? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall on 
day no. 69 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development: how much money has your department 
invested in ethanol plants in Saskatchewan? 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 69 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much profit did 
Saskferco make in the last fiscal year? 

 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly a group sitting in your west gallery. 
 
This group is from the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council and 
includes adult learners studying English as a second language. 
This group is accompanied by Sherry Avinou, Dean Kush, and 
Margaret Campbell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council does a great 
deal of work with ESL (English as a second language) and in 
many other ways helps with new Canadians — not only right in 
Moose Jaw but in the surrounding area — make their transition 
to life in Saskatchewan and Canada as smooth as possible. 
 
And I’m very pleased to welcome you here this afternoon and 
hope you enjoy watching the proceedings. And I would like all 
members of the House to welcome you here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Opening of Booth Siding Terminal 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some great 
agriculture news for the people in the Raymore area. 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has officially opened its 
state-of-the-art, high-throughput facility at Booth Siding, six 
kilometres west of Raymore, Saskatchewan on beautiful 
Highway No. 15. 
 
The Booth Siding Terminal has a grain-handling capacity of 
27,800 tonnes including 16,300 tonnes of condo storage, and 
the capacity to clean grain to export standards. 
 
This adds up to positive progress for farmers in the area and 
positive progress for the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. The 
opening of Booth Siding Terminal is an important step in Sask 
Wheat Pool’s expansion strategy that will help shape the next 
century of agri-business in Western Canada. 
 
The terminal is possible through the co-operation and 
involvement between the community and Sask Wheat Pool. 
This is another important example of hard-working people 
building on the strengths of this great province the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Author Publishes New Book 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
importance of citizenship and a love for Canada is the theme 
behind Weyburn author Joanne Bannatyne-Cugnet’s new book 
From Far and Wide which was launched this past weekend in 
Weyburn. 
 
Joanne Bannatyne-Cugnet is the author of the much loved 
books A Prairie Alphabet and A Prairie Year. 
 

The illustrator in Joanne’s new book is Song Nan Zhang who is 
originally from China. He lived under the dictatorship of Mao 
Tsi-tung and so his personal story is one of escaping oppression 
and of his love of Canada and freedom. His illustrations are 
wonderful. 
 
Joanne Bannatyne-Cugnet has put Weyburn on the map and 
we’d like to congratulate her for another great accomplishment. 
And we look forward to many more exciting books from this 
great author. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Week 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 
House on behalf of my colleagues to recognize ALS Week. 
ALS stands for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and is more 
commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease. 
 
It is a progressive, fatal, neuromuscular disease afflicting many 
members of our society. Though people afflicted with ALS 
suffer from rapid physical deterioration, their senses and minds 
remain unaffected. 
 
ALS does not discriminate. It affects men and women equally 
and can occur at any age. Though the likelihood of ALS 
occurrence becomes more likely as a person ages, those in the 
prime of their life are just as vulnerable to the disease. 
 
Ninety per cent of those who have ALS have no family history 
of the disease. Only 10 per cent of the cases can be classified as 
inherited ALS. 
 
Right now there is no cure for ALS, nor are there any successful 
treatments for slowing down or combatting the symptoms. 
Though research has improved our understanding of this 
disease and has yielded many breakthroughs, more research is 
still needed in order to find ways of treating ALS. 
 
My colleagues and I are wearing these cornflowers as a symbol 
of our solidarity with those who suffer from ALS. We realize 
that it is not only those who have the disease that suffer; their 
families, loved ones, and others involved in their lives suffer as 
well. 
 
Finally I want to commend the ALS society for the fine job they 
do in educating the public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Special Olympics Developmental 
Summer Games 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the city of Estevan hosted the Saskatchewan Special 
Olympics Developmental Summer Games. Over 200 gifted 
athletes arrived from all over the province for competitions. 
 
At the opening ceremonies, Rory Allen touched everyone’s 
heart with the kindnesses he showed to these special people 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

during his tribute to Elvis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed meeting many of the athletes as they 
spent their weekend focusing on developmental skills, 
teamwork, friendship, and fun. I would like to congratulate all 
of the athletes and volunteers on this huge success. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biggar Summer Musical 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — A few days ago we were told about 
Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan which takes place just a brisk 
swim across the river from my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when you have finished brushing up on your Shakespeare, I 
have another summer theatrical suggestion for you and all 
members — this time, the place I was born in, Biggar, the town 
that put New York on the map. 
 
In fact, this summer extravaganza is called, New York is Big . . . 
But This Is Biggar — the Musical. It opens off-Broadway at the 
historic Majestic Theatre on Main Street in Biggar on July 27. 
So if you rush, you should be able to get a ticket. 
 
In the grand Saskatchewan tradition, Mr. Speaker, this 
production about the history of Biggar is truly a co-operative 
community effort. It is sponsored by the Biggar Museum and 
Gallery, with the generous support of the Canada Millennium 
Partnership Program. 
 
The play is written and directed by Biggar native son, Tom 
Bentley-Fisher, better known for his years as director of 
Saskatoon’s 25th Street Theatre. He and composer Angie 
Tysseland have written a number of songs soon to be on the 
charts, including one about the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) 
and William Hodgins Biggar, for whom the town is named. 
 
Six well-known actors with a huge supporting cast of singers, 
actors, and dancers from the community will keep our toes 
tapping and our senses tingling. This is one not to miss, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lights off at the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday when I 
spoke on SaskPower I related a story that one of my two 
socialist friends often likes to tell about Tommy Douglas’s 
pride about rural electrification, in spite of the fact that other 
provinces managed to achieve the same things without the 
socialist hoards waving the Regina Manifesto. 
 
But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we finally saw some competition in 
SaskPower, and today the lights went off in this building. It 
seems the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) couldn’t get it right when 
they had a monopoly, and they can’t get it right when they’re in 
competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hearing Assistance Service for Visitors 
to the Legislative Building 

 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, good things continue to happen. I 
want to take just a minute to congratulate Lorraine deMontigny 
and her staff at visitor services, as well as to congratulate Mr. 
George Thomas of the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
Services. 
 
What’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is visitor services now have a 
special service for people who are deaf and hard of hearing, and 
four different technical fixes for visitor services. So if someone 
comes to the Legislative Building and wants to have a guided 
tour we can assist people who are hard of hearing now. It is 
wonderful that they have just purchased the Easy Listener 
System, Mr. Speaker — microphones, radio waves, transmitters 
and so on. 
 
It’s through small, sensitive acts such as this that public 
servants of Saskatchewan, and indeed all the people of 
Saskatchewan, have gained a reputation for courtesy, 
co-operation, and consideration. Mr. Speaker, again I 
congratulate George Thomas for his suggestion to improve 
visitor services and to Lorraine and her crew for implementing 
it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker. the Western Canada Farm 
Progress Show is being held in Regina this week. This show is a 
high calibre exposition of dryland farming expertise, 
technology, and equipment that attracts exhibitors and visitors 
to Regina from around the world. 
 
It serves as the place for more than 700 companies to display a 
wide range of new products and expertise. It’s a showcase for 
Saskatchewan’s dryland farm implement manufacturers who 
have helped to diversify the agricultural economy. 
 
The exhibitors demonstrate the latest in agricultural technology, 
but also products for the modern farm home and even antique 
farm implements. 
 
The Farm Progress Show helps to sell the Canadian agri-food 
industry to the world. Each year the number of foreign visitors 
increases, with a record 397 visitors from 36 countries attending 
last year. The International Business Centre provides a link 
between international buyers who attend the show, and 
Canadian exporters looking to move into foreign markets. 
 
Each year the Farm Progress Show contributes $50 million in 
export sales to the Canadian economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Exhibition Association and all the staff 
of the Western Canada Farm Progress Show are to be 
commended for the success of this event in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), all citizens of Saskatchewan to attend this show. 
Thank you. 
 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, has 
Dutch Lerat or SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
donated to any political parties or campaigns in the last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the 
member is talking about issues that I stated yesterday would be 
addressed in the auditing process. I can tell them today a team 
of auditors, including the Provincial Auditor, has been 
assembled and the audit process is underway. 
 
The audit team, as I stated yesterday, will review all aspects of 
the issues identified by the normal audit review processes, and 
it will review the systems and controls and actions taken by 
SIGA, including its CEO (chief executive officer), board of 
directors, and key staff. 
 
I’m not prepared to discuss those details or the status of the 
audit process. That would interfere with the audit team’s ability 
to do its work, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell the member that the 
audit team is expected to be completing their work by the end 
of this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
over the past year Dutch Lerat received $360,000 in expense 
money. There were virtually no receipts, so we really have no 
idea where any of this money went. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier’s 1999 election return shows a 
$500 contribution from Mr. Lerat and another $500 contribution 
from Florence Lerat. To the Deputy Premier: did Dutch Lerat 
use SIGA money to contribute to your election campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Lerat, who is 
Dutch’s mother, lives in the riding of Elphinstone and has been 
a supporter of the New Democratic Party as I understand, for 
some time. I don’t know the amount that they would have 
donated to the campaign, if they donated any. I will check on 
that. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Lerat’s mother lives in the 
riding and is an active participant in elections over the years — 
not just last election, but for a number of elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again to 
the Deputy Premier. What assurance can you give us that the 
money that Dutch Lerat contributed to your election campaign 
did not come from the $360,000 in unauthorized expenses 
discovered by the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to make it clear to the 
member opposite who raises the name of an individual, an 
elderly woman in my riding, I’m sure without consulting with 
her, without consulting with her, I just want to make it very 
clear — the Elphinstone executive and our party have gone to 

great lengths to include Aboriginal and First Nations people in 
our executive and in our campaigns. 
 
And I want to make it clear to the member opposite, if you’re 
saying that either Mr. Lerat or his mother, Ms. Lerat, have 
given money inappropriately, say it outside of the House. 
Because I’ll say to you, I will defend the involvement of First 
Nations people in my riding executive. 
 
And I’ll tell you as well, if you believe there is wrongdoing, go 
outside of the House, report it to the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), but don’t hide in here and make your 
accusations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now confirmed 
that the Deputy Premier did receive money from Mr. Dutch 
Lerat. 
 
What’s even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is his Liberal 
partners got money directly from SIGA. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal’s 1999 annual return shows a contribution of $1,779 
from SIGA. 
 
To the Minister responsible for Gaming: why is SIGA donating 
to the Liberal Party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to get 
into who gave money to whom, I want to challenge the member 
opposite to explain as well why Conrad Black gave $75,000 to 
your political party. 
 
But I want to go back to your earlier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The question’s been 
asked; kindly allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in asking his question 
in his preamble, went on the attack of the Lerat family in my 
riding, a family that has lived in the area of Elphinstone for a 
number of years. 
 
I say to the member opposite, if you have any evidence that the 
money that was donated in the Elphinstone riding from Dutch 
Lerat’s mom, or from Dutch himself, I challenge you to go 
outside of the House, make those accusations. And if you have 
any evidence, you have a responsibility not to play politics here, 
but to report it to the RCMP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, you know perhaps better than anyone else that SIGA 
profits are supposed to go 50 per cent to the First Nations fund, 
25 per cent to the associated entities fund, and 25 per cent to the 
General Revenue Fund. I don’t see anything about the Liberal 
Party getting a cut. 
 
To the Liberal leader: do you think your party should be 
accepting donations from SIGA, and will you return these 
contributions to the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 
 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad and it’s 
unfortunate that the members opposite are playing this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s sad and it’s regrettable 
that that member is trying to play this kind of politics with casinos 
that provide jobs for 1,100 people in this province; provide 
economic benefits to communities in which they are located; and, 
as he states himself, provides benefits to charities and social 
activities throughout this province. Very regrettable that he 
chooses to go this direction. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would talk to the people of the province 
through the member’s question to say that issues like this are 
going to be addressed in the normal course of the review 
process we have underway. We have a team of auditors 
assembled, including the Provincial Auditor. That process is 
now underway. 
 
I’m feeling very saddened by the member trying to interfere 
with the audit team’s ability to do their work. I would 
encourage him not to do that with this process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Gaming minister. Mr. Speaker, yesterday we 
asked the minister what she knew about the internal 
management of SIGA. And what does the minister say? 
“Politically we’re not responsible.” Those were her exact 
words: “Politically we’re not responsible.” Isn’t that a typical 
NDP response? 
 
Madam Minister, the fact is you are responsible for SIGA, and 
yesterday you couldn’t answer a single question about SIGA’s 
financial operations. Madam Minister, you are responsible for 
ensuring SIGA is run properly. It was your negligence that led 
to this mess. Why are you refusing to take responsibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
knows that it’s Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
that has a statutory obligation and a legal requirement to 
regulate gaming in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not a minister’s responsibility to play politics 
with that legal responsibility vested to the authority. As the 
regulator, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming is doing what it 
must do. Please let them do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We expect compliance, as I said yesterday, just as we expect 
any other licensee to comply. Compliance is not negotiable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention to the member opposite that Liquor and 
Gaming Authority must . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the hon. member from 
Rosthern to kindly allow the minister to be heard. Hon. Minister 
of Liquor and Gaming, complete your answer. 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t see 
you on your feet that quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was mentioning that the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority has the legal and the statutory 
requirement to regulate gaming. They are the regulator. I won’t 
speculate about the compliance measures they’re taking, but 
they do have that responsibility and requirement. 
 
I also say that I’m not the person to go in and do the detailed 
auditing of any organization in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a long speech 
— not much in content — but . . . nonetheless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says she is not responsible for SIGA’s 
financial procedures. That’s not what the Provincial Auditor 
says. In fact, the 1999 Spring Report of the Provincial Auditor 
has an entire section of steps the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
should have taken to ensure SIGA is being run properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the auditor said: 
 

The Liquor and Gaming Authority’s rules and procedures 
to regulate and monitor SIGA’s operation need 
improvement. 
 

Then he made eight specific recommendations for the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority to follow. 
 
What steps have you taken, Madam Minister, to implement the 
auditor’s 1999 recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
would know, and it would be tabled by the Authority, that all of 
those issues were addressed by the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority and outlined in detail what steps were being taken, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As in any auditing process, particularly of an economic engine 
that is fairly new to this province, we are taking our 
responsibility seriously. As the auditor points out, anything that 
could be done to strengthen the integrity of that economic 
engine and that process, we comply with and we follow his 
suggestions. We also tell the people of this province what we’re 
doing to make certain that that occurs. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has repeatedly stated 
that she is not responsible for the internal financial controls at 
SIGA. She says her responsibility only started after she 
received reports of irregularities from the Provincial Auditor. 
 
However, that’s not what the auditor says. In 1999 the 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

Provincial Auditor recommended that the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority should work with SIGA to establish an internal audit 
function at SIGA — an internal audit function, Madam 
Minister. That means your responsibility started well before the 
Provincial Auditor looked at the books. 
 
Madam Minister, what steps have you taken in the past year to 
ensure SIGA established an internal audit procedure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
mentioned to the member opposite that when the auditor does 
his reporting, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
takes those very seriously. It’s my responsibility to oversee the 
measures that they take to respond. They respond to me in 
detail in how they are working together in co-operation with an 
organization to comply with the auditor’s requests. 
 
Some of the work outlined is saying that we are taking steps 
and progress had occurred, and others say we have completed 
those. That is all a matter of public record. She has chosen to 
use the first part of the public record and not look at the 
responses that were provided by Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, if 
SIGA had had a proper internal audit process in place, Dutch 
Lerat could never have taken $360,000 in expense claims 
without receipts. The Provincial Auditor says it was your job to 
ensure that internal audit was in place and you failed. 
 
Madam Minister, you say you are now taking steps to tighten 
up SIGA’s financial procedures. Well you’re just a little bit late. 
Why didn’t you take these steps a year ago when the Provincial 
Auditor first recommended it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, she’s 
outlining what the Provincial Auditor said to us. She has chosen 
to disregard the work of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority to address the auditor’s concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are always prepared to look at the auditor’s 
recommendations as he brings them forward to ensure the 
integrity of the gaming industry in this province. This is no 
different. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you’re working with another 
organization, you put forward the recommendations, you are 
assured that the recommendations are going to be worked out. 
And, Mr. Speaker, yes, something that was brought to my 
attention last Wednesday says to me — not from speculation, 
not from anything they might pick up, Mr. Speaker — but from 
our Provincial Auditor, here are the concerns, he says. There are 
twofold concerns here; you need to address those. We began 
that work immediately to address those issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says the 
Liquor and Gaming Authority receives monthly revenue and 
expense reports from SIGA. The actual results are then 
compared to budgeted results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this just begs the question: how did the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority miss $30,000 a month of unauthorized and 
unbudgeted expenses? How did you miss that? 
 
Madam Minister, you are responsible and you weren’t minding 
the store. Madam Minister, you approved SIGA’s budget. You 
received monthly expense reports. Dutch Lerat was making 
$1,000 a day in unauthorized expense claims. How on earth did 
you miss this for an entire year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of the 
events, as the Provincial Auditor would also know that, KPMG, 
the auditor for SIGA — the auditor of record for SIGA — 
presented very early on in the working paper stages the 
concerns that they had. Very quickly they alerted people to take 
action, and the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
moved, as I mentioned in my statement, to take serious steps to 
address the concerns outlined to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if anything, very quickly we wanted to let people 
know what we were doing in response to the serious concerns. 
If anything, Mr. Speaker, the auditing processes — as we have 
them in place — picked this up; they alerted us, and we acted 
swiftly to comply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
minister says she’s not responsible. The NDP set up casino 
gambling in this province; the NDP signed the SIGA 
agreement; the NDP reviews SIGA’s expense reports every 
month — but, of course, they’re not responsible. 
 
They’re not responsible for blowing $10 million on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company); they’re 
not responsible for blowing $10 million on Channel Lake; 
they’re not responsible for blowing $3 million in Guyana; and 
they’re not responsible for this latest mess — it’s always 
somebody else’s fault. 
 
Madam Minister, you clearly are responsible. You reviewed the 
books every month. You were supposed to set up an internal 
audit procedure. Why weren’t you doing your job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that I am 
responsible for the oversight of the regulator to make certain 
that they are carrying out their responsibility. The 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority also have 
responsibility. Neither group, neither myself nor the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, have done other 
than to be the regulators of gaming in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As the regulators we are doing what we must do. We expect 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

compliance. We expect that of any licensee in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Compliance is not negotiable. 
 
I won’t speculate on what measures we’ll be taking to have that 
compliance occur because it compromises Liquor and Gaming 
Authority’s ability to do that, to provide the strategies to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she chooses again to use the front part of a 
statement, does not complete the statement that I used . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Construction Industry Union Legislation 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday you received a letter from the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth. Mr. Premier, the 
Alliance is asking for an emergency meeting to discuss the 
NDP’s plan of forced unionization and they are asking you to 
put the brakes on your plan to force unionization of the 
construction industry. 
 
According to the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth, 
Bill 59, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act, 2000 will indeed force construction 
companies to unionize and send a strong negative message to 
the rest of the country — Saskatchewan is not open for 
business. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you agree to meet this week with the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth and will you 
agree to dump Bill 59 before it creates yet another NDP 
economic disaster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this question 
— not the specific question of the meeting but surrounding the 
proposed legislation — has been asked many, many times and 
has been answered many, many times very adequately by the 
Minister of Labour. 
 
This is legislation which is not disjunctive or in nonconformity 
with the legislation that exists elsewhere in Canada. It is in fact 
with conformity with respect to the proper labour relations laws 
of Canada. 
 
With respect to the meetings, the letter that he raises, I frankly 
haven’t seen this request run across my desk at this point. I’ll 
consider it as soon as I get a chance to get back to the office and 
take a look at it. But I have to indicate too, that probably by this 
stage in the game, there’s not much that can be added to the 
answers and the reason as to why we’re doing this other than 
what the Minister of Labour has said so eloquently over the 
weeks previous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Premier 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth 
represents 65 per cent of all businesses in Saskatchewan. They 

are saying the NDP’s destructive legislation will force 
unionization and stifle economic growth. They say the Labour 
minister has been making statements that may confuse members 
of the legislature and the public. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth 
is telling you that your legislation stinks. They want a meeting 
with you to discuss NDP labour policies the alliance says are 
not good for the business community and not good for the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you prepared to listen to the business 
community in Saskatchewan? Will you admit your plan to force 
unionization on the construction industry is bad public policy. 
And will you agree to shelve Bill No. 59 until you have 
legitimately consulted with the business community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s 
question is predicated on a strong difference in ideology 
between his party and the coalition government. And our 
position is that the business community and the trade union 
community must work together in a true partnership in order to 
make sure that the economic activity of Saskatchewan is 
enhanced and that it grows. 
 
We think that our labour laws and the facts indicate that it’s 
working. We have 14,000 more people working by the end of 
May of 2000 compared to year 1999 — 14,000. Highest 
number of people working in the province of Saskatchewan 
since the formation of this province in entering into 
Confederation in 1905. And the labour laws were obviously a 
part of this. 
 
So what we want is to have balanced, fair labour laws. We think 
this particular legislation does exactly that. That is not what the 
hon. member believes in; that is obviously not what the group 
that he speaks for believes in; it’s however what we believe in. 
We have a difference of agreement here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, the last thing we need from you and your NDP 
cronies are more worn out NDP slogans. What we need is a 
government that listens. 
 
The Alliance for Economic Growth represents some of the most 
respected organizations in Saskatchewan — the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Independent Businesses, the Prairie Implement Manufacturing 
Association, the Saskatchewan Construction Association, the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council, and the Canadian Restaurant and 
Food Services Association. Mr. Premier, the list goes on and 
on. 
 
Will you demonstrate that you are listening. Will you agree to 
meet with the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth. 
And will you agree to dump your destructive plan to force 
unionization in the construction industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can 
continue to keep asking. It’s his right. It’s my right to continue 
to keep answering. And I’ve said to the hon. member opposite, 
we have a difference with respect to the legislation. 
 
I’m advised by the Minister of Labour that either herself or 
somebody in the Department of Labour has met with nearly a 
hundred times on a hundred occasions, a hundred occasions, in 
discussing this Bill, in discussing with individual members who 
have concerns about the legislation. So there has been 
widespread consultation. 
 
But the proof of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that there were 
more jobs created in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan since Confederation in 1905; more than when 
that group was in office, more by a country mile. More 
permanent jobs, less part-time jobs, more population, more 
diversification, more value-added, lower taxes. This economy 
in this province is growing, thanks to the entire climate in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth 
is asking you to set aside the destructive forced unionization 
legislation until your government has held real consultation 
with the construction industry. 
 
This afternoon this legislature will be dealing with Bill 59, The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000. 
The Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion to put this 
dangerous and destructive legislation on hold for six months 
while the government completes some real consultation with 
the construction industry. 
 
Mr. Premier, will your government support this motion and will 
you commit today to a full round of meaningful consultation 
with members of the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic 
Growth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think that any 
objective observer of the Saskatchewan economic scene and in 
the aspect of industrial relations, must testify to the fact this is 
probably been — talking about destructive, the old policy of 
double-breasting — one of the most destructive programs and 
policies around. It has not been solved by anybody over the last 
number of years. It has created confusion, both on the working 
side of working men and women and on the employer side. It 
exists in no other province except Saskatchewan. It was 
introduced by the Devine Conservative administration and with 
it sowed the seeds of division of which this hon. member 
complains. 
 
Now the answer to the matter is simply this. We want 
everybody to work together. We represent government, we 
represent business, we represent farmers. We try to have the 
common weal of the province of Saskatchewan uppermost in 
the administration of government. 
 
So the answer is, here, we believe this legislation is balanced. 
You people can advance it. I know that you believe in right to 
work. I know you believe in Alabama North. We don’t. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 219 — The Property Rights Act 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 219, The Property Rights Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 229 — The Children’s Law Amendment Act, 2000 

Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur le droit de l’enfance 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 229, The Children’s Law Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Legislative Building Access 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I 
have a statement to make. 
 
Yesterday, an allegation was made during statements by 
members which I feel must be addressed. The subject of the 
member for Rosthern’s statement concerned accessibility to the 
Legislative Building, and the role played by security staff in 
carrying out policy. 
 
The security of all that transpires in the Legislative Building is 
the responsibility of the Speaker and the Board of Internal 
Economy. This includes ensuring that there is a safe 
environment for all individuals who work within the precincts, 
while maintaining reasonable access to visitors, organizations, 
and others who wish to visit or carry out business in this 
building. 
 
Since the start of this year there have been many occasions 
where individuals and groups have been permitted to use the 
Legislative Building as the venue for publicizing their opinions. 
Where they have abided by the security policy set by the Board 
of Internal Economy, they have been permitted to proceed. 
Where they have not, it has been the responsibility of the staff 
of the Sergeant-at-Arms to take the appropriate steps to uphold 
the security policy. 
 
The member for Rosthern’s comments yesterday can be 
construed as questioning the impartiality of the security staff in 
upholding this policy. I wish to reiterate, hon. members, 
comments I made in a ruling on April 17, 2000 in which I 
cautioned members not to attack those individuals who are not 
able to respond. 
 
Reflections on the impartiality of the Speaker or the staff of this 
Assembly impugn the spirit of rule 32. As your Speaker I am 
not concerned about how such comments may offend me 
personally. It is, however, my duty to protect the integrity and 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

impartiality of the legislative staff and the Office of the 
Speaker. These individuals may not participate in the debate, 
and thus cannot answer any allegations made by a member on 
the floor. 
 
The member is correct in identifying the Speaker as being 
responsible for the administration of the Assembly. The 
member should also be aware that it is not in order to raise 
issues respecting the Speaker’s administrative responsibilities 
on the floor of the Assembly. 
 
I refer members in that respect to Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, 
paragraph 119, which expresses this long-standing practice, and 
I quote: 
 

If information relating to matters under the jurisdiction of 
the Speaker is required, it must be obtained privately. 

 
The reason for this practice, as I noted earlier, is that the 
Speaker cannot participate in debate or respond to questions in 
the House. 
 
Commenting publicly in this Assembly is not the appropriate 
forum in which to raise such concerns. Members are welcome 
to meet with me in my office at any time to discuss concerns 
they may have with respect to administration of the Assembly. 
 
It is my intention to raise the hon. member’s concerns later this 
afternoon during my weekly meeting with House leaders. I 
invite the member from Rosthern, and any other interested 
member, to join us. A meeting such as this is the appropriate 
forum in which to address these types of issues. 
 
I wish to remind all hon. members, these are your rules, not 
those of the Chair. In my experience, it has always been prudent 
to canvass all sides of an issue before drawing conclusions. I 
encourage all members to put forward a positive example for 
the citizens of this great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an open 
and accountable government, Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely 
happy to table a response to question no. 183. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 183 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the Table officers but on behalf of the government, 
we’re extremely happy to table a response to question 184. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 184 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, being an 
open and accountable government, we’re extremely happy to 
table an answer to no. 185, question 185. 
 
The Speaker: — Answer to question 185 is tabled. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, we are 
extremely pleased and happy to table a response to question no. 
186. 
 
The Speaker: — Answer to question 186 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert question no. 187. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I would 
move that we go to government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion by 
the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 65 — The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2000 be now read second 
time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today on Bill No. 65, The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2000. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a continuation 
of the trend being developed by this government of less 
accountability, less acceptance of responsibility, as we have 
seen in the last few days from one of the ministers of the 
Crown. 
 
They want to participate in the operations of government, Mr. 
Speaker, but they do not want to be accountable. And this Bill 
is part of that move to withdraw them from accountability to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are eliminating, Mr. Speaker, the access to direct contact 
with the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. They are supposed 
to be putting in ministers of the Crown on the boards, Mr. 
Speaker, so that there is better control. However, that’s not 
being done for the right reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other items that this Bill does is it 
allows the Crown corporations to get into more and various 
types of businesses without them having to come before the 
legislature or without them having to come before the Crown 
Corporations Committee. It allows the Crowns to expand into 
many other areas that have not traditionally been within that 
Crown’s purview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen in the past, they spin off 
subsidiaries of subsidiaries so that they simply do not have to 
report back to the legislature. And that is exactly what happened 
with Channel Lake. 
 
Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker, was a subsidiary of SaskPower. 
When it lost all the money, they tried to sell it right away so that 
they wouldn’t have to provide a report, Mr. Speaker. Well it 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

was found out about, and the responsibility landed on the laps 
of the government. They simply would not accept that 
responsibility even though they were directly culpable for it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What they did is one of their people that they have put in power 
within the Crown corporations, Jack Messer, was made 
responsible for that but was given the golden handshake in 
leaving the corporation while two other long-time employees of 
SaskPower were forced to shoulder the blame for this 
government’s incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what this Bill continues to do, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have seen that kind of failure to accept responsibility and 
accountability in too many, too many of the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, where the NDP government have 
their fingers and their underlings placed. 
 
We have seen the NST fiasco, Mr. Speaker, where they lost $16 
million on a failed cable company, Mr. Speaker, in Chicago. 
 
We have seen the Channel Lake fiasco where they directly lost 
$5 million — just poof, disappeared into thin air, Mr. Speaker. 
Well $5 million doesn’t just disappear; it ended up some place. 
We don’t even know what the final losses were on Channel 
Lake because they’re ongoing, Mr. Speaker; because they were 
engaged in contracts that they still had to honour, contracts that 
were losing money rapidly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have seen the loss of $13 million in SPUDCO, another one 
of the NDP’s job creation programs, Mr. Speaker — $13 
million lost. 
 
And when people ask, well where’s all this government money 
going, they’re collecting over $6 billion a year — well there’s a 
few of the examples, Mr. Speaker; a few of the examples where 
this government and its members think they are great business 
people. But whenever they get into business, Mr. Speaker, they 
fail. 
 
They fail just as they’re failing to take their responsibilities and, 
Mr. Speaker, accept their responsibilities when they’re 
accountable. But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, that government 
is not a responsible government. That is an unresponsible 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a good many questions we have to ask 
on this particular Bill that can only be dealt with in Committee 
of the Whole. I’m prepared to let it move forward. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 49 — The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Minister of 
Highways introduced this Bill, he used the following words to 
describe it: 

. . . The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 
2000 . . . contains the first set of substantive amendments 
to The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 that was 
passed by this Assembly in 1997. 

 
And listening to his comments, he indicated that the changes 
that had been brought forward were changes recommended by 
the department staff, the legal people associated with the 
Department of Highways, and were essential to the efficient 
running of the department; that some loopholes and some 
oversights which had been inadvertently left out of the original 
legislation would be addressed with this amendment. 
 
(1430) 
 
This Bill ensures, according to the minister, that the department 
is not held necessarily liable for injuries of users of highway 
rights of way, even if they are operating on the authority of a 
permit. Further, the minister went on to say, we will ensure to 
the best of our ability that users of the rights of the way are not 
placed in unsafe situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that particular comment very unusual in 
light of what’s happened here over the last several weeks. 
Safety appears to have become the common theme of the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation — at least as far as 
the topic of highway conditions in Saskatchewan has developed 
over the last several weeks. 
 
We have heard many times of safety related issues that have 
been brought to our attention and to the attention of this House 
by people throughout the province who have suffered, frankly, 
rather serious and misfortunate incidents because of crumbling 
highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safety like so many of our other maintenance 
experience is being given priority billing, but it’s become a fact 
that it’s a little too little too late. And I think that for many 
people who have suffered harm to their vehicles or personal 
injury, damage of various amounts, that the issue of safety has 
hit home literally not just figuratively. Safety is an important 
element of our confidence in the highway system and the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, simply do not have that 
confidence any longer. 
 
I’m talking about safety for the owners of vehicles who are 
driving down the highways at any time of the day or night who 
hit unmarked potholes, who hit depressions in the road, who hit 
areas where there has been heavy traffic and grooves have 
formed in the highway and loss of control ultimately results. 
 
I’m talking about people who’ve had damage to their 
windshields, I’m talking about people who’ve had incidents as 
serious as rollover and, in some cases, death. 
 
Safety is an important feature but it’s coming too late for many 
people of this province already. 
 
The issue of safety is absolutely critical to the transference of 
children especially on school buses on their way to and from 
their day at their local school. What about the safety of those 
children? How is that going to be addressed? Is it as crucial to 
this government as they would indicate? 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

I can say as a matter of fact that the people in the Climax area 
about 10 days ago indicated that they would no longer expose 
their children to the unsafe conditions of the road down there 
and chose instead to have their children bussed to school on dirt 
roads and grid roads of slightly better condition, rather than risk 
having their children transported to school over the highways. 
 
And what about the safety of individuals who have sustained 
injury from flying pieces of pavement? What about the young 
lady from Hazlet who, just last week in this House we were 
informed, suffered eye damage because of flying glass when 
pavement hit her windshield although she was stopped at an 
intersection. 
 
How much more serious would her injuries have been if she had 
been moving at that time? What about the many other cases of 
similar types of incidents that we have heard? I’ve read into the 
record, I’ve spoken on several occasions of those very types of 
things that have happened in this province. 
 
Safety is an absolutely paramount consideration, but I feel the 
government of the day has done a very poor job in being able to 
speak to the safety issue. The record of this government in 
terms of safety on the highways is less than what we would 
hope for under any ordinary circumstance. 
 
I think it’s curious, Mr. Speaker, that the government doesn’t 
want to be held liable for injuries to users of the highways, 
according to the comments made by the minister when he first 
introduced this amendment, but yet it says that safety is the 
highest priority. 
 
It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that avoiding responsibility is 
really the government’s highest priority. And I think that this 
amendment . . . this particular Act amending The Highways and 
Transportation Act, 1997 speaks loudly of that attempt to avoid 
responsibility. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there is the issue of the awarding of 
contracts that is addressed in this particular amendment. In his 
comments to the House on the introduction of this Act, the 
Minister responsible for Highways said that: 
 

There are circumstances in which a contract should not be 
awarded to the lowest bidder other than for reasons of 
expediency. 

 
And this Bill, according to the minister, will change that and 
will authorize the minister to seek Lieutenant Governor in 
Council approval in such cases where it might be in the public 
interest. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, ordinarily I can understand the need for 
awarding a contract to someone other than the lowest bidder. 
There will be times without a doubt that the lowest bidder may 
not be the most cost-effective bidder. There may be 
circumstances where the minister would be aware that the 
lowest bid is not going to be able to . . . the lowest bidder is not 
going to be able to meet the contractual obligations that that 
individual has bid on. 
 
I find absolutely no solace in obtaining the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council approval on the basis of, quote, “public interest.” 

Mr. Speaker, behind closed doors the definition of public 
interest may be significantly different than what is normally 
considered public interest in the public domain. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I would advocate strongly, as we look at this piece of 
legislation, that a proper definition of public interest be 
included in the amendments, a definition that is understandable 
and generally recognized to be complete. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, there is the issue of the transportation 
partnership fund. This is a fund that is addressed in The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2000, and it 
seems to me, having read the Act and the explanation that 
accompanies the Act, that this transportation fund is very wide 
open. It’s quite wide-ranging, and I think it’s open-ended to a 
point where there needs to be some serious discussion as to 
what parameters this fund is meant to address. 
 
I have found that there are at least six areas in which funding or 
monies can be entered into the fund and, many more than that, 
areas where money can be taken from the fund. And I guess the 
question I have here is who really is in charge of this fund? Is it 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation or, ultimately, is it 
the Minister of Finance? I think these are some of the issues 
that need to be addressed as we look more closely at this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that highways and transportation 
have become a flashpoint of public concern. It’s no secret that 
people experience on a daily basis the trauma of driving many 
of our roads. It’s no secret that we have an ever building public 
awareness of the failing state of our highways provincially. 
 
It’s no secret, frankly, that our highways are a mess. They’re 
crumbling, they’re decaying, and while the members opposite 
have sat idly by for the last nine years doing absolutely nothing 
about them, we have seen all of the problems suddenly 
skyrocket. It’s as though all the chickens have come home to 
roost at the same time. 
 
It’s not going to take a scientist much time — or a rocket 
scientist, I guess, much time — to figure out that when you go 
for a drive in our province there’s more potholes in our 
highways than there have been in the NDP platform over the 
last nine years. This government needs to ultimately take 
responsibility for the conditions of our roads. Tinkering with 
this Act will address some of the minor problems, but the real 
problems are out on the highways and byways of rural 
Saskatchewan and areas outside of the main urban areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we would be happy to work with the 
government in finding solutions if just once we could hear them 
accept some responsibility for the chaos that exists in this area. 
And over the last nine years that has not yet happened. 
 
The possibility of reverting roads to gravel as a matter of safety 
is unacceptable. What we’re finding is that the people of rural 
Saskatchewan — especially having deemed those highways the 
ultimate lifeline, the single one most important item left to them 
right now in terms of servicing their communities — have 
decided that allowing the roads to go back to gravel is 
completely unacceptable. 
 
On my drive into the city today from my constituency, I heard 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

one individual say, or express his frustration this way: the 
government has pushed us to the final end. It’s time for us to 
start pushing back. 
 
And I think that that kind of attitude indicates very clearly the 
frustration and the level of disdain the people of especially rural 
Saskatchewan hold for this government, because this 
government has for nine years held the people of rural 
Saskatchewan and their roads — as essential as they are — in 
complete contempt. 
 
And I believe that that issue has done more to undermine the 
credibility of this government than anything else among the 
people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several other aspects of this piece of 
legislation that I think we would like to address, but I do believe 
that in fairness much more could be accomplished by dealing 
with this Bill within Committee of the Whole, and so I move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to clarify with the member — is it an 
adjournment of debate or move to committee? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I meant to adjourn to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 52 — The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi 
sur la faune be now read the second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of 
our members have already had an opportunity to speak to Bill 
No. 52. A lot of the concerns that we had around it, I think, 
were very well expressed at that time. 
 
We still do, however, have a number of questions that we would 
like to pursue. These are questions as a result of our 
consultations with stakeholders and individuals and agencies 
that will be impacted by this Bill. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Speaker, we feel that those questions can 
be appropriately responded to in Committee of the Whole. So I 
would therefore refer Bill No. 52 to Committee of the Whole. 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 60 — The 
Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

have the pleasure today to speak to Bill No. 60, The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The protection of our forest is an extremely important issue. 
Our forests are one of the most prestigious natural resources we 
have in Saskatchewan. If harvested to extreme, it takes many 
years to regenerate. 
 
While there can be no denying that the commitment to forestry 
is in place, these amendments, as we read them, give us cause 
for concern. These amendments will give the government more 
control over our forest licences. It’s the control part that we 
have a problem with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly there have been some measures to . . . in place that 
will act as a monitor in this industry. We can’t just . . . we can’t 
have just anyone coming here to harvest our forest products. 
However, these amendments speak to the issue that people are 
tired of hearing, and frankly, do not encourage business or 
growth. Government control is the main concern of this Bill, 
which seeks to allow more of that. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the public and the business 
sector have had enough government control in their lives and 
they have become increasingly suspicious of this government’s 
intentions. A recent story in a local paper indicates a level of 
mistrust people have for this government, and they question 
their alternative motives. 
 
People want to be listened to. They deserve to be listened to. 
Government has a responsibility to do this. They are here to act 
on behalf of the people they represent. 
 
Increasingly enough, Mr. Speaker, this saying says that SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
officials need more time and that public meetings are just the 
first step in what looks to be a very long process. The timeline 
that was mentioned was three or four years. For small business 
owners and the people that will be using this forestland in the 
areas that three or four years is just way too long. 
 
(1445) 
 
Many businesses are encouraged about the government’s power 
to arbitrarily designate large tracts of land as protected. As one 
Calgary spokesman says, and I quote, “Is Saskatchewan open 
for business or not?” 

 
This Bill also has amendments regarding wild rice crops. 
Apparently, there have been problems with wild rice producers 
not paying their fees — fees that this government contends 
were kept low to encourage production. If there is one thing we 
don’t know, it’s the government’s love for fees and fee hikes as 
witnessed in the last budget. 
 
Why aren’t the members opposite asking themselves why wild 
rice producers haven’t been paying fees. Perhaps those fees 
aren’t as low as they may think they are. Perhaps wild rice 
producers aren’t able to pull in as much revenue as they think 
and have had to let their fees and licences lapse. 
 
Also, don’t we have a judicial process in place that would 
address this issue? Instead of looking at those options, this 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

government decides it’s going to confiscate someone’s wild rice 
crop and then dispose of it as they see fit. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases government control in 
a number of areas and that’s the issue that we must take 
exception to. While we remain fully committed to the 
protection of this precious resource, we must also not lose sight 
of the fact that this Bill also indicates a serious lack of respect 
for businessmen and stakeholders. 
 
More consultation and review needs to be done which can be 
done at Committee of the Whole. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move it on to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 63 — The 
Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise in 
the Assembly today to speak to Bill 63, An Act to amend The 
Legal Aid Act. 
 
A number of my colleagues have spoken to the Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, I will keep my remarks brief as we have some specific 
questions on this Bill in committee, except to say that, I guess, 
the introduction of a Bill on legal aid and changes to the legal 
aid system is certainly timely in our province. 
 
It’s a topical piece of legislation. There are a number of people 
both within and without the legal community in our province 
that are talking about legal aid in our province. 
 
There are some specific issues that people have raised with me 
in the course of discussing this. Not the least of which are the 
current legal aid tariff, Mr. Speaker, and the seemingly arbitrary 
decision by various judges to spend money on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan in terms of adjusting the tariff. 
 
And I think all members will agree — regardless of where they 
come from with respect to this Bill — I think all members will 
agree that it is, and should be, the exclusive purview of this 
venerable institution to expend taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And in effect, when we have judges arbitrarily changing the 
legal aid tariff, they in fact are without the accountability that is 
due here. They are making . . . they are expending taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
And so that’s one general concern. Other general concerns arise 
from the overall budget for legal aid. And while that may not be 
directly related to the Bill, we still would like to address 
questions in that regard as well. 
 
And so with that, with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I can 
indicate that we’ll be allowing this Bill to move to Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to be able to tell you and through you to my colleagues that 
it is a pleasure to stand and enter this debate on Bill 59. 
 
But I can’t say that, Mr. Speaker. I can’t make that claim 
because I, along with Saskatchewan small-business men and 
women, along with my colleagues here, with employers, and 
with the majority of construction workers in the province, 
would rather that this Bill never touched the Table of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would have rather that this government did not . . . would 
not have the gall to bring it into this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you would have told the people of this province 
that this government, or any government for that matter, could 
possibly dream up and conceive of something more odious, 
more destructive, and more anti-small-business than the NDP’s 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement to replace it, no one 
would have believed you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But sadly we have underestimated this government’s ability to 
innovate and this government’s ability to create in terms of 
coming up with hurtful, unfair, paternalistic, and needless 
policies that harm our economic future and kill jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately, the rules under which construction 
companies have been operating for the last 20 years — by this 
legislation if it’s rammed through by the members opposite — 
will now be arbitrarily changed overnight by a government 
that’s bent on pleasing the union leadership of this province. 
 
There is a talk show host in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
John Gormley, who recently characterized this attempt to 
mollify union bosses as a wounded animal going home to die, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s a graphic depiction, but if this government continues to 
introduce this kind of legislation, if this government continues 
to attack the men and women that are creating jobs and creating 
wealth in this province through Bills like this, then there will be 
a political death, Mr. Speaker. And it will be an obituary that 
will read of those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They will 
pay a political price for that kind of legislation, that is to be 
sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing that both those who oppose this Bill and 
those who support this Bill agree on, is that it is significant 
legislation. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also fair to say that the 
introduction of any legislation by a government, but especially 
that of a significant nature, should be intended to address some 
major problem or fill some legislative gap. If not, Mr. Speaker, 
then the Bill is significant for all the wrong reasons. And so I 
think it’s time to look at that. 
 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

What major problem in the construction industry, in the 
construction labour relations field, has precipitated this Bill? 
Has the industry been plagued by strikes? What about lockouts, 
have employers been locking out their staff? Have there been an 
inordinate number of unfair labour practices in this industry, or 
grievances, or bitter certification battles? The answer to all of 
those questions is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So why then, why then is the Bill significant? Well, as I said, it 
is significant for all the wrong reasons. Consider what will be 
wrought by the NDP in this legislation. Consider the employees 
of currently non-union companies on whose behalf their 
non-union employers will now be forced to deduct union dues. 
Consider those employees who are laid off, as is often the case 
in a seasonal industry, who then must join a union to be rehired. 
 
And the member for Regina South seems to indicate that he 
believes that when these employees are forced to join a union, 
they’re going to get a pay raise. What he ignores, Mr. Speaker, 
are simply the facts. And the facts are that in this province the 
non-unionized construction industry is often paying wages that 
are higher than union workers are getting in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, consider the employees who will be 
laid off, as is often the case in this seasonal industry, who then 
must rejoin a union to be hired. Mr. Speaker, that is forced 
unionization. 
 
And all of the press releases, and all of the spin doctors, and all 
of the sanctimony by the Minister of Labour cannot change that 
fact. If it walks like a duck, and talks like a duck, it’s a duck, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It is a big, ugly, anti-business, job-killing duck — 
that’s what we’re dealing with here. And, Mr. Speaker . . . and 
Mr. Speaker, consider the sub-trades, the thousands of men and 
women either employed or creating jobs in this sector of our 
economy. 
 
Unionized agreements in this province have sub-contracting 
restrictions which make it illegal for unionized companies to 
hire non-unionized firms. Companies caught by this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, will be forced to abide by the terms of these 
agreements stretching out the long and the destructive arm of 
this particular Bill even to mom and pop operations, small 
business men and women across this province. 
 
How are any of these provisions good for the province of 
Saskatchewan? Will they improve fairness? Will they improve 
labour harmony? Will they create jobs, Mr. Speaker? The 
answer is an absolute and unequivocal no to all of those 
questions. 
 
Will this Bill help the businesses in my community, Mr. 
Speaker? Will it help them create even a single job or to retain 
the jobs they have? This Bill cannot possibly help Frontier 
Construction of Swift Current. It’s of no use to Bridal 
Construction or Riverside Electric or Melhoff Electric. 

McElheran Construction will find no earthly good in this Bill; 
neither will Swift Painting or Payless Painting in the city of 
Swift Current and in the surrounding area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the companies that employs up to 19 
people in Swift Current, Dominion Construction is even 
reconsidering whether it wants to stay in a province that would 
force unionization and implement legislation so harmful to the 
industry. That’s what Dominion Construction has said. They 
have an office in Swift Current that employs 19 people. 
 
And if you question at all whether I and members on this side of 
the House care about those 19 jobs, you need not question it 
because we do and that’s why we’re going to oppose and fight 
against this legislation every step of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So if it is not needed, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
labour peace that has existed in the industry, and if it is of no 
help to either the construction employers in our province or the 
construction workers, who then benefits? Who will be helped 
by the Bill? 
 
Well I would imagine, Mr. Speaker, that NDP fundraisers will 
be helped by this Bill. I would imagine that the quid pro quo for 
this odious legislation is the ongoing financial support of the 
province’s union leadership for the members opposite, for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is the kind of politics that people lined up September 
16 in the province of Saskatchewan to reject. That’s the kind of 
politics members on this side of the House object to. We will 
continue to fight against that kind of politics, Mr. Speaker, that 
buys favour from a government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if my time as an economic developer in this 
province taught me anything at all, it is that the number one 
priority, the number one priority for a new business considering 
a location in the province of Saskatchewan, or for an existing 
business considering expansion, is the business environment. 
That’s what businesses told me when I was an economic 
developer, that they were looking for. They were looking for a 
positive business environment. One of the most important 
considerations in assessing business environment is the labour 
environment, the labour legislation in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in time after time I have dealt with businessmen 
and women who simply could not abide the labour environment 
in the province of Saskatchewan under this NDP government. 
 
This Bill and all of the attendant issues and red tape and 
regulations that have been foisted onto business community by 
this government, be it through Workers’ Comp or occupational 
health and safety or various pieces of labour legislation, too 
often has driven businesses and the jobs they create and the 
taxes they pay out of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we need in this province, Mr. Speaker, is to foster a 
positive business environment, one that encourages 
entrepreneurs, that encourages men and women to stay here, to 
build here, to create jobs here, and yes, to pay taxes here that 
will fund education, health care, and highways, and a 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

responsible social safety net for our province. 
 
We need a government that is more concerned about union 
members than they are about union leaders, Mr. Speaker. We 
need legislation that assumes the best of those who create jobs. 
We need a government that assumes the best of the business 
sector of our province. Legislation that is not grounded in the 
assumption and expectation that these people have some sort of 
agenda against the working men and women of the province. 
 
We need a government that has a vision that sees past where its 
political donations are coming from. We need a cabinet and a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that does not believe that the private 
sector is inherently evil. Because it most assuredly, it most 
assuredly is not. The private sector in our province is the very 
backbone of our economy. Small-business men and women, 
and I include farmers when I mention that category, are the one 
and the only reason that we can afford anything that we treasure 
in this province. 
 
Without them, like those in the construction industry, there 
would be no jobs for Saskatchewan families, no taxes paid to 
fund our schools, no taxes paid to fund our health care system, 
or to pay our nurses, or our teachers, or our social workers. 
They represent the core funding that builds our schools and our 
hospitals and our highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I honestly wonder if the members opposite understand that 
when they draft and present legislation like this. 
 
(1500) 
 
Do they understand that that’s where all of it comes from. It 
doesn’t come from government; it doesn’t appear out of the sky. 
It comes from the business sector. From small-business men 
and women in this province who need the kind of an 
environment . . . who need the kind of an environment that 
fosters and encourages development. That doesn’t have them 
sitting at their desks and examining their options, and deciding 
if this is the place they even want to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could tell you — I could tell you with surety — I 
could tell you with surety that members on this side of the 
House, we understand the importance of a vibrant and healthy 
small-business sector in Saskatchewan. We understand the 
importance of a business environment that is conducive for all 
businesses in the province, be they union or non-union. 
 
And we understand the importance of a government that will 
stand firm against those who would have it introduce legislation 
that is clearly intended to favour the very few number of 
businesses in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a solemn and a serious duty that we have to represent those 
job and wealth creators. To consider the impact of each and 
every measure that’s brought forward by this government 
against those measures. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is fundamentally flawed. It’s 
flawed on every level. And today we heard from the member 
for Redberry Lake of the latest missive from the Saskatchewan 
Alliance for Economic Growth who have some very serious 
concerns about this piece of legislation. 

Now the government may seek to minimize this criticism that 
they had from the alliance. They may write it off as one or two 
groups in the province who oppose this legislation. And that is 
why, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worth reading a list of those who 
have endorsed the position of the Saskatchewan Alliance for 
Economic Growth, who are simply asking to meet with the 
Premier. Who are only asking to meet with the Premier and talk 
about the Bill and possibly delay it until that consultation can 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Saskatchewan Alliance for 
Economic Growth and the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, the North Saskatoon Business Association, the Prairie 
Implements Manufacturers Association, the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association, the Saskatoon and 
District Chamber of Commerce, the Lloydminster Chamber of 
Commerce, the Estevan Chamber of Commerce, the Moose Jaw 
Construction Association, Prince Albert Construction 
Association, Regina Construction Association, Saskatoon 
Construction Association, the road builders, the Lloydminster 
Construction Association, the electrical contractors, general 
contractors, the Mechanical Contractors Association, the Merit 
Contractors Association, the Saskatchewan Masonry Institute, 
the Saskatchewan drywall and acoustical association, 
Saskatchewan steel fabricators and erectors, Saskatchewan 
Construction Labour Relations Council, Saskatchewan 
professional painting contractors, the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council, and the Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices 
Association. 
 
I can only imagine how many employees, how many families, 
how many small businessmen and women in our province are 
represented by the list of people I just read. 
 
And what are they asking for, Mr. Speaker? All that they ask is 
that this Premier and that minister would meet with them — just 
to meet with them to discuss their concerns and see if the Bill 
can be delayed until that could happen. 
 
We asked the question today in question period and the answer 
was no. We don’t have time for the thousands of families that 
are represented by those associations. We don’t have 30 
minutes, we don’t have 30 minutes in our busy day to meet with 
the business community of this province that are concerned 
about this Bill. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, soon — and very soon — the Saskatchewan 
people, the Saskatchewan voters aren’t going to have any time 
for this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And it’s going to start on the June 26 down in 
Wood River. They’re going to send a message loud and clear 
that they don’t have five minutes for your kind of arrogance. 
They won’t have five minutes for your sanctimony. And they 
won’t have five minutes for your misguided legislation like Bill 
No. 59, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is flawed on so many levels. It lets down 
our construction workers. It lets down our construction 
employers in this province. And it lets down taxpayers as a 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

whole as it risks still a greater exodus of well-paying and 
meaningful jobs in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues cannot and will not support 
this Bill. We are not prepared to let construction workers down. 
We’re not prepared to let construction employers down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can summarize Bill 59 thusly — it is wrong 
for working people, it is wrong for their employers, and it is 
wrong for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we won’t be 
supporting it today. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member 
for Lloydminster: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all of the words 
after the word “that” and substituting the following 
therefore: 
 
Bill 59, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act be now read a second time, but that it be 
read a second time this day six months hence. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wanted to 
highlight a couple of things to this Assembly as seconder of this 
motion. I think it’s very important that there be a delay in the 
discussion and the voting of this particular Bill. 
 
I’m really concerned about the consequence of this particular Bill 
because in the Lloydminster area, as you could see was listed 
under the part of the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic 
Growth, one of my constituents has a real serious problem in that 
he in fact has gone through a very, very contentious union 
certification. 
 
This particular employer, with a union staff, is now no longer 
eligible or no longer competitive to bid on any of the projects in 
the oil industry and particularly the upgrader. The result of that, 
that particular certification means that that employer is no longer 
a constituent of mine. He’s no longer in business. He’s moved 
his business across the border just because of the fact that those 
employees that were certified now made him non-competitive. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the Government 
Deputy Whip on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly, three union leaders who happen to have walked in, 
in a rather opportune time to hear the opposition try to kill a 
very progressive labour Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to introduce Bob Bymoen, who is the Chair of the 

Public Service bargaining unit here in Saskatchewan, and two 
other members of their negotiating committee, Cory Hendriks 
and Joanne Hubick. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
them to all the members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would like to remind all hon. 
members, but particularly the hon. member for Regina 
Dewdney, in this instance, in introduction of guests, we are not 
to involve guests in the galleries in any debate that is on the 
floor. 
 
And I ask all hon. members to honour this in the future. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
example that I just alluded to earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
. . . fit right into something that I found very interesting. When I 
was in my constituency this weekend, I noticed a bumper 
sticker that was on a vehicle, an Alberta licensed vehicle that 
was in the construction trade. His bumper sticker read 
Construction — Alberta’s largest employer. 
 
I wish that we’d had the opportunity to be able to have this 
particular bumper sticker here in Saskatchewan. In fact, 
Alberta’s biggest employer is probably the biggest employer of 
Saskatchewan people that have crossed that border. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact it gives me great pleasure to 
speak as a seconder to this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
highly unusual, at least it has been for the last few years, to 
move a so-called, six-month hoist motion. In fact up until a 
little while ago I didn’t even know what a hoist motion was. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do know one thing. That this 
government, the government across here, has taken a step, and 
that we on this side as official opposition are going to try and 
stop this. The government over there is trying to hoist up the 
construction industry and hang them out to dry. 
 
However the opposition party feels strongly that this is simple, 
very bad legislation and has not been the subject of consultation 
with the construction industry which it will have a huge impact 
upon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have been asking the minister for 
months now why this is going ahead, for what reason. And she 
has been giving us many, many wrong answers. If the answers 
we’ve gotten in this Assembly are any indication of the type of 
discussion she has had with the construction industry, I can see 
how they feel there has not been proper consultation. 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

We want to offer positive, forward-thinking solutions that are 
practical, realistic, and respectable for all Saskatchewan people. 
Such policies are critical to the creation of an environment 
conducive to economic growth, investment opportunities, and 
jobs. And this was noted by Marilyn Braun of the CFIB 
(Canadian Federation of Independent Business), the Chair of 
the alliance. 
 
If the answers we got in this Assembly are any indication of the 
type of discussions she has in the construction industry, I can 
see how they feel there has not been proper consultation. The 
minister has said she’s had hundreds of meetings with the 
industry over this Bill. This is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Contrary to the minister, recent comments about meetings held 
with interested parties, the government has not broadly 
consulted with the vital issue. She has also rejected any 
invitation from the alliance to debate the pending changes to 
their effects. 
 
Meanwhile the government is pushing forward final approval of 
this provincial legislation . . . Legislative Assembly for changes 
to stand to leave thousands of construction workers with less 
say in their own futures. I wonder how many of the meetings 
she has with the construction association over the CCTA 
(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement), and how many 
did she take in that will force unionization Bill? 
 
(1515) 
 
First we had forced amalgamation, and now we’re looking at 
forced unionization. 
 
The minister stands in this House and spouts half-truths 
designated not to answer questions about . . . which is only to 
confuse the public who don’t have the intimate knowledge of 
this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone in the construction industry, 
including workers, are saying this change in law will be highly 
destructive. This is a good reason why we need to delay this six 
months to let this industry time to prepare. 
 
The minister has said this will affect only the three large 
construction companies in the province. This is pointlessly 
false. Subcontractors will be subject to the same 
provincial-wide agreements. Most construction companies in 
this province will feel the effects. 
 
The minister says this is necessary to bring forth a fair wage 
policy; yet the numbers suggests wages in union and non-union 
and union shops are very competitive. For an apprentice, the 
pay is much better for non-union employees in the construction 
industry. 
 
This minister also says this legislation will bring forth in line 
the same as in every other province. Again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is false. 
 
The minister needs to instruct her staff to review the opposed 
legislation in Ontario, currently legislation in New Brunswick 
and Alberta, and the construction . . . collective agreement in 
Manitoba, where they will find completely different provisions. 

Most progressive provinces that are rapidly developing have 
modern labour legislation that fosters a business-friendly 
environment. These amendments are a throwback to the old 
days of confrontation. As a province we simply can’t afford 
that. And this comes from Kent Smith-Windsor at the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. 
 
As far as the reverse onus costs, whereby employees must prove 
they do not have spinoffs instead of the other way around, no 
other province has this. Ontario is studying changes as we 
speak. In Alberta, spinoff provisions do not apply to the 
construction industry. And New Brunswick has no spinoff or 
common employer legislation. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill does not bring in line 
with every other province that this minister says it does. The 
minister says these changes now are imperative to bring about 
labour harmony in the construction association. This is an 
industry that hasn’t had a major strike in two decades, and the 
CLR (Construction Labour Relations Organization) itself says 
this legislation will be highly disruptive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, too many people in this province are 
absolutely convinced this Bill is a very bad Bill; it is a very bad 
move. The government cannot ignore that if they are truly 
interested in the good of this province. 
 
However, if they are only interested in a political payoff for 
their big union contributors, they will move ahead . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I think so. Because is too much is asked to delay 
this . . . is it too much to ask to delay this for six months to 
allow for greater consultation? 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Alliance for Economic Growth members urge the Premier to 
remove this legislation from the government’s agenda and deal 
with the Minister of Labour, who seems hesitant to bring about 
the facts forward. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The CILRA (Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act) is anti-business 
and anti-democratic. Pushing this legislation forward clearly 
sends a clear message to the rest of Saskatchewan — 
Saskatchewan is not open for business. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
speak to the amendment regarding the hoist. I just want to 
provide a little bit of history because I know I’m kind of an old 
gal here and I might have a little longer memory than some of 
the folks here. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this does go back to 1982 when 
some contractors in the industry here wanted to be able to bid 
lower and because of having to pay union wages, the only way 
they could make their contracts cheaper was to de-unionize 
their workplaces. 
 
And it wasn’t because the contractor was prepared to take a 
lower profit. All of these savings by de-unionization came on 
the backs of their workers — their workers’ ability to purchase 
a home, to purchase a car, to send their kids to school, to have 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

some level of job security, to participate in apprenticeship 
programs leading towards journeyman status. 
 
And so when this happened in 1982 — and I guess we could do 
some research into donations at that time — but certainly it was 
true that the whole purpose of the changes made during Grant 
Devine’s time, who I’m sure many of the members opposite 
have supported and in fact participated in that government, the 
fact of the matter is, is that this action taken by the Devine 
government regarding this Bill that we’re discussing . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the Opposition House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 
comments have to be based on the amendment. The minister 
has already spoke to the Bill. She’s talking about ancient history 
that took place 20 years ago, not the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To the point of order, I recognize the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I was listening 
carefully to the member speaking about the amendment and I 
couldn’t be more clear in that what she was speaking to was 
exactly to the point. I’m not sure what the member opposite is 
referring to when he says she’s not speaking to the Bill, but it’s 
very, very clear to anyone, to anyone who is listening, that the 
amendment is being dealt with clearly in this case. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the Hon. Opposition House 
Leader for raising the point of order and I thank the Deputy 
Premier for speaking to the point of order. 
 
The Chair could have headed this off, that is I could have 
headed this off by announcing more clearly that the amendment 
and the Bill are debated concurrently, with the amendment. And 
indeed in speaking to the amendment it is a normal course of 
events to be speaking to the Bill as amended. 
 
Therefore I do not find the hon. member’s point of order well 
taken. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to clarify for the 
House how this is related. What I’m speaking to is the length of 
time that this discussion has been going on and the lack of 
validity of another six months of discussing it. 
 
So in fact as we progressed through the ’80s, and basically 
assisted by the legislation of the government of that time, it 
undermined the ability of people to be unionized and certainly 
aided the ability for contractors to bid non-union on their 
contracts. 
 
Now when we came around to 1991, certainly this problem had 
really undermined the apprenticeship trades in this province and 
in fact had resulted in many journey people and other skilled 
tradespeople having to be brought from outside the province 
because it had such a dramatic effect on undermining the 
development of the apprenticeable trades in the province. 
 
In 1992 we did take an action to amend this Act, hoping that in 
time the provisions of that Act would clean up some of this 

problem and we could get back to some kind of a normal labour 
relations environment in this province. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, because during the interim period 
between indicating that that legislation would be passed and the 
Bill, the fact of the matter is is that hundreds of spinoffs were 
created which thereby had the effect of undermining the intent 
of the Bill. 
 
So at this point, after over a hundred meetings and I would say 
about 17 years of discussion on this topic, and a clear indication 
to the parties during the discussion that if they did not reach 
consensus that we would have to proceed to make the decision 
ourselves. And the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, in this whole 
debate, I have not heard anything from the members opposite or 
those they claim to represent that would suggest a solution to 
this problem other than just doing what they want. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the absence of compromise has been the 
problem throughout this discussion. And I would just like to say 
in closing that another six months is not likely to solve this 
problem. 
 
So I speak against the amendment. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:36 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 

Hermanson Elhard Julé 
Krawetz Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Hart Allchurch 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays— 30 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Hillson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
you’ve heard this afternoon from the member from Swift 
Current, the member from Lloydminster, the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, and everybody that we’ve checked with 
in this province doesn’t like this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We have businesses in our own 
constituencies; we have businesses in constituencies all over 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

this province, including urban and rural, because this is an 
urban-rural issue; there’s no separation. No one likes this 
proposed legislation and that government should have done the 
right thing and hoisted it for six months and then gone on to 
pull it forever and never bring it back to see the light of day. 
 
The minister over there has said on a number of occasions, Mr. 
Speaker, that this legislation resembles other jurisdictions. 
When we checked other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, we can find 
nowhere in this country that resembles the legislation that that 
minister is proposing. Other jurisdictions don’t want this kind 
of legislation either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will have many more times, I would hope, to 
speak on this Bill, but at this point I would like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 

Vote 12 
 
The Chair: — I would like to invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is Mr. 
Dennis Polowyk, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
treasury and debt management division; and to his left is Mr. 
Terry Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller. And behind 
Mr. Polowyk, is Ms. Margaret Johannsson, who is the executive 
director of cash and debt management. Behind me is Mr. Glen 
Veikle who is the assistant deputy minister of the treasury board 
branch. And to the right of Mr. Veikle is Mr. David Pratt who is 
the senior analyst with the taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs division of the Department of Finance. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Subvote (FD01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. I have a few questions that I would 
like to get to maybe just for clarification more than anything, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
When I was looking through the Estimates book that was 
published earlier and I noticed that this was a particular vote 
unto itself, on page 63, vote 12, my first question was, and I’m 
sure I’m going to be asked that too, has this always been a 
separate vote, and why in particular is it a separate vote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is yes, this has 
always been a separate vote. The reason is it is prescribed by 
law under The Financial Administration Act, 1993 that interest 
on the public debt should be a separate vote. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, if it’s prescribed, I’m 
wondering then why we have to have a particular vote on it. But 
that’s something for me to learn, I guess, as time goes on. 
 

One of the questions that I looked at earlier when I was looking 
in the Estimates was on page 11, I noticed that under financing 
activities — and this is related to that — under financing 
activities, there is a section called borrowing and a section 
called debt repayment. And I noticed that the debt repayment of 
course has been increased quite significantly — my calculation 
is about 10 per cent and I think you’ve talked about that earlier. 
 
My question is though, why the borrowing has increased so 
significantly as well. My calculation is again about 13 per cent 
increase in that borrowing. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the borrowing is going up, but it 
is not new borrowing. It is debt repayment. 
 
In other words, it’s sort of like if you had a mortgage on your 
house or your farm and say you had a five-year term on your 
mortgage, in the third year and the fourth year you wouldn’t be 
borrowing any money to refinance that mortgage because it 
hadn’t come due yet, but in the fifth year you would indicate on 
your own books that you were borrowing money if you were 
going to another lender, for example, to refinance. 
 
And it just so happens that more of our debt is coming due this 
year than came due last year. And when that happens, the term 
of the loan that we have expires, we have to go out and 
refinance that in the marketplace. And that’s what we’re doing. 
 
So we’re doing a little more refinancing than we’ve done last 
year. But in fact, the debt of the province is not going up, we’re 
just having some of it come due. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, another 
question I would have is, this is mainly servicing the debt or the 
interest, I assume. Can you give me an idea of how much of this 
debt servicing in proportion or percentages or even numbers, is 
interest, and that which is being paid in principal, paying down 
this debt in this particular year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, we are paying this year, in 
interest, approximately $678 million. And we will be reducing 
the gross debt of the province by $124.1 million. 
 
So to put it another way . . . Well I suppose you can’t put it any 
simpler than that. Interest charges will be about $678 million. 
The total decrease in debt will be $124.1 million as indicated on 
page 11 of the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to follow 
that maybe with this question. Will any of this debt — servicing 
the public debt, government share — is that going to be coming 
from or has come from the sale of shares or equity in the Crown 
corporations or government equities in various investments? 
Anything of that nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is no, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have another 
question, and it’s . . . and I think it . . . Maybe I should ask: in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which is vote 71, is that going to 
be a separate vote through estimates? 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of the 
questions I have at that time, we’ll discuss it then. 
 
In terms of vote no. 12, I really have no further questions, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — There being no further questions. I just 
want to be sure that no one else has a question, and I take it that 
they don’t from looking about. 
 
This is statutory, members of the committee, so it’s not really a 
matter that we bring for a vote. It’s a required payment. I think 
we can simply move on to the next item of consideration. So we 
basically have statutory approval of spending of $677.400 
million. 
 
Vote 12 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Centenary Capital Fund 

Vote 70 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I just want to again invite the Minister 
of Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much. Before I do that, 
Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank the member opposite and the 
opposition for co-operating with respect to vote 12 that we’ve 
already completed. And also to thank the officials from the 
Department of Finance who assisted us with that. 
 
And now I want to introduce to you, Mr. Glen Veikle, who was 
previously here but is now sitting beside me who’s the assistant 
deputy minister of the treasury board branch. And behind him, 
we have Mr. Craig Dotson, who is the deputy minister of 
Education. Behind me, we have Mr. Larry Chaykowski, who’s 
the executive director in Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Housing. 
 
Beside me to my right is Mr. Blaine Ganong, who is the 
manager of planning in the environmental protection branch of 
SERM. And behind him we have Mr. Bob Stenzil, who’s the 
manager of facilities of the parks branch of SERM. And finally 
to the left of Mr. Dotson, we have Ms. Karen Lautsch, who is 
the executive assistant to the deputy minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. 
 
And the reason I might explain we have representatives of so 
many departments — we have Finance, Post-Secondary 
Education, Education, Municipal Affairs, and Environment — 
is that the centenary fund is going to be administered with the 
co-operation of all of those departments because it covers 
different areas. Different parts of the centenary fund are spent in 
different areas, and hence we have some interdepartmental 
representation here, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Subvote (CF01) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I want 

to welcome your officials that are here to discuss some of the 
items in this Centenary Capital Fund. I guess the first question I 
would have, Mr. Minister, and of your officials is, can you give 
me what you feel is the goals, the vision behind this particular 
fund. 
 
Why do you think, in your opinion why was it needed? Why 
was it established? And is there goals that we can measure 
progress against in the application of this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the reason for the 
development of the fund was the realization that there are many 
infrastructure needs in the province as indeed the opposition has 
pointed out. We have needs in K to 12 education to rebuild and 
fix some of the schools. We have needs that in post-secondary 
education, at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) and with the universities. 
 
And we have needs in highways, we need to clean up the 
environment in some cases. We have a great need for more 
social housing. We need to upgrade some of our parks and 
heritage properties. So part of the rationale for the fund, the 
creation of the fund, was to fix-up some of the public property 
in this province which I think both the opposition and the 
government would agree needs to be done. 
 
Secondly, leading up to the 100th anniversary of Saskatchewan 
which is five years away, we thought it would be appropriate to 
have a program which would commemorate the 100th 
anniversary of the province in a meaningful and permanent 
way. And we thought there might be some projects that we 
could usefully do for the benefit of all the people of the 
province which they would value as things done in order to 
commemorate the 100th anniversary of our province. 
 
And so that was the second goal. The first goal being meeting a 
need as I’ve described. And there’s some others like municipal 
infrastructure and northern water and sewer that are very 
important. 
 
The second was to commemorate the 100th anniversary of our 
province and do some planning to assist us to do that. And to 
leave a legacy for future people that they could look back and 
say, in Saskatchewan’s centennial this is what they did; they did 
this project — maybe a new school, maybe sewer and water 
project in the North. In the same way that we look back at some 
of the centennial projects from 1967 when Canada had the 
centennial and so many useful, public facilities were improved 
upon or built. 
 
So that was some of the thinking behind the fund. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, another 
question then about the fund. 
 
From my perusal of the expenditure, it’s $30,000 . . . $30 
million, excuse me, per year. And I think you, in your budget 
address, indicated that it would be over . . . projected over a 
four-year period. 
 
If that is in fact the case and you wanted to direct it to certain of 
these projects — lots of which I agree need to be addressed in a 
fairly urgent manner — why would you not direct that kind of 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

dollars to the budgets of the different agencies and departments 
rather than trying to pick particular projects? And how, and if 
that’s your choice of allocating, how do you allocate, how do 
you pick? What conditions do you put in place in order to have 
successful applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We do wish to have a marriage, if you will, 
between the various departments and the goals of the fund, as 
the member indicates we should. And the reason why we’ve 
involved the officials from these various departments is just to 
do what the member is suggesting I think that we should do, 
and that is get the expertise of the officials in each department. 
 
And I should say that in K to 12 education, there is pretty much 
an established way of prioritizing the spending needs. And so 
they are involved in allocating the additional $5 million per 
year in education. 
 
Then with respect to the universities, for example, and SIAST, 
we certainly will be involving the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. In highways and 
roads, we’ll be involving the Department of Highways to assist 
us in identifying the highest priorities. In Municipal 
Government, with respect to parks and heritage properties and 
social housing, the same thing. 
 
And in each area, we’re involving the officials that are involved 
in that area so that we have the benefit of their professional 
advice as to the very best way to spend that money. In other 
words, where’s the need the greatest; where will it have the best 
social impact? And those are the projects, with their advice, that 
ultimately will be pursued. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. From 
what I understand then, there is an amount of money, $30 
million this year, that will be allocated to the different 
co-operating or partnership departments. Are those proportions 
already established or is that written in stone? Do I have . . . and 
if I could I’d like to say, is the 30 million, is that set in stone? 
You’re anticipating the same kind of thing again next year for 
120 million over four years. 
 
Is that in fact a commitment now that there will be four years of 
30 million each? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct. There are $30 million a 
year for four years for a total of 120 million. And then in each 
year, with respect to the $30 million, we’re allocating it equally 
— 5 million to each of six areas, being K to 12 school capital, 
firstly; secondly, universities, SIAST, and regional colleges; 
thirdly, municipal infrastructure; fourthly, heritage properties 
and parks; fifthly, transportation, highways, rural roads, and 
environmental cleanup; and sixth, social housing. 
 
Now it’s always possible, I suppose, that in light of experience 
or suggestions from the opposition or government members, by 
the time we get around to the next budget, we may find that 
there needs to be some revision or amendment to the plan. I 
don’t anticipate that, but it’s always possible. 
 
But the plan as set out in the budget is as I’ve described, the 30 
million a year for four years, and at this time the $120 million 
commitment to various public properties — trying to fix them, 

improve them, or in some cases create new ones. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
will these funds be made available? When will the projects be 
determined? Has any decisions been made at this stage? Have 
applications been coming forward based on your announcement 
in the budget, or is that still to come? And what is the time 
frame that you would see, making sure that this 30 million is 
allocated in the most expedient way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should say that, arising out of some of the 
things I’ve said already this afternoon, there is already a 
commitment of about $10.5 million. And I’ll explain that. 
 
As it’s been previously announced, $5 million will be going 
into Northern Affairs. That was announced on the budget day, 
although the exact projects I don’t have. But we know $5 
million is going to the North and an additional $2.5 million to 
northern water and sewer. And in addition, $3 million is 
committed for school capital already, because of the 
prioritization that they have in the Department of Education. 
 
Of the remaining $19.5 million, we anticipate that the 
departments will be working with various stakeholders that they 
deal with on an ongoing basis, and we’re hopeful that we’ll get 
suggestions from their stakeholders fairly soon. I think we’ve 
got some of those, that we’ll have a chance for them to analyze 
them, and for an approval process that might take place say in 
the next six weeks or so. 
 
And we would hope to have announcements within the next six 
weeks or so and to have the money going out so that the 
projects can get underway. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And to 
members that are with you, Mr. Minister, welcome. 
 
I have a couple of questions to follow up on what my colleague 
has been asking regarding the centenary fund and its set-up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve received information that would indicate I 
think as you’ve indicated in the House today, that basically the 
two areas connected with education — the K to 12 and the 
post-secondary — are not going to be individually handled 
through Saskatchewan Municipal Affairs, they’ll be handled by 
the K-12 education which the facilities department will handle 
that. 
 
And my colleague asking the Minister of Education questions in 
estimate the other day, the minister indicated that the amount of 
money allocated for capital in education will rise from 24.1 to 
29.1, which is the full 5 million and, therefore, no one else will 
be involved and the facilities department will handle that, okay. 
 
Now, if that’s true, Mr. Minister — and I guess the same thing 
is happening in post-secondary education with the other portion 
that’s been allocated to that area — why didn’t you just directly 
allocate this money to the facilities department, rather than 
create a bureaucracy now that’s going to have to look at 
whether or not the actual spending of the centenary money was 
done correctly through both of those departments? 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should say first of all, I want to correct 
myself in my last answer. When I said $3 million was allocated 
to K-12, I should have said $5 million, rather than three, and the 
member for Canora-Pelly has used the correct figure which is 
$5 million. 
 
I should say, first of all, we’re not creating any new 
bureaucracy. I want to stress that. As I tried to say in my first 
answer to the first question, I think from the member from 
Lloydminster, we’re having the officials from those 
departments that deal with these questions do the work. There’s 
no new officials or new civil servants doing this; it’s the same 
officials. So there is no new bureaucracy being created, point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, the reason for the centenary fund is — as the 
name implies and as I’ve indicated — to have a program that 
enables Saskatchewan to do something to commemorate the 
100th anniversary of our province. 
 
And as government, we felt that it was appropriate for the 
people of Saskatchewan to set aside some extra funds to put 
into projects in order to commemorate the fact that 
Saskatchewan is going to have its 100th anniversary in the year 
2005. And it seemed to us that this was one appropriate way to 
celebrate the 100th anniversary of our province. And that is the 
reason for the centenary fund, and that is why indeed, it’s called 
the centenary fund. It’s to celebrate the 100th anniversary of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your comments 
on those two key areas and I think by your comments you’re 
suggesting that those two key areas will basically be dealing 
with expenditures on an annual basis, and will be looking at the 
projects according to guidelines that have been in place for a 
number of years, and you’re not looking at a sort of a four-year 
plan. And if that’s true, Mr. Minister, then I don’t need any 
further comment on that. 
 
But I would like you now to move to the other four areas, which 
the indication is of course, that the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Affairs, Culture and Housing authority will be handling those 
other four key areas. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In the other areas, Municipal Affairs will 
be playing a coordinating role but they’ll be seeking advice 
from the other areas of government that may be impacted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If that is correct 
and then could you tell us what is the timeline that has been put 
in place? 
 
I have, Mr. Minister, some information that indicates by way of 
faxes that many different communities in all of Saskatchewan 
were informed on or about May 30 that the deadline for 
application was May 31 to submit projects to Saskatchewan 
Municipal, Housing and Culture. Now that doesn’t give 
communities a lot of time. 
 
Is indeed that the timeline, that you expected all applications 
and projects to be put forward by May 31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m advised that indeed the 

Department of Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing did send 
a letter to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), at the least, dated May 29 saying that they 
would like to . . . Well specifically it says: 
 

Project submission time frames are very short, I’m told, 
because they want to get on with capital projects as soon as 
they can. And proposals are being accepted until late May. 

 
But I’m advised in fact that that’s not completely accurate in the 
sense that because of the fact the letter didn’t go out until May 
29 many of the proposals came back after May 29, and indeed 
have been given consideration by the Department of Municipal 
Affairs. 
 
So I don’t think that was a firm deadline at all. Some leeway 
was certainly granted, and it was recognized that people 
couldn’t necessarily reply within the space of a few days. And 
so the department has tried to work with those organizations to 
give them a reasonable amount of time to work with the 
department in terms of the projects. 
 
But having said that I should say that, as the member will know, 
the reality is that most of the municipalities, because of the 
provincial municipal infrastructure program that is in place, are 
in a position where they can in fact identify their needs in a 
fairly timely way. 
 
And indeed SUMA and SARM are involved with the 
provincial-municipal infrastructure program. And so it’s not 
unreasonable to expect that when more money becomes 
available, and in this case, 5 million, you can see that instead of 
having 10 million from the province and then matching funds 
from the municipalities, in effect, you’re up to 15 million. 
 
And because there’s a process in place, it was in fact more 
reasonable to expect that SUMA and SARM could in effect see 
the infrastructure program simply as being a bigger program 
that could do more in identifying some of the projects that have 
been on the drawing board for some time; because we actually 
started the process of asking them to identify infrastructure 
projects in the spring of 1999, over a year ago, when we 
introduced the municipal infrastructure program in the 1999 
budget. 
 
So I understand, Mr. Chair, the question being asked by the 
member, which is, well, how can you expect anybody to reply 
in a few days? The answer is that the individuals concerned for 
the most part have actually been working on the list of projects 
for probably 15 months. And the officials of SUMA and 
SARM, as well as the municipal government, are so confident 
in fact that given a few days they’re able to compile a list of 
worthwhile projects. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your 
comments have led me to another question that I have to ask, 
because when you start to look at a budget that you delivered 
here in the House on March 27 and a letter comes out on May 
29, there seems to be a gap of two months. And now you’re 
asking the members of SUMA and SARM to respond in two 
days time. 
 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

And I appreciate your comments that municipal . . . the 
authority has looked at applications that have been received 
after May 29. But I have heard from a number of community 
groups that say, we just didn’t have enough time to put together 
a project. 
 
And I know you’ve mentioned SUMA and SARM, Mr. 
Minister, but your project identifies social housing issues, it 
identifies parks, it identifies heritage facilities — there are a 
number of things that you are looking at in your six areas. 
 
How would those individuals have heard if they didn’t have 
contact with SUMA and SARM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, that the member’s 
point is well-taken; that it would be certainly in order to provide 
people with an opportunity to reply in a timely way. And I’ll 
just say that I agree with the member and I think in the future 
we have to try to ensure that very timely notice goes out. 
 
But I would just reiterate — not to argue with the point the 
member’s making — but I’d reiterate that in fact the process 
that has been ongoing has compiled a list of things that need to 
be done, and we won’t do all of the things that need to be done. 
But there has been a lot of work trying to identify the more 
important or most urgent things that need to be done. And that 
has meant that the Department of Municipal Affairs is in the 
process in fact of trying to compile a list of projects that may 
have been talked about for some time. 
 
And I appreciate the member’s comment that not everybody 
would get their proposal for a project in, in that amount of time. 
But I’d also make the point that not all projects that could be 
sent into government could be funded in any event. We have to 
prioritize, and some work has been going on for some time. 
 
But having said that, I think the member would like to say, well, 
try to do a better job in the future in terms of giving 
notification. And I’ll just say I’ll take that to heart certainly and 
we’ll try to do a better job next time. And I’m very hopeful that 
the member won’t next year have to ask me the same kind of 
question because we will have done this in a more timely 
fashion. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And I appreciate those comments very much, 
Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, then that leads me to the 
question about a one year and a subsequent three more years of 
this plan. 
 
From the projects that Municipal Affairs has already received, 
would you have an idea how much money has been applied for, 
for this year? And I guess we’re looking at probably less than 
$20 million because in those four areas, you’ve indicated that 
amounts of monies will be designated specifically for northern 
issues and you’re pulling out a certain portion of that. 
 
Could you indicate how many projects . . . or the amount of 
money that is being requested for a one-year expenditure being 
this fiscal year? Or how many projects are actually applying for 
the full four-year funding? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that for the current fiscal year 
we’ve had proposals for approximately $6.6 million of the $5 
million available. And over the four-year period, it would be 
approximately $21.5 million of proposals over the four year . . . 
for the amount of money available over the four years in the 
area of municipal infrastructure. In that area, yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was wondering if 
your number of 6.5 was meaning. Okay. So in other words, 
you’ve received a larger amount of requests than what is 
available and you’re going to look at that. 
 
The other projects, which are also through Saskatchewan 
Municipal Affairs — and they’ll be looking at those guidelines 
— I’m sure that they’re receiving the project applications, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And Mr. Minister, I have two projects in my hand and I’m 
wondering about the detail and the kind of project that you’re 
looking for, Mr. Minister. And very specifically, a couple of 
groups have requested through combined projects where there 
is joint proposals being made through Municipal Affairs, 
through municipalities, through Economic Development, a 
corporation involved, through a resort community, through all 
those kind of things, they put together a couple of projects. 
 
One is dealing with actual construction . . . not construction but 
the surfacing of a portion of road near the resort community of 
Leslie Beach along Fishing Lake. They have had discussions 
with the Minister of Highways and the indication there of 
course, from the Highways department, is they’re not prepared 
to take that under Highways because it’s not a highway at the 
moment. 
 
So they’ve looked at it from many points of view. They’ve 
looked at it from an Economic Development point of view. 
There’s a golf course, a resort community. A large amount of 
tourism comes into that area. 
 
They’ve looked at it from a safety factor because this is a newly 
constructed road that has a tremendous amount of dust on it 
when it doesn’t rain, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the other part that they’re looking at of course is that when 
you look at municipal infrastructure and the need to develop 
one arm of government, Highways has said no, we don’t want 
to have any part of that. 
 
Is that the kind of project that you’re looking at as far as being a 
project that would be eligible for funding for maybe not only 
just a one-year term, but over a period of four years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I don’t think I can get into 
saying very much about specific applications for funding in the 
sense that those have to be duly considered in the process and 
then the announcements made in due course. 
 
But to answer the question this way, I would say, that certainly 
any suggestion that is made by communities should be 
considered and will be given due consideration. 
 
And I think the member said that there might have been some 
co-operation with respect to several parties going into a project. 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

I think that would be something that would be a point in favour 
of a project. I think that whether the project has sort of a 
provincial nature to it would be something that would be looked 
at. There are other factors that would be looked at. 
 
I think, for example, you’d want to look at the aspect of fiscal 
infrastructure, whether the fiscal infrastructure of the province 
as a whole was going to be improved. Look at questions of 
employment. How much employment was going to be 
provided; environmental and cultural aspects. Whether there 
was a cost sharing opportunity for municipal governments or 
from the federal government that might allow us to stretch our 
dollars further, and so on. 
 
I don’t know if I can add anything to that, but certainly I can 
assure the member that the kind of project he’s describing 
would be given all due consideration in the process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you’re very, 
very correct. I was not looking at the specific comments on the 
specific project. It’s a concept, though, that has been developed 
and people are questioning whether or not a concept that 
involves involvement of other municipalities, involving 
economic development and housing, etc., is going to be looked 
at more favourable. 
 
The other question that’s been asked of me, Mr. Minister, is 
from the parks, regional parks specifically. Regional parks have 
not been funded for a large number of years already as far as 
funding directly. And regional parks have phoned, a number of 
parks have phoned my office saying . . . requesting whether or 
not funding through the centenary fund may be available 
through a regional park for changing electrical wiring that has 
now become obsolete and needs that kind of improvement. And 
we’re talking a capital fund that may be somewhere . . . or 
capital cost that may be somewhere between 75 and $100,000. 
 
Are those the kind of projects that might be able to be 
submitted, if not this year then next year, through some of the 
other four areas that you’ve mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. In fact, Mr. Chair, that’s one of the 
things that I’ve been attempting to point out in the legislature 
and through the media to the Regional Parks Association, 
because there was some frustration expressed, as is well known 
and is a matter of public record, by the Regional Parks 
Association with respect to the fact that they were not granted 
sort of a direct grant, as they had requested, in the budget. 
 
And I had taken some pains to point out to them that in fact 
there was a fund available for improvement of capital in the 
province, and that they, I’ve said consistently, the regional 
parks would in fact qualify to apply for funding. And that in a 
positive way I felt that the most appropriate approach for the 
regional parks to take, and the association in particular to take, 
would be to approach government with some ideas for how 
original parks capital infrastructure could be improved. 
 
And we know that there are some needs in the regional parks, as 
the member has described. In fact, I’ve indicated publicly one 
of my thoughts when we were developing the centenary fund 
was in fact how could we work with and help the Regional 
Parks Association. And that was one of the things that led me to 

believe that it would be useful to have an infrastructure fund in 
the hope that we could work with the Regional Parks 
Association in a very positive and proactive way to see how we 
could improve some of the capital around the regional parks. 
 
And so I agree with the member that this is an appropriate area 
to look at, and in fact, that’s what we’ve been trying to do all 
along. And we look forward to having a positive and productive 
and proactive method of trying to get some capital and 
improvements into our parks in Saskatchewan. That’s part of 
the objective. And we will certainly be looking at any proposals 
that the Regional Parks Association wishes to advance, and I 
know that they’ll be advanced in a very positive way because 
we all have an interest in improving the parks in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for 
those comments. And I’m sure regional park authorities in the 
province appreciate those comments as well, because I think 
they will be very much be looking to what you’ve just said. 
 
Mr. Minister, my final question. I want to back up just to one of 
the other questions I asked and I’m not sure if you clarified. I 
wanted to know what your officials think will be the allocations 
in year 2, year 3, and year 4 of this fund. Not only from 
municipal infrastructure, Mr. Minister, but from those four 
areas outside of the two education areas, what kinds of projects 
or what kinds of monies do you see allocated over the longer 
period of time? 
 
And the follow-up to that, Mr. Minister, of course is will there 
still be room for further applications two years from now or 
three years from now? Or will that entire $30 million be 
allocated in each of the four years and the entire a hundred and 
twenty million dollars has already been spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have not made any decisions yet with 
respect to the allocation of the funding. So it’s not possible to 
answer the question in terms of dollars and cents. But I’ll say to 
the member that in one of the member’s questions, I think a 
couple of questions ago, he said, you know, could a project be 
sort of multi-year in nature. And the answer to that is, yes, a 
project could be multi-year in nature. That is it might take more 
than one year to build, or the cost of it might be such that you 
couldn’t fund it in one year but you might fund it over two 
years or three or four. 
 
So some of the projects that are approved will be multi-year in 
nature. They will be four-year projects. Some will be one-year 
projects. Some will be for two or three years. So the answer is 
some of the money will be allocated on a four-year basis, some 
of it will be allocated on a one-year basis, and we’ll have a mix. 
 
I can’t give exact dollars and cents, but I suspect a good chunk 
of it probably will be a four-year commitment. But there will be 
a good chunk left to be reconsidered next year for one- or two- 
or three-year commitments. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was happy to 
hear that response, Mr. Minister, because I would hate to see 
anybody that was late in applying for this particular year be 
disqualified in year 2 or 3 or 4 as they get closer to the 
centennial year and have in fact identified something. So I think 
that’s very important. 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any other questions and I don’t 
believe my colleague does. I would like to thank the minister 
and thank the officials for being here and clarifying some of 
these points for us. 
 
Subvote (CF01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 70 agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister; 
my thanks to your officials. 
 
I’d like to invite the Minister of Finance to report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Okay, but before I do that, Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to thank members of the official opposition for their 
co-operation in moving this along and for their very good 
questions. And also I’d like to thank the representatives of the 
various departments that are here for their assistance. 
 
And with that I move that we report progress with respect to 
this matter, Mr. Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1630) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 45  The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. With me, sitting to my 
left, is Mr. Len Rog who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
revenue division of the Department of Finance. And behind him 
is Mr. Doug Lambert who’s the director of revenue programs of 
the revenue division of the Department of Finance. And behind 
me is Mr. Kelly Laurans who’s the director of corporate taxes 
and incentives in the revenue division of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if I 
could welcome your officials here, and I have a couple of 
questions that I would like to have clarified if I could. 
 
The first one pertains to really the intent of this Act. When I 
read through the Act and the amendments, it doesn’t look like 
there’s going to be a great deal of difference in terms of the 
consumer. Can you give me a bit of a thumbnail sketch as to 
why these amendments are coming forward at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the member’s correct, Mr. Chair, that 
the Act does not really have that much impact on the consumer 
in that it does not increase the fuel tax or anything like that. In 
fact in some cases there’s, I think, a decrease of tax with respect 
to propane. 
 
But the purpose of the Act could be described as housekeeping 
in nature. What it is doing is describing in the legislation the 

way that the fuel tax is actually collected in practice. But the 
legislation has not been kept up to date in the sense that it 
doesn’t reflect the practices that have come about for the 
collection of the tax. The Bill is housekeeping in nature in the 
sense that it says, you know, let’s actually describe accurately 
how this tax is collected. 
 
It attempts to streamline processes for government and industry 
to make the collection of the tax work more efficiently for 
everybody concerned. But it doesn’t impose any new taxes on 
anyone. 
 
And as I said, in one case, with respect to propane cylinders, it 
dispenses any tax with respect to cylinders that weigh 100 
pounds or less. Although, I hasten to add, that with respect to 
propane purchased for farm use — because that’s been raised in 
the legislature before — that is not taxable now and nor will it 
be taxable under this Act. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my 
understanding, from what you’ve described earlier and your 
explanation now, was that to clarify the process or to make it 
clear that the tax . . . how the tax is applied at various stages of 
fuel as it’s processed and through the distribution chain. 
 
Was there some illegality that might have been associated the 
way the tax was designated or allocated before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. There was no illegality surrounding the 
collection of the tax. In fact the legislation we have is the same 
legislation basically as other provinces have. But the 
Department of Justice did feel that the legislation should be 
updated and simplified somewhat, and that’s the purpose of the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
assume there was consultation then with the industry itself, 
right from production through distribution of fuel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. There was quite considerable 
consultation with the industry, Mr. Chair, and they are 
supportive of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I think any 
time that we can get some efficiencies into the system that’s 
certainly a positive thing. 
 
You referred earlier to the propane as an example, and referred 
to farm use of propane for grain drying as tax exempt. Are you 
referring to zero rated or tax exempt meaning tax has to be paid 
and then a rebate applied or . . . And was there any 
consideration in the tax, The Fuel Tax Act, 2000, for 
eliminating the need for the collection of that tax and having to 
go through the whole exercise of rebating it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It should be delivered in bulk tax free when 
it’s delivered as farm fuel or heating fuel. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think just for 
clarification, it should be noted that farm fuel, the zero-rated tax 
on farm fuel really applies to gasoline. The diesel portion of the 
farm fuel didn’t have tax on it even before the budget, if I’m 
correct. 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

Thinking now of the propane that you referred to earlier. Why 
was the decision made to exempt propane in the small 
quantities, the hundred pound cylinders and so on? Because 
there’s lots of homes that are heated by propane. And I’m 
wondering why the exemption for the small quantities as 
opposed to larger quantities for heating of homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The reason the change is being made is for 
simplicity. And I can explain it this way, that it used to be that 
the dealer was supposed to inquire as to the purpose for the 
propane. And some things were exempt from tax and some 
things were not. 
 
But it was very difficult for the dealers to tell if I came with my 
tank, whether I was using it for a purpose that was taxable or a 
purpose that was not taxable, because how do they know. They 
have to make an inquiry. They have to take someone’s word for 
it. And the administration was just kind of cumbersome and 
difficult and time consuming. 
 
And it was much easier just to say, look, if you buy less than 
100 pounds of propane, it’s not taxable. If you more than 100 
pounds of propane, sometimes it will be taxable and sometimes 
it won’t be. If it’s for the farm purpose or heating for example, 
it won’t be. But when you get into the larger bulk volumes, then 
you can take the time to make the inquiry, and it’s much more 
straightforward. 
 
When I’m going to my local Co-op service station, as I do with 
my own propane tank, for them to have to make an inquiry what 
I’m going to use it for — is it for my barbecue, for cooking 
which wasn’t taxable, or is it for some other purpose which may 
be taxable — was just a little bit administratively cumbersome. 
And it’s just as simple to say, everything under 100 pounds, just 
don’t tax it — the cylinder being 100 pounds or less. 
Everything over that, make the inquiry — exempt the farm use, 
exempt the heating use, and it’s easier for all concerned to 
handle. 
 
And certainly the industry I think is appreciative of greater 
simplicity in that regard. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
just one further question about the propane. 
 
In my constituency in the heavy oil area, there’s a lot of 
propane consumed in keeping the tanks warm for flowability of 
the oil. I guess I would suggest that it would be a lot, it would 
be a lot more astute for economic development to consider that 
kind of an exemption to try to increase the economic activity in 
the oil patch rather than to trying and exempt small propane 
tanks which is just an inconvenience mainly to urban dwellers. 
Is that a fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If the propane is used for heating purposes, 
it is not taxable. If it’s used to upgrade a stationary engine then 
it would be taxable. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Chairman. I don’t have any further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 to 55 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
members of the opposition for their co-operation and also the 
officials for their assistance. And I move that we report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Insurance Premiums Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Mr. Minister, are you using the same officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I have the assistance of the same officials, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — And that is a wonderful thing. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister. If I could direct some questions regarding the 
insurance premium tax. This is a tax, if I understand correctly, 
that is put onto different forms of insurance not directly to the 
consumer this time, but more directed now to the company. Can 
you explain the rationale for that process rather than a 
consumption tax on the consumer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes I can. In fact it’s a very good question 
because it brings to light the issue of what was suggested to us 
by the Vicq committee or the Personal Income Tax Review 
Committee that reported last year. 
 
Specifically they recommended a consumption tax on the 
consumer with respect to insurance, and they recommended that 
we place $40 million of tax on consumers of insurance. What 
this Bill does, as an alternative to that, is approximately $13.7 
million of tax onto the insurance companies. 
 
In preparing the budget, we felt that it was more fair to have a 
tax of $13.7 million on the insurance companies than a tax of 
$40 million on the consumer. And I might say that both of those 
suggestions are part of the tax reform process. 
 
We’re cutting — I won’t go into all the details because the 
member knows — we’re cutting income taxes this year by 
approximately $200 million by cutting the flat tax in half. And 
we’re getting part of that revenue through expanded taxes 
elsewhere — not all of it, but part of it. And this is part of that 
effort to enable us to substantially reduce income taxes over the 
next three years. 
 
(1645) 
 
In answer to the question specifically, why go this way — the 
13.7 million in tax rather than the 40 million — when you 
looked at a tax on the consumer and you looked at the insurance 
in Saskatchewan, approximately 70 per cent of the insurance 
sold in Saskatchewan is when we buy our licence plates, and 
another 10 per cent or so is package policies. 
 
So really when you analyze the suggestion of the Vicq 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2000 

committee to put the tax on the consumer, you’re really putting 
another tax on driving a car, buying a licence plate, and insuring 
your vehicle. 
 
And we felt that that was not the thing to do both in terms of 
respecting the interests of the driving public and in terms of 
economic development. That it would increase the cost of 
transportation in Saskatchewan, which we didn’t want to do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, is it not true that if you tax the 
company they are not going to absorb that in their bottom line; 
in fact, they pass it through to the consumer at one time or 
another. 
 
Are you not just hiding the tax, rather than keeping it up front 
so that people can understand how much it does cost them in 
terms of a tax base? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think that there’s some validity to what 
the member is saying, Mr. Chair, that any time you have a tax 
on business, ultimately that tax may be passed on to the 
consumer. 
 
I would point out though that better to have a tax of $13.7 
million than a tax of $40 million as was recommended. So if the 
alternative was to have a direct tax on the consumer, it would be 
three times as expensive for the consumer. 
 
And I might point out, for example, that if you had a $92,000 
house, and you purchased a Home Pak from SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), let’s say, for $367 with 
a $500 deductible, an increase of 1 per cent would result in a 
tax of $3.67 to the consumer. 
 
Well $3.67, you know, insurance for a year on a $92,000 home 
versus the alternative suggested was a tax of 5 per cent, you 
know, on the full amount of your licence plates and package . . . 
or yes, package policy on your vehicle, which you can see 
would be 5 per cent on, let’s say, a thousand dollars, is $50. 
One per cent additional on a thousand dollars, to state the 
obvious, is $10. But on a Home Pak as opposed to your licence 
plates, it’s going to be more like $3.67. 
 
So in my view the consumer is much better off with what we’re 
doing than the alternative, and that was the reason why we 
proceeded in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the question 
I would have is that although you say that you could have charged 
a tax to generate $40 million, you only taxed . . . you only generate 
13 million. Is that trying to tell the people that you’re a good guy 
by only taxing them a little bit? Because in fact it is a tax increase. 
Isn’t that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, it’s not an effort to tell anybody that I’m 
a good guy or anything of the sort. 
 
Whatever we’re doing in taxation, we’re dealing with the 
taxpayers’ money. And nobody ever likes any kind of new tax or 
additional tax. You know that, Mr. Chair . . . I should say the 
member knows that. I know that; we all know that. But 
nevertheless we have to find a way to pay for the education we all 
receive. I was educated at the taxpayers’ expense from grades 1 to 

12, and in large measure at university. 
 
The health care system we want, the highways we want . . . and 
it’s easy to say that none of us like changing taxes, raising taxes, 
or paying taxes in one sense. But the reality is we have to be 
mature adults and say that we need a certain amount of revenue to 
pay for education and health care and so on. And it has to be 
collected in a certain way. 
 
We opted to do it this way — the $13.7 million increase in 
insurance taxes rather than taxing licence plates and package 
policies. I believe that that was the appropriate choice to make 
for the reasons indicated. And that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. But I also 
noticed that there’s other tax increases as well going from three 
to four, except for I think hail insurance. But all the other taxes 
have in fact had a tax increase. 
 
With that in mind, I guess I’m wondering why you went against 
the Vicq report that suggested that the PST really be at 5 per 
cent, and rather you’ve kept it at 6 and expanded the tax base. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The reason was, Mr. Chair, that the Vicq 
report recommended that we tax children’s clothing; I did not 
agree with that. They recommended that we tax home heating; I 
did not agree with that. They recommended that we tax licence 
plates; I did not agree with that. They recommended that we tax 
package policies on vehicles; I did not agree with that. They 
recommended that we tax home electricity; I did not agree with 
that. 
 
I did not agree that we should charge people taxes on things that 
are more along the lines of basic necessities of life. Therefore I 
said no, we’re not going to expand the tax to all those things 
even if it means lowering it to 5 per cent, because you’re taxing 
people on children’s clothing, home heating, home electricity, 
and those other things that I did not believe should be taxed. 
 
And my colleagues in the coalition government also agreed 
those things should not be taxed. And that’s why we made the 
decision that we did. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
And I have no further questions. I would like to thank your 
officials that are here with you today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, I’d 
like to thank the member from Lloydminster and the other 
members of the opposition for their co-operation, moving the 
Bill along to the next stage of the House. And I’d also like to 
thank the officials from the revenue division of the Department 
of Finance for their assistance. 
 



June 20, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

And with that, I move that we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


