





























































Hansard: June 15, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1833 
 June 15, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today to retain 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Viscount and 
Watrous. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about health care. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this is presented on behalf of citizens from Viscount and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise as well on behalf of the citizens concerned about the future 
of their hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Viscount and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with the possible closures of hospitals. 
The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from Viscount, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good citizens of Langham, Nokomis, and Jansen. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to read 
a petition of citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from the communities of Colonsay and 
Viscount. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have also a petition regarding the closure of hospitals in 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the good citizens of Viscount have signed this petition. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with possible forced 
amalgamation of municipalities in this province. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Regina, Rouleau, Caron, and Tuxford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of the citizens of the province on the 
following matters: 
 

Not proceeding with the amalgamation of municipalities; 
and 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce a couple of guests that are seated with us this 
afternoon — a gentleman from the area of Rocanville. And 
maybe many of the members have already read about Mr. 
Dennis Hack and his trip across the country to actually to raise 
funds for the Moosomin health care centre, and he’s joined by 
his son Aaron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very appropriate for this 
Assembly to welcome Mr. Dennis Hack and his son Aaron to 
this Assembly this morning. I invite the members of this 
Assembly to extend a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. I want to join 
the member from Moosomin in welcoming Dennis Hack and 
his son to the Legislative Assembly. As the member indicated, 
Mr. Hack is bicycling from one end of Canada, starting in 
Vancouver, to the other end of Canada ending in 
Newfoundland, to raise funds for the Moosomin integrated 
health facility. 
 
Tomorrow as I understand it, there’s going to be a big welcome 
in Moosomin and a barbecue in order to increase the profile of 
the fundraising endeavour. I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
Mr. Hack is 60 years old. He’s a farmer. He’s been in training 
all winter. He’s travelled from Vancouver to here in I think 10 
days. He got through the mountains, no sweat; he got across 
Alberta, no sweat; and I understand that he even is making it 
across Saskatchewan with no difficulty. So that does say 
something about some things. 
 
Anyway, I want to welcome you very much to the legislature 
and I wish you all the best on behalf of the government in your 
fundraising endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
stand before you on behalf of the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, a group of 11 grade 4 to 6 students 
who are seated in the east gallery. They are from Carl 
Frederickson School at Govan, Saskatchewan. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher Dawn Hassman, and 
chaperones, Karen Hancock and Colleen Mitchell. I hope you 
enjoy your visit here. And I want everyone to welcome them. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I very enthusiastically 
would like to introduce some special guests in the west gallery, 
for a number of reasons. One, it’s my first school visit as an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). Second, my niece 
and nephew, Matthew and Sarah attend the school. And it’s 43 
grade 8 students from Forest Grove School, and they are 
accompanied by a former neighbour of the Minister of 
Economic Development, Mr. Tranborg, as well as Mr. Wilson, 
Mr. Hernberg, and Mrs. Vizsko. 
 
They have a fine group of students, very good teachers — it’s a 
very progressive school — and I’m very much looking forward 
to meeting them. It’s the best school in the best city in the 
province in the best country in all of the world. 
 
Would you please welcome the members from Forest Grove 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, members of the gay and lesbian community 
association who are in the west gallery. I’d ask them to please 
stand. They are going to observe the first province-wide 
celebration of Gay and Lesbian Pride Week. 
 
I met with them earlier and I’m pleased to report that they have 
agreed to participate in my department’s review of the 
province’s guidelines for issuance of proclamations. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you today and to you 
through all members of the House, two guests who are seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Randy Pritchard, who is at the present time serving as the 
technical adviser to the Special Committee to Stop the Sexual 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade and his 
daughter, Jennifer, is also visiting — if Jennifer would stand up. 
Jennifer has just completed her school term in the Saskatoon 
Catholic system and she’s visiting with her father for the day. 
 
So we’re very happy to have them both here in the gallery and I 
hope all members will join me in welcoming them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to be able to introduce to you today and through 
you to the rest of this Chamber our special guest, Tanner James 
Vanin and Tanner’s brought his mom and dad along as he’s one 
of the millennium babies — one of the first born in the 
province. 
 
And I’d ask all of you to stand, please. There’s Tanner, looking 
after his dad up there. His dad’s name is Darren Vanin — 
Darren works for Smurfit-MBI, it’s a box factory — and mom, 
Luisa. And Luisa is a plant maintenance person, works out of 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

her home, looking . . . and I believe that’s like petunias and 
flowers. Right? And we’re very happy to have them here today. 
 
Many of you will know that the millennium babies receive a 
number of gifts from the province. One of those gifts is a bond 
that’s issued in the baby’s name and Tanner will be a recipient 
of that bond. I’m looking forward to going out and presenting 
the bond and the certificate to them following question period 
today. 
 
And so I’d ask everybody to join in welcoming Tanner and his 
parents who are here for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
complete the introductions by introducing my constituency 
assistant who is invaluable and just a warm and graceful person, 
Donna From, who has brought them here. And I’d ask you to 
join me in welcoming Donna as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you as well, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to as well introduce to the members of the 
Assembly a former member who has joined us behind the bar, 
Mr. Rick Swenson, the member who served this Assembly very 
well and distinguishedly for a number of years. And we 
welcome him to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Increased Sales of New Vehicles 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. For those who doubt that the 
economy is on a roll, here is another quick snapshot of 
Saskatchewan’s booming economy. The number of new 
vehicles sold in Saskatchewan this year is up. The number of 
new vehicles bought by Saskatchewan citizens has increased by 
10.1 per cent over last year at this time. And sales in April have 
increased 6.9 per cent over those in March of this year. 
 
Clearly what we’re seeing from the spring budget is not the 
doom and gloom that the opposition was predicting. We’re 
seeing more jobs, more confidence in the economy, and more 
new car sales. 
 
Just imagine, Mr. Speaker, how great things will be on July 1 
when the first of our planned income tax reductions kicks in. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gun Registry Legislation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today the 
Supreme Court threw out the challenge to the federal Liberal’s 
ridiculous gun legislation, Bill C-68. Mr. Speaker, we were all 
disappointed by this ruling. And for the record I want to state 
once again that the Saskatchewan Party was opposed to this 
law. We are opposed to this law, and we will remain opposed to 

this law in the future. I hope all members of the House can say 
the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill was pushed forward by the federal 
Liberals and the federal NDP (New Democratic Party). And I 
think the voters of Saskatchewan should remember that when 
the next federal election rolls around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This law will do nothing to fight crime. It will only punish 
law-abiding citizens throughout this country, and do it with 
their own money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I am asked by people what we do next to get 
rid of this asinine law, I believe the best response is this, Mr. 
Speaker. We have to change the federal government. That is the 
only way we can bring some common sense to this issue. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Lottery Agreement Signed 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday there 
was good news for the volunteer organizations that provide 
sport, culture, and recreation opportunities for the citizens of 
our province. 
 
The minister responsible for culture has signed a new three-year 
lottery licence agreement with representatives of Sask Sport. 
This agreement ensures that Saskatchewan citizens will be able 
to continue accessing recreation programs that they might not 
otherwise have access to. 
 
The opportunities that the proceeds from ticket sales are 
indispensable to Saskatchewan citizens. These are opportunities 
that contribute to the well-being of individuals and the 
economic and social viability of our communities. 
 
Children who did not previously take part in sport, recreation, 
and cultural programs are now able to through programs such as 
the northern community school program, KidSport, and Youth 
with Challenges dance program. Other programs, such as the 
Trans Canada Trail, are examples of programs that benefit all 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 12,000 sport, recreation, and cultural groups 
and organizations make up the Sask Sport system and continue 
to be fundamental to the quality of life in all our communities. 
The opportunities for people of all ages to access their programs 
must continually be encouraged and developed, and this new 
agreement attempts to do just that. 
 
On behalf of all my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate all of the partners involved in signing this 
agreement. Thank you. 
 

Saskatchewan Party’s Vision for the Future 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to take this opportunity to report on a very important luncheon I 
attended in Saskatoon yesterday. 
 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

Nearly 400 people, mostly from the business community, 
turned out yesterday to hear the Leader of the Opposition lay 
out his vision — our vision — for the future in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, that vision is one of hope for the 
future and a belief that things can be better here in 
Saskatchewan, and that we don’t have to simply accept the 
notion perpetuated by the NDP that Saskatchewan shouldn’t 
reach for the top. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s speech laid out a 
four-point plan for Saskatchewan’s future that will put us on the 
road to prosperity. Those points were: lower taxes in the context 
of a smaller government; fair labour laws; the development of a 
strong and positive relationship between Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal peoples that works for the betterment of all; and 
a serious examination of the future of Crown-owned businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is by no means a complete list of everything 
that must be done in order to put Saskatchewan on the right 
track. But it is a solid plan that was well received by the 
business community in Saskatoon, and one that is being 
applauded around this province everyday as it becomes more 
and more and more obvious each and everyday that the NDP 
alongside their Liberal puppets haven’t got a clue which way 
this province is to head. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SIAST Aboriginal Employment Development Program 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
excellent post-secondary education system continues to 
improve. As a supporter of fair and equitable employment, I’m 
delighted to announce that a third institution has become a 
partner with the Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program. 
 
Yesterday at a ceremony at the Wascana Campus in Regina, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) agreed to, according to the mandate of the 
program, prepare its workplaces for the Aboriginal workforce 
and to promote education within the Aboriginal community. 
 
SIAST now joins the U of R (University of Regina), and the U 
of S (University of Saskatoon) as partners in this program. I 
regret even having to mention this, Mr. Speaker, but this 
employment development program is not a program of racial 
preference as some would have us believe. 
 
Quite the contrary. The Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program identifies employment needs and opportunities which 
then allows Aboriginal people to focus their training and 
compete for these jobs on an equal footing. This partnership is a 
perfect fit for SIAST — of its nearly 8,200 students, Mr. 
Speaker, 15 per cent are First Nations and Metis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the aims of this program are to foster fairness and 
equity, consistency of approach, mutual respect and dignity, 
open communication, and trust. I am proud of this program and 
congratulate SIAST. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rocanville Farmer Cycling Across Canada 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as was 
earlier indicated, Dennis Hack, a farmer from the Rocanville 
area is cycling across this country. And, Mr. Speaker, on June 
4, he dipped the back tire of his bicycle into the Pacific Ocean 
at Vancouver Stanley Park. Today he is here with us in the 
Assembly, and tomorrow at 11:30 he plans on being in the 
community of Moosomin for a special welcoming ceremony 
and encouragement as he continues his journey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have to suggest that being . . . I hope at 60 
years of age I have the same abilities and am able to bike along 
at that clip that Mr. Hack has been certainly biking along. He 
plans on being on the road for about 55 days, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, for example, he left Swift Current yesterday at 8 a.m., 
arriving in Regina — after having had a couple stops — at 9:15. 
I’m not sure if I’d have quite made it to Herbert myself. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for us to recognize the 
reason he’s bicycling across this country is because he’s doing 
something he feels very strongly about. He’s thankful for the 
way the health care system has met his need. This is his 
contribution to health care, not only in this province but 
certainly for his community and the integrated health facility in 
the community of Moosomin. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to say thank you to Mr. Hack and all 
the residents of Saskatchewan who are so proud of the health 
care system and so willing to give of themselves to help meet 
the needs so that residents of the future can enjoy quality health 
care. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legends of the Road in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, a group of Seattle high school 
students will help re-establish Moose Jaw’s place in baseball 
history this summer. Students from Chief Sealth High School 
will leave Seattle on bicycle on June 21, embarking on a 4,444 
mile journey through Western Canada and the United States. 
This is all part of the Legends of the Road Journey, an event 
used to help recognize and celebrate the 100th anniversary of 
baseball barnstorming. 
 
Barnstorming was a phenomenon which occurred in the first 
half of the 20th century due to the segregation of black baseball 
players. The barnstorming circuit allowed Negro League teams 
to compete against a broad array of white professional and 
semi-professional baseball teams throughout Canada and the 
United States. 
 
The Legends of the Road event is both a research project and 
fundraising venture for the Negro Leagues Museum. Students 
from Moose Jaw’s Peacock Collegiate are helping in the event 
by researching and documenting local barnstorming history. 
 
Moose Jaw is one of just four communities the students will 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

visit in Saskatchewan — Swift Current, Indian Head, and 
Moosomin being the others. Moose Jaw will also be one of the 
few cities which will feature in a documentary of the event 
being put together by the History Channel. Festivities in Moose 
Jaw will include as well a baseball game at Ross Wells Park on 
July 12. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the students of Seattle’s 
Chief Sealth High School, Moose Jaw’s Peacock Collegiate, 
and all other participants in the Legends of the Road Journey. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 31, Rebecca Ellis of Hazlet was driving 
east on Highway 332 just east of Hazlet when an oncoming 
vehicle sent a large chunk of asphalt flying into her windshield. 
The impact was so great that it sent broken glass flying into the 
vehicle, including some pieces of glass that wound up in her 
eye. 
 
Mr. Minster, shouldn’t people be able to drive down 
Saskatchewan highways without having this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask the hon. member to 
kindly recognize the rules of the Assembly as far as exhibits are 
concerned. Kindly go directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, the question is pretty simple. 
Shouldn’t Rebecca Ellis and the rest of Saskatchewan motorists 
have the assurance and the confidence that they can drive down 
your highways without chunks of asphalt flying up in their 
windshield? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, of course we’re very concerned about public safety, 
and it’s obvious we would be concerned when a situation like 
that occurs. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to talk about the facts, 
Mr. Speaker. Day after day the opposition comes in here with 
petitions for us to cut the fuel tax — 5 cents a litre they say, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s 30 per cent of the revenue that this province 
raises for fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. And I looked through the paper 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and I see a headline that says, 
Hermanson calls for further tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if the opposition would explain to me, Mr. Speaker, how 
you can day after day ask for tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, and at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, improve the infrastructure in the 
province of Saskatchewan — it’s absolutely impossible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — I think the minister’s missing the point. The 
people of Saskatchewan would like you to do something — 
either fix their roads, use the fuel tax to fix the roads, or cut the 
fuel tax. Do something, Minister. I think that’s what people are 
saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, Rebecca sent us a letter asking a number of 
questions, and I’d like to ask the minister those questions on her 
behalf. Her letter says, and I quote: 
 

This is ridiculous, don’t you think? 
 
We all pay our taxes out here so why should we have to 
suffer? 
 
What is it going to take to make you people realize what 
needs to be done out here (she writes)? 
 
Does someone need to be terribly injured before you take 
notice? 
 

Mr. Minister, what is it going to take? Does someone have to be 
seriously injured or worse before you’ll give them more than 
NDP excuses and fix the highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just before the minister answers, I 
would just like to remind all hon. members to kindly address 
their questions through the Chair. I thank you for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said many times in 
the House, this government has determined and believes that 
the infrastructure on our highway system is very important, and 
that’s why we have committed $250 million this year, Mr. 
Speaker, the highest Highways budget ever and 6.6 per cent 
increase, well above the rate of inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t like to hear this, Mr. 
Speaker, but those members opposite voted in favour . . . spoke 
in favour, I should say, of the abolition of the Crow benefit — 
$320 million a year, Mr. Speaker. Much of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, went back to the producers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We had rail-line abandonment, and as a result of rail-line 
abandonment, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got heavy trucks that are 
now travelling on our highways and causing severe damage on 
the roads that the member brought into the legislature today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Minister, in most places when 
someone decides to go for a drive they say that it’s time to hit the 
road. Unfortunately in NDP Saskatchewan, the roads hit back, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, if Saskatchewan highways were a workplace, 
occupational health and safety would have shut most of them 
down long ago. And the fact is, Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
highways are a workplace in the province of Saskatchewan — for 
freight companies, for truckers, ambulance drivers, bus drivers, 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

and farmers hauling grain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of these people face unsafe working conditions at their 
workplace, the Saskatchewan highways, each and every day 
because of the neglect and improper maintenance of highways of 
this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, this piece of asphalt hit Rebecca’s car right in front 
of her face. If it had come through the windshield she might have 
been very seriously injured. Is that what it’s going to take for you 
to fix Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I say you can’t 
have a huge debt that was created by those members opposite and 
paying $2 million a day interest, Mr. Speaker. You can’t come in 
here every day asking for us to cut the fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to tell you . . . I want to read to the members opposite 
and to the members of the legislature, a article . . . an article I 
should say, out of The Leader-Post of June 15, today. And it goes 
as follows: 
 

Berthelot congratulated the provincial highways 
department for making do in a bad situation. Many of its 
engineers have been burning the midnight oil trying to 
come up with a solution for a problem that wasn’t of their 
making . . . (Mr. Speaker). 

 
The problem was created by those folks opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, excuses aren’t cutting it anymore. 
You’ve had nine years of collecting fuel tax from Saskatchewan 
people. This government’s had nine years of collecting the 
second-highest income tax in the dominion from Saskatchewan 
people; nine years of utility rate hikes. Nine years, Mr. Speaker, 
of auto insurance rate increases. It’s now time for them to stand 
up, suck it up, and take nine years worth of responsibility for 
broken-down highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On behalf of Rebecca Ellis and everyone else who must travel 
dangerous Saskatchewan highways, will this minister now stand 
in his place and take some responsibility for the sad state of 
Saskatchewan roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll tell you who should take some 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. It’s that member who worked in the 
premier’s office in the last government who contributed to 
much of the problems that we have today, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
who should take some responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what we’re 
fighting, Mr. Speaker. This government is fighting the fact that 
we have to pay $2 million a day interest on the debt, Mr. 
Speaker. Eight kilometres a day, Mr. Speaker, of structural 
pavement at $250,000 a kilometre, Mr. Speaker — that’s what 

we could construct if we didn’t have that amount of debt that 
those members created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have some 
questions for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning in Climax about 200 people showed 
up to fix Highway 18. Unfortunately they were rained out, but 
they plan to reschedule their work crew for another day. 
 
Mr. Minister, more and more Saskatchewan communities are 
saying no to your plan to gravel highways. 
 
This morning you received a letter from the village of Briercrest 
voicing their strong opposition to your plan to gravel Highway 
339. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to start listening to the 
growing list of communities opposed to your plan to turn 
highways back to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think 
that the members opposite should get together in caucus over 
what their real view is on roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read an article or a clipping, I should 
say, out of the Southwest Booster from June 10. Here we are. It 
goes as follows: 
 

“There is no doubt the highways were never designed to 
meet the kind of traffic loads (as) . . . they are (having to 
carry) . . . now,” says Wayne Elhard. 
 

Mr. Speaker, also the member from Saltcoats said: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back in gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me on that . . . point, 
but I honestly feel there must be some point there where 
we (will) have to give up. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said often, we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In case they 
didn’t hear it, the member from Saltcoats says: 
 

Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having 
them back in gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many of my constituents agree with me (he says) on . . . 
this point, but I honestly feel there must be some point . . . 
where we have to give up. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our government will not give up even though we 
are having to pay $2 million a day interest on their debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the Minister 
of Highways. Mr. Minister, the village of Briercrest says they 
have been told for the last two years that you were going to fix 
their highway. However this hasn’t happened, so now they plan 
to fix their own highway and they’re asking for your help. 
 
They want to know if you, the Department of Highways, will 
assist them by supplying asphalt and equipment? They are also 
providing the assurance that they will observe all safety 
measures. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to help the people of Briercrest fix 
Highway 339 or, better yet, will your government live up to its 
responsibility and fix it yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the 
members opposite understand. But when they voted and spoke 
in favour of, when they voted and spoke in favour, Mr. Speaker, 
of the abolition of the Crow rate, that cost us $320 million a 
year, Mr. Speaker — $320 million. And when they created the 
$15 billion debt, Mr. Speaker, that cost . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Hon. members, I would ask 
members on both sides to kindly respect your rules and the 
decorum of this venerable institution. Allow members to be 
heard, both when asking the question and when giving the 
answer. I ask for your co-operation, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And, Mr. Speaker, if I could conclude, 
when they created the $15 billion debt, Mr. Speaker, that cost 
us $700 million a year in interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know how you can create that kind of situation, call for 
tax cuts day after day, Mr. Speaker, and for improved services 
and infrastructure. It absolutely is impossible; it does not add 
up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Red Coat Trail 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, I have received a letter 
from the RM (rural municipality) of Key West. They are very 
upset about the NDP government’s plan to revert sections of the 
historic Red Coat Trail, Highway 13, to gravel. 
 
And I quote: 
 

This truly is an outrage and this government needs to be 
stopped. This is another form of downloading to the 
municipalities. We are very afraid of what the future of this 
highway holds. We project that in the future they will turn 
this highway back to the RM and we will be responsible 
for this highway. 
 

And I further quote: 
 

We the people of Saskatchewan are definitely saying 
we’ve had enough. Stop all of this erosion of services and 
let’s get back to running this province the way it should be. 

Mr. Minister, can you commit to the RM of Key West that you 
will listen to their ratepayers and not convert the Red Coat Trail 
to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly glad 
to get a question from the member from Weyburn because I 
want to read a quote from the Weyburn Review of October 20, 
1999 that said . . . where she says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan and keeping the money here if that’s what 
we’re going to do (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Well I would say to that member, and I would say to the public 
of Saskatchewan and to the employees, especially in the 
Department of Highways, if that member is in favour of 
privatized health care, I can only guess and surmise that she 
might well be in favour of privatizing roads and in favour of 
privatizing the Department of Highways as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Another question to the Minister of Highways. 
One RM after another is expressing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 
question for the Minister of Highways. One RM after another is 
expressing serious concerns about your move to turn provincial 
highways back to gravel. People of this province are very upset 
that the highways they rely on have only been neglected by 
your department for years and are now being converted to 
gravel. 
 
The RM of Laurier met in Radville last night. They too are 
planning to protest your plans to turn sections of Highway 28 to 
gravel. They are distributing a petition to area residents who 
will urge you not to take this action and they will be asking to 
meet with you. 
 
Mr. Minister, no one is buying your phoney budget numbers. 
They know administration costs have increased and actual 
spending on maintenance and construction has decreased. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you begin to listen to the concerns of 
people in these communities and stop the plans to revert their 
highways back to gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I would say if that 
member’s concerned — really genuinely concerned — about 
roads being reverted back to gravel, she should talk to the 
member beside her from Saltcoats who says, “Maybe there is a 
point that we would be better off having them back in gravel,” 
Mr. Speaker. He says, “and I don’t think I’d probably have 
many . . . constituents agree with me on that . . . point, but I 
honestly feel there must be some point there where we have to 
give up,” Mr. Speaker. She should talk to that member, Mr. 
Speaker. 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would be especially concerned, as I’ve 
said before, that member who speaks in favour of privatizing 
health care, would she also be in favour — and I wish she 
would answer the question, Mr. Speaker — would she also be 
in favour of privatizing the Department of Highways and/or 
privatizing the highways, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction Industry Labour Legislation 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Labour. Madam Minister, I have received a 
letter from the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth. 
They have invited me to attend a debate on The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000 on Thursday, 
June 29. The organization believes this debate will help 
Saskatchewan businesses understand the changes to the Act and 
determine what effect it may have on them. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe that the business community and 
indeed the industries who will be most affected by this 
regressive legislation need to have all of the information and all 
the effects known and I intend to take this opportunity. 
 
Madam Minister, will you accept this invitation to this debate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we 
already have a place for this debate and that’s right here in this 
House. And I’m happy to go toe to toe with the member any 
day, and he can ask whoever he wishes to tune in and hear the 
debate. 
 
But the fact of the matter is is this legislation . . . any of the 
people he’s talking about would operate under essentially the 
same rules in any other province. There’s no place in Canada 
that allows double-breasting of unionized companies. And he 
knows that and I don’t know why he keeps asking this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the 
minister’s scared of, but why will the minister not commit to 
this today? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth 
represents three-quarters of all businesses in Saskatchewan. 
They have expressed their concerns with this legislation and 
believe that economic development in this province will be 
hindered by this legislation. 
 
They have publicly stated that they believe you have not been 
forthcoming with all the facts. And they have requested that this 
legislation be removed from the government’s agenda until 
there has been a province-wide consultation with business and 
industry on this issue. 
 
They’ve requested a meeting with you and they’ve asked the 
Premier to step in to the forefront of this issue. Madam 
Minister, why are you afraid to face the business community to 
discuss this legislation? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, 
we greatly value the business community and we had a hundred 
meetings trying to resolve this issue in some kind of friendly 
and co-operative way. 
 
But I ask the member opposite, what his true motives are. When 
he gets up in the House and he says that unions are job killers, I 
guess I have to ask him, is he talking about public-sector 
unions, is he talking about private-sector unions, or is he just 
generally against the right of workers to a democratic 
workplace? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Licensed Practical Nurses’ Legislation 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, later today the legislature will consider Bill 
73, The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000. The 
Saskatchewan Party will be proposing an amendment to address 
a major concern of both registered nurses and licensed practical 
nurses. 
 
As you are aware, Madam Minister, The Registered Nurses Act, 
1988 holds the RNs (registered nurse) accountable for the 
overall provision, coordination, and evaluation of nursing care. 
However, LPNs (licensed practical nurses) rightly argue that 
there are many circumstances in which the training and 
experience they have to provide for personal nursing care on an 
independent basis. Mr. Speaker, the SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association) also acknowledges this case. 
 
Madam Minister, in order to clarify this whole issue, we’re 
proposing this amendment this afternoon. Madam Minister, will 
you support the amendment, and if not, why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, right after question 
period, I understand that we’re going to Committee of the 
Whole. We’ll have an opportunity to go through the Bill clause 
by clause and I can give a much more detailed response to the 
member at that time. 
 
I can assure the public that the legislation that we’ve introduced 
is going to allow licensed practical nurses in this province to 
work to their education and training as they should be able to 
do, as other professional groups are able to do in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
minister. Madam Minister, while nobody is going to be 
surprised that you’re going to put politics ahead of really 
understanding and considering important health care motions, 
Madam Minister, if you won’t consider our amendment 
appropriately, Madam Minister, will you at least consider 
another option? 
 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

You, yourself, have initiated a mediation process between the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association and the licensed 
practical nurses. And as well, you’ve also initiated a health care 
review yesterday. Madam Minister, will you consider at least 
postponing this legislation until either of these processes have a 
chance to address these issues appropriately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is what I will say to 
the member. Mr. Speaker, every day in this Legislative 
Assembly and sometimes on occasion outside of this 
Legislative Assembly — we have people that are appointed and 
involved in health care in this province — and far too often, I 
hear from the members opposite, a real besmirching of people’s 
reputations. And I think that that . . . the time to talk about other 
people in this Legislative Assembly and what they do in health 
care, those days are over. 
 
What we want to develop in this province is a health care 
system that is citizen-focused, that allows health providers to 
come together and work in a team way. Mr. Speaker, the 
registered nurses in this province, the licensed practical nurses 
in this province, and the psychiatric nurses in this province, 
along with nursing assistants, want to move forward in having a 
team approach to health delivery. And that’s the way it should 
be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Review 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again the 
minister has missed a question entirely, so I’ll direct my next 
question to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday morning you refused to assure reporters 
in your press conference that there would be no further hospital 
closures until after the royal . . . or the health care commission 
has reported. But later in question period, you said hospitals 
would not be closed at all. 
 
It’s just like your position on the Canada Health Act. When 
you’re in Ottawa, you say it’s almost irrelevant; and when 
you’re back home, you consider it gospel. Why always the 
different versions of what’s going to happen? 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I want to give you the opportunity to set the 
record straight. Will you assure this province, the communities 
in this province, that hospitals and health care facilities will not 
be closed while this review is happening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked 
me this question yesterday, and I said to the hon. member then 
that there will be no hospital closures pending the review, and 
we expect few major disruptions during the course of the 
review. 
 
But while we’re on the question of hospital closures, I want to 
draw to the attention of you, Mr. Speaker, and the members of 
the House, a Leader-Post article of March 3, 1999, headlined, 

“More hospitals changing,” quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson couldn’t 
guarantee his party would keep the doors open at all 36 
hospitals with low average daily bed usage rates. An 
evaluation would be done first (he said) to decide how to 
best serve the communities, he added. 

 
My question to you is what is your position and your leader’s 
position on those 36 hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
again for the Premier. Mr. Premier, you keep doing that. After 
nine years you keep shirking your own responsibility. After 
nine years, and all the years you’ve served in this legislature, 
Mr. Premier, surely you can stand in this House and be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
surely after all of these years you can stand up in this House and 
be responsible and accountable for the mess your wellness 
adventure has put this province’s health care system in. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you refer the wellness model to this 
commission, to get a report card from this independent 
commissioner to see what he thinks of your system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the commissioner, Mr. 
Fyke who is respected nationally, and I would even in many 
quarters, internationally, on health care, has a carte blanche to 
examine the health care system, including the wellness concept 
which has been inserted within the context of the five principles 
of the Canada Health Act and medicare. 
 
I’ve given that answer, and I’ve given the answer on hospitals. 
But what you have not done, sir, and I would ask that the 
journalists ask you, and more particularly, the Leader of the 
Opposition, is why you have failed to give us your answer on 
his statement that 36 hospitals are likely to be closed if the 
Saskatchewan money-for-value audit is going to be established. 
 
You, sir — and you, sir, — and the Saskatchewan Party are the 
enemies of medicare, and the people in Saskatchewan know 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government being both open and accountable, we are very 
pleased and happy to table a response to question 177. And we 
hope the opposition understands it, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 177 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
 

The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Health to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, beside me today is Marlene 
Smadu, who is the primary nursing advisor to the Department 
of Health, and is presently the assistant deputy minister for the 
department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Yorkton on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank the 
member from Melfort for the leave. I want to introduce, Mr. 
Chair, seated in the west gallery, a young man by the name of 
Aaron Nagy who is from the small little community of Rhein 
and attends school at the Regional High School in Yorkton. 
 
This morning and today he’s with me. He’s shadowing a 
minister is how it’s called, and this morning we were at 
Buchanan where we addressed the SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) regional meeting of which 
Mr. Nagy was a part of. This afternoon he observed the 
proceedings in the House and later today will accompany me to 
another meeting that I have and then return back to Yorkton. 
 
So I ask members of the Assembly to join with me today in 
welcoming Aaron to the House. I know that soon he will be 
making his presence to the floor of this Assembly, I’m sure. He 
hasn’t yet told me on which side of the House he prefers to sit 
on but I expect it’s going to be over here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Mr. Chair, ask all members of the 
House to join with me in welcoming him to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
want to introduce members of the licensed practical nurses’ 
association who are here this afternoon. In particular I want to 
recognize Gloria Miller who is the past president of SALPN 
(Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses); Judy 
Zawyrucka, who is the Regina chapter president. Heather 
Cuguat, works in Weyburn. Gord Campbell, who is the 

president of the Regina CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) local; Andrew Huculak, who is the staff member at 
CUPE; Cathy Ogle, who is from the Estevan LPN chapter; 
along with Sherry Schindel, who works here in Regina and 
Doug Ferris, who works here in Regina. 
 
And all of these people are here this afternoon to see the 
workings of the legislature. As well, Ede Leeson, the executive 
director of SALPN is attending as well this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to welcome the various LPNs that 
are in the galleries, as well, this afternoon to observe this. It’s 
sort of difficult sitting where I am because I can’t usually see 
people, because the clock is in the road. So welcome all of you 
that are here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we get into a clause by clause 
discussion of this important legislation, I don’t want to go into 
depth in terms of repeating the speech and the comments that I 
made in second reading, because I think that’s the time to 
debate the principles of this legislation. 
 
But I do want to repeat one important fact, that as a matter of 
principle and direction, the official opposition is fully 
supportive of the licensed practical nurses having their own 
independent association and the professional set-up of that 
legislation to allow them to function appropriately and 
completely within the general nursing profession, and more 
generally in the health care field in broader terms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly have had a 
great deal of opportunity to consult with licensed practical 
nurses. I have had . . . We’ve had, as a caucus, a couple of 
meetings with the association. I’ve had individual meetings and 
discussions. I’ve had written communications and I’ve had 
meetings with individual groups of licensed practical nurses 
most recently in my own constituency. And I do appreciate the 
comments that I’ve heard on all those occasions. 
 
I also want to say that I have to say that I’m very impressed by 
the absolute dedication and commitment that these individuals 
have to the practice of nursing. And I certainly do commend 
them for that and do believe that the legislation that we’re 
considering today is an important step in a long progress or a 
long journey really not only for licensed practical nurses but for 
what I think is a changing atmosphere in the nursing profession 
in general. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to clarify that we have said and 
we continue to say . . . and on Friday we faxed copies of this 
proposed amendment to both the LPN association and the 
registered nurses’ association. Also, I gave copies of the 
proposed amendment to the minister for her consideration. So I 
have to say for the record, and I think it would be agreed, this is 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

nothing that’s coming as a huge surprise at the last moment. We 
have expressed our concern about the wording of this issue and 
we would like to explore some of those issues in more detail. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had a number of communications 
from registered nurses, both individually and from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association officially. And as 
in our conversations and from these discussions — and as well 
I’ve even had a letter from the Alberta registered nurses’ 
association expressing their concerns about this legislation — 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I have to say that I do understand 
the concern, I’m hopeful that we can address some of the 
concerns in our questions to the minister today. And that may 
go some distance in alleviating concerns that have been 
expressed by the registered nurses association in particular. 
 
And, Madam Minister, if I could direct this comment and 
question to you then in specific. One of the issues and concerns, 
and it’s a serious one . . . And I really appreciate Ms. Smadu 
being with you because I do recognize the great amount of 
experience that she does have and I welcome her here today. 
And I do appreciate the fact that she in on board with the 
department to try to bring a real professional perspective about 
the nursing issues to the department. 
 
And so I’m particularly pleased that she’s here today to advise 
you in terms — and maybe you don’t need it — but the issue is 
very important from the RN standpoint. And they say that —. 
and I’ll just quote a paragraph of a letter I received dated June 
12 from Rivie Seaberg; I was just looking to whose signature 
was on it — that says this, it says there is a concern that has to 
do with the fact that, and I quote: 
 

. . . while the LPN is responsible for his/her actions by 
virtue of being self-regulated, the RN legislation holds the 
RN accountable for the overall provision, coordination and 
evaluation of nursing care. 

 
Madam Minister, I believe that this philosophically is a great 
concern of RNs in terms of interpretation of their responsibility 
as being pretty comprehensive. 
 
Will you state for the record, for the comfort of registered 
nurses, that with the passing of this legislation, the proposed 
LPN legislation, that it would then limit the responsibility of the 
registered nurses under their legislation to actions and conduct 
conducted by their members, and the LPNs as a professional 
autonomous association would be responsible solely and 
independently for the action of their members. 
 
Would you comment and give comfort on the record of the 
issue that the registered nurses raise? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that each 
of the nursing groups or each of the practitioner groups are 
responsible for their own level of competency, and therefore 
their associations are responsible for ensuring that people are 
not practising beyond their level of education and training or 
beyond their competency levels. That’s point number one. 
 
The second point I want to make is that the entire discipline of 

nursing has you know three different nursing groups: the LPNs, 
the RPNs (registered practical nurse), and also the RNs. And 
one of the things that’s become so apparent in the various 
discussions that have taken place over the last two years is that 
you can’t solve problems per se in legislation. What you can do 
is to provide the legislative framework and then the three, in 
this case, three nursing groups need to get together. 
 
And the three nursing groups have gotten together through a 
mediation process. The three nursing groups are working 
towards what we will call a nursing articulation document 
which will clearly outline to employers and to the public, levels 
of expectation and responsibilities for the three nursing groups. 
 
The three nursing groups will then, once they’ve agreed to this 
document, they will then take the document out to the public 
and the employers and the other people in the workplace, and 
they’re going to implement this document together. 
 
What we’re trying to do is get to the whole notion of team 
nursing. And this is happening in other parts of Canada. 
 
I also note that you said that the Alberta registered nurses 
association has written you, and I also received a copy of that 
letter. But I do note that in the province of Alberta, licensed 
practical nurses do have their own legislation and do practise 
not under the direction of another medical provider. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. They are 
good comments but they still beg an answer to the question 
specifically that I asked. And that is specifically, Madam 
Minister — and I’m not trying to trap you; I’m trying to be very 
clear — the registered nurses are concerned that their legislation 
holds them responsible and accountable as RNs for the overall 
provision and coordination and evaluation — assessment, if you 
like — of nursing care. 
 
And what they want I think clearly to understand is that if this 
legislation is passed, that sets up the LPNs as a clearly 
autonomous professional association, that registered nurses 
should clearly have your assurance, Madam Minister, that the 
interpretation of their legislation of this overall responsibility 
does not overlap to being responsible for conduct or scope of 
practise that licensed practical nurses would have as an 
autonomous association. 
 
I think they want you to say clearly and specifically that that 
would be the case, that they would not be held responsible for 
anything other than the actions of their members within their 
professional association. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Each of the nursing groups is 
responsible for their own competency or skill sets. Registered 
nurses will continue to be responsible for the coordination of 
care. They are not going to be liable for the actions of people 
who practise beyond their skill sets. 
 
They are responsible for the coordination of care in our various 
health facilities. And that’s not going to change. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Madam Minister, if they’re 
responsible for the coordination of care, does that responsibility 
then extend to . . . and it moves into why the amendment. The 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

amendment and part of the vagueness of definition is where it is 
appropriate under scope of practise for LPNs to operate 
autonomously, if you like. 
 
And the general consensus taken right out of the SALPN 
documents and their own association documents, and I don’t 
have the exact wording in front of me, but basically says where 
the situation and the . . . of a client is stable and predictable — I 
think are the words — then it’s appropriate for LPNs to operate 
autonomously and without direction. Where that situation 
changes, where it’s unpredictable or unstable, then it is 
something that we would ask that LPNs would then do 
collaboratively with registered nurses or doctors or other health 
care professionals. That’s the thrust of our amendment. 
 
In the legislation, as you’ve written it, that is very vague. And 
as such, I think it is that issue that’s creating a concern by 
registered nurses if, as you say, they’re responsible for the 
overall coordination, then where is the responsibility on the 
other side to then work co-operatively. Because it is pretty moot 
on that point in the legislation as you provided, Madam 
Minister. 
 
And as I see it, you either got to sort of isolate the registered 
nurses from responsibility in this regard of overall coordination, 
because there needs to be some authority that goes with overall 
coordination. Or you’ve got to come out with the proper scope 
that says we’ve got to have then some definition that brings 
comfort not only to the registered nurses, but in many licensed 
practical nurses in the workplace that I’ve talked to are also 
concerned about the vagueness of the wording and were quite 
supportive of the wording that came on the basis of their own 
scope of practise wording in their association. 
 
So, Madam Minister, that’s the dilemma. And I didn’t hear the 
words of comfort that we needed here in terms of where the 
responsibility of the RNs end and the responsibility picks up 
under this legislation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m getting lots of advice so I’m going 
to try and synthesize the advice that I’ve been given. 
 
What I will say is this: I think what you’re trying to get me to 
say is that registered nurses will only be responsible for their 
own competence and conduct, and LPNs will only be 
responsible for their own conduct and competence, and 
registered psychiatric nurses and physicians and so on and so 
forth. 
 
What I can say is this: that the licensed practical nurses 
association and the registered nurses are responsible for their 
competency and their conduct. But there is this other notion of 
team — that you work together and that the health system is a 
. . . It’s not just a stovepipe. People work together in teams, and 
there is this thing called the health districts, which is the 
employer, and then there are people who direct the work within 
the workplace. 
 
And I have to work — if I was a registered nurse — I have to 
work with other people in the workplace, as do LPNs, and we 
need to work together. Now if I, as a licensed practical nurse, 
go beyond my scope of practice, do something I’m not 
supposed to be doing, I can be disciplined. And the same goes 

for a registered nurse and goes for a physician and so on. 
 
But we need to work together in order for the health system to 
work. And there are some people who will be in charge of 
coordinating and integrating the system. And if an individual 
goes beyond their scope of practice, obviously that individual 
and her or his regulatory body will deal with that. And that 
individual could be disciplined for inappropriate conduct 
moving beyond their education and training. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I do want 
to say in preface towards my next comments that I do recognize 
this mediation process and the value — and that’s going to be 
valuable and important. Make no mistake. I agree with that. 
 
But we’re talking about legislation here that sort of is the 
underpinning of the whole thing, and so that sort of, I think, 
does take precedence in a way because that’s where you come 
back to as a foundation, if you like. 
 
And I do appreciate your comments of this notion of team, but 
the concern is it’s sort of a one-way street where the RNs feel 
because they . . . in their legislation, they feel that the wording 
in that legislation has them responsible — as I outlined, and I 
won’t go over all the words — but for the overall coordination 
and these other issues, that that has an onus of responsibility on 
them that they do not have the comfort in the LPN’s legislation 
makes that a reciprocal team arrangement. 
 
And so they feel while they have the responsibility, there is 
nothing in the LPN legislation that clearly sets out some 
framework whereby there is an obligation and responsibility for 
the LPNs to clearly understand where their scope of practice 
and competencies are clearly outlined to be independent, where 
you say . . . you know, where we’ve said in our amendment 
where it should be — I have more papers around here than I 
need — where it says a predictable outcome, you know. 
 
And that issue of course is where we say it’s clearly understood 
by everyone, registered nurses as well — and they should 
understand this — that where you’re in a situation of stable and 
predictable outcomes, that the LPNs are fully able to function 
within their scope of practice and competency. I don’t think 
that’s an argument. 
 
The problem becomes if you get beyond that, where you end up 
with an unpredictable situation or an unstable situation, there is 
nothing in the LPN legislation as you propose it, Madam 
Minister, that says that the LPN should be part of that notion of 
team that you just described. 
 
The RNs feel the responsibility in their legislation to be a part 
of the team, but it’s not balanced and reciprocal. And that’s the 
concern. 
 
If you look at the legislation as you propose it, Madam 
Minister, when you talk about the practice of licensed practical 
nurse, it means: 
 

. . . to provide services, within the education and training 
of licensed practical nurses for the purposes of providing 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

care, promoting health and preventing illness. 
 
It doesn’t lay out at all those general terms. And I recognize that 
LPN association can set bylaws and get very specific — I 
understand that all. But I think the concern is it’s sort of a 
one-way street. And what our amendment is attempting to do is 
to provide comfort, not only for the registered nurses, but also 
an indication of responsibility on the LPN side for something 
they all acknowledge. Because they’re also a part of a team, and 
when it moves beyond their scope of practice, they should work 
with other health care providers. 
 
That’s what we’ve tried to do with this amendment, and that’s 
why we’re concerned about the way the wording of the 
legislation is right now. Because I think — this whole thing is 
important — but I think it leaves an ambiguity that is pretty 
fundamental, that I think is a real concern, Madam Minister. 
 
So that’s why we’re asking you, either say look at the registered 
nurses are not responsible for this coordination and the overall 
responsibility, or say, let’s come up with a better definition here 
in this legislation which we’ve proposed that I think is 
beneficial to both sides, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I will say to the member, I really 
do appreciate your effort to try and address the issues that have 
been raised certainly by the registered nurses’ association. What 
I need you to know is that I have considered the . . . I have 
considered a number of possibilities in trying to resolve the 
issue that the registered nurses do have. 
 
Unfortunately, your suggested revision to the legislation raises a 
number of concerns and questions, and I’ll just give you one 
example. What is a predictable outcome? Now a predictable 
outcome could be that, you know, I have a stable condition, I go 
to a health facility, the licensed practical nurse is able to provide 
me with my medication, and I go home. That could be a 
predicable outcome. 
 
Another predictable outcome that has been raised by some of 
my officials is this. I am a patient, I’m in an intensive care unit, 
I require catheterization, I require a respirator perhaps, and my 
predictable outcome is that I’m in the process of passing away. 
Would it be appropriate for a licensed practical nurse, given her 
or her present education and training, to be providing services 
in an intensive care unit? And I’m advised it would not be. 
 
So we have . . . what’s important here is your education and 
training. And your education and training determines the kinds 
of services that you’re able to provide to the public. And there 
are several other examples of some of the difficulties that your 
amendment . . . I know you have good intentions but your 
amendment creates a number of difficulties that we just don’t 
think will be helpful as the registered nurses, the licensed 
practical nurses, and the registered psychiatric nurses go 
through this mediation process. 
 
And we think that the scope of practice provision should 
indicate very clearly and we’ve . . . for all the other professional 
legislation we haven’t even talked about a scope of practice, 
except for RNs and LPNs. And what we’ve said in this 
particular legislation is that we don’t believe the scope of 
practice for a licensed practical nurse should go beyond his or 

her level of education and training. 
 
And now we’ve got the mediation process. They’re going to 
work through that process. They’re going to arrive at a 
consensus on what the articulation document should look like 
for nursing, and then they’re going to implement it together. 
And we think that’s important. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I don’t know if we’re going to get anywhere here in 
terms of agreeing. I suspect we’re not. But I would like to 
address the issues that you raised. 
 
In terms of predictable income, one of the things that I was 
impressed by in all my discussions with licensed practical 
nurses, is their acknowledgement of the fact that they recognize, 
within their scope of practice and competency based on their 
education and experience, where things get beyond what they 
can handle. 
 
And so when you’re talking about a predictable outcome, they 
do understand that if a client’s situation changes where it gets 
into a more critical or emergent situation, or unpredictable, that 
they know that they have to engage people. I think that that’s 
clearly understood. And in all the discussions I’ve had, there is 
very clearly that commitment that’s there. 
 
The concern in this issue — and you raised a couple of 
examples. If the first example you made where you go into a 
facility, that you are stable and predictable, and that changes, I 
have every confidence that licensed practical nurses on the 
scene will engage the assistance and help of other appropriate 
health people in order to deal appropriately. 
 
The acute care situation, or the palliative care situation that you 
addressed, I would again say to you in that specific instance, if 
indeed, that that person’s predictable outcome is terminal, and 
indeed, if the competency and the training of the LPN is clearly 
sufficient to take care of catheterization or respiratory 
assistance, then I think it’s appropriate for them to deal in that 
environment. 
 
If it is not, or if the situation changed where it goes beyond their 
competency, then clearly I think they’re going to identify this is 
beyond their scope of practice. 
 
And, Madam Minister, while you say that what we propose 
creates those anomalies, I think there are opportunities within 
the association bylaws, or indeed your ministerial bylaws, that 
could actually further refine and define specific instances where 
this should be referred, or where this arrangement could work. 
 
So I don’t think that our solution creates more difficulties. I 
think not having it there at all, and the vagueness of the 
legislation the way it is, creates far more difficulties than what 
our amendment does. In fact I think it’s a pretty clear concern 
that we should all have. Because I think LPNs should be 
concerned about this as well. Because they’re going back to a 
situation where there is no definition, where RNs are clearly 
going to feel that they have the responsibility for the 
coordination and the LPNs are saying, well we have our own 
independent scope of practice. Where does this build that team 
approach to working? 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

Our proposed amendment I think goes to the very heart of 
providing some direction and healing between these two 
distinct groups of people practising under the broad category of 
nurses. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I think there’s all . . . there’s a number 
of other areas where we can address the issues that you’ve 
outlined because I don’t think they’re real issues. I think not 
having this . . . (inaudible) . . . is going to create us way more 
difficulties than not having it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you lay out very clearly a 
problem. And the problem is that . . . and this is the problem 
we’ve had for a couple of years in trying to work our way 
through this. In terms of your wording, my understanding is that 
neither SALPN or the SRNA like your wording . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I know. 
 
Well I should tell you that in terms of my wording no one, no 
one likes my wording 100 per cent as well. In fact, you know, if 
the SALPN had their way, I don’t think that we would even be 
talking about scope of practice. But this was a compromise. 
 
In terms of the SRNA, they don’t like the wording. And this is 
the difficulty. And we’ve been at this for a few years. 
 
I don’t think it’s . . . we’ve tried to wordsmith this, we’ve tried 
for a couple of years. We think that our words are the simplest, 
the most simplest — licensed practical nurses cannot function 
beyond their scope of practice in terms of their education and 
training. That’s really clear; you just cannot do anything you’re 
not educated or trained to provide. That’s point number one. 
 
Second point, and I think that this is a good point, that the 
health districts are the employer and they set direction for 
employees. When you’re talking about the registered nurses’ 
legislation, the practice of nursing indicates that nurses are to 
coordinate the provision of nursing services. But they are not, 
under this legislation, to direct “under the direction of”. And 
“under the direction of” has been interpreted in many different 
ways. And that has created great difficulty, and I guess that is 
part of the issue. When you have words that aren’t properly 
defined, it can create all kinds of conflicts. And I would 
suggest, with much respect, that predictable outcomes is very 
problematic in terms of how do you define that. 
 
And maybe you might have a few people . . . maybe you can 
have the groups agree what a predictable outcome is. That’s not 
necessarily how a court would define a predictable outcome, 
and there could be some liability issues. 
 
I continue to maintain this opinion based on the advice I’ve 
been given by the people in the department that licensed 
practical . . . or registered nurses will continue to coordinate the 
practice of nursing, but they will not be responsible if a licensed 
practical nurse goes beyond her scope of practice and provides a 
service that she is not educated or trained to provide. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think your 
last two sentences were helpful. And I also then would . . . you 
indicated, and I don’t want to try to wordsmith your words, but 
as I understood them you said that registered nurses will not be 
responsible if a licensed practical nurse goes beyond their scope 

of practice. That clearly would be a responsibility for the 
licensed practical nurses association to deal with. 
 
I also would take it that a registered nurse is also not 
responsible even if a licensed practical nurse is working within 
their scope of practice. And with that I think is the concern. Do 
they have overall responsibility? It’s one thing to say 
coordination, but is there overall responsibility? Or does their 
responsibility end at the coordination level? 
 
And so, you know, things can go wrong even if you’re 
operating within your scope of practice. But clearly then if a 
licensed practical nurse . . . let me put it this way: are you 
saying that a registered nurse is not responsible if a licensed 
practical nurse is or is not operating within their scope of 
practice? That a registered nurse is not responsible for the 
licensed practical nurse? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. If a licensed practical nurse does 
not act responsibly within her scope of practice and provides a 
service in a way that she shouldn’t be providing, obviously she 
would be responsible as . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . or he, 
yes, thank you. I’m gender-neutral here. He or she would be 
responsible for that activity, as would the employer because 
there is an employee-employer relationship. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I’m not a 
lawyer but I clearly heard you saying that registered nurses 
provide . . . have a responsibility to provide the coordination but 
they are not responsible for how the licensed practical nurse 
undertakes their own work, either within or without the scope of 
practice. And I hear that clearly and I think that that’s a very 
important issue. 
 
I still believe, Madam Minister . . . And we could be here all 
day discussing the relative merits. I think we’ve identified the 
very same issues and I think, as I said to you when we 
discussed this on Friday, that if we asked a hundred legal 
opinions about this issue, we’d get a hundred and fifty opinions. 
If we had a hundred lawyers, we’d have a hundred and fifty 
opinions. So with all due respect to the legal profession, I think 
they would tend to agree with that. It's the nature of the legal 
profession. And you agreed with it as well, Madam Minister. 
 
So I think that’s true. We’ve identified an issue that’s there. I 
think we’ve registered our concerns. I believe that you have 
given us a reasonable explanation as to where the definition of 
responsibility lies and I do appreciate that. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s another issue that I would like to 
address by way of getting your comments. When I did some 
looking at comparing the nature and not the detailed wording of 
the 1988 registered nurses Act and this proposed legislation, I 
noticed that in this licensed practical nurse legislation, under the 
broad category of bylaws, there were of course the obvious 
association bylaws in both bits of legislation that dealt with 
internal association matters, but also dealt with issues like the 
educational requirements and the things that are prerequisite to 
licensing. 
 
But I did notice as well in addition to it in this licensed practical 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

nursing legislation, there were a category of bylaws that were 
not in the registered nurses’ association, and that is ministerial 
bylaws. 
 
And as I read it — and again I didn’t look for a bunch of legal 
opinions in this — but my wording of that . . . my 
understanding of the wording of that clearly sort of implied that 
the ministerial bylaws would be set up in such a way as that 
they would actually supersede association bylaws. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This particular provision is consistent 
with other professional legislation that’s been introduced in the 
province of Saskatchewan and elsewhere in the country. This is 
not a provision that is peculiar to this province — that’s point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, there could be occasions where the 
professional association might set in place a bylaw that would 
not be positive for the province. 
 
And the third thing that I understand, we need to have this type 
of provision in case a bylaw was set up that would not be 
positive, that would hinder the internal agreement on trade . . . 
or the agreement on internal trade. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, I do appreciate, you know, your commitment 
to this issue. I do appreciate the advice that you’re getting from 
legal counsel and from Ms. Smadu. 
 
I think that I would like to say on the record that a couple of 
things are very important. First of all that this mediation process 
be given a real emphasis, and that there is not any attempt or 
that you allow any attempt by any of the parties to this to sort of 
wiggle out of a real commitment to making sure that this 
workplace definition is going to happen in a practical sense. 
 
And the second thing is, is because of the discussions that I 
have had with registered nurses and LPNs, there’s a great deal 
of confusion and uncertainty in the workplace, that in each of 
the areas around it . . . And also I think that there is a fair bit of 
confusion in terms of the district health boards because they’re 
sitting there sort of wondering what their responsibility is in this 
whole exercise. And there are certainly some workplaces where 
there’s a fair bit of hard feelings and prejudice or whatever you 
want to call them. 
 
And so, Madam Minister, I’m hoping that once this agreement 
happens — and I do hope it happens — that there will be an 
undertaking that there be a province-wide, and not just sort of a 
notice in some bulletin, but there actually is an effort for people 
of both associations or all three associations to go out to every 
single health district in this province to meet with the director of 
nursing, to meet with the board if that’s appropriate, and clearly 
outline what’s the agreement here. Because the people out there 
in the field are feeling very much confused about where this is 
all going. And I think we owe it to all of them to clarify this 
matter as soon as possible. And I would like your commitment 
that something of that nature would happen. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think we’ve had this discussion 
before. And yes, I know you want it on the record but it’s on the 

record through the mediation process. 
 
In fact, it’s something that I’ve directed . . . or requested that the 
three nursing groups work very co-operatively in the next three 
months to put together a nursing articulation document. And 
I’ve asked them to take that document out to all of the health 
districts. 
 
The other point that I would make, which I think is an important 
point, is that this confusion has been there for sometime, long 
before we contemplated introducing the legislation. And there 
have been real hard feelings — very hard feelings — around 
this word, “under the direction of.” And there has been disputes 
about the interpretation of those words, “under the direction of” 
and it really has created problems. 
 
And in fact, I’ve had many registered nurses say to me, for 
heaven’s sake get “under the direction of” out of the legislation 
because it just is so problematic because if something happens, 
they’re under my direction, you know what does that mean for 
me. 
 
And I think that this is trying to clarify, this legislation is trying 
to clarify that and I’m pleased that you support the notion of 
removing that particular provision of the old legislation. 
 
So there will be . . . there is a mediation process. The mediation 
process is being paid for by the Department of Health, the 
Government of Saskatchewan. The three nursing groups are 
committed to having these ongoing discussions to develop the 
articulation document which we believe can be a consensus 
document. And they’re committed to going out and 
implementing it together, as a team. And we think that this is 
the beginnings of truly developing the notion of team nursing in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many examples of it. And I have registered nurses 
and LPNs tell me that they do work as a team. But there are also 
many, many, too many examples where that isn’t happening in 
the province. And we think with the mediation process with the 
document and with the three groups implementing the 
document, we can get to the notion of co-operation and 
teamwork. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We certainly 
support those objectives. And as I said, please keep all the 
parties together and make sure their commitment stays to this 
whole process and that it comes to a consensus at the end of the 
day. 
 
The other final question or general direction that I want to 
address is in the Fyke commission that was announced 
yesterday. Is there a likelihood, and I know the broad categories 
that are there and I don’t want to get into the commission’s 
mandate specifically other than, is Mr. Fyke going to be 
addressing the whole issue in general and maybe specific about 
the changing nature of health care delivery and the role of the 
nursing profession and categories within that? Do you see that 
as something that this commission is going to address as well? 
 
And I know I asked you in question period if you’d delay this. I 
think it’s important that we had the clarifications that we did 
today, for the record. Because I think it’s going to provide 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

comfort to all the parties. 
 
But I also think it’s important that there’s comment made about 
where the nursing profession is in terms of the delivery of 
health care in the province now and where it’s going in the 
long-term future. Is there going to be reference to the Fyke 
commission? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s one of the provisions under the 
mandate of the Fyke commission. How we deliver health 
services — they’re changing and they’re constantly evolving all 
across Saskatchewan and all across the country, and in fact in 
various parts of the world. So the Fyke commission obviously 
will have the ability to comment on this. 
 
And I know that when the Fyke commission meets with the 
various stakeholder groups, various professional organizations, 
and the various organizations that represent health workers in 
the province, I’m sure that they’ll have something to say about 
this. Because there are many, many groups — not just nurses, 
but other groups — that believe that they can really add to the 
kinds of services that are provided to the citizens of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but before I 
take my place, I would like to thank the minister and her 
officials for her responses to the issues that we raised in this 
legislation, and we’re prepared now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
proceed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe 
that this is the appropriate time to introduce the amendment, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would move that: 
 

Clause 2 of the printed Bill be amended by repealing 
clause (i) and substituting the following: 
 

“(i) ‘practise as a licensed practical nurse’ means to 
provide professional nursing care and health-care 
services in accordance with the standards of practice and 
the guidelines established by the bylaws: 

 
(i) on an independent basis where a person has a 
defined health condition that has predictable outcome; 
or 

 
(ii) in partnership with other health-care professionals 
and providers where a person has a defined health 
condition that: 

 
(A) does not have a predictable outcome and the 
complexity of care increases; or 

 
(B) does not have a predictable outcome and an 
advanced level of knowledge is required to 
co-ordinate and direct the type and course of care 
required by a person.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move, and I believe you have the 

original on the table. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member for Melfort-Tisdale for 
providing the original copy of the amendment. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:13 p.m. until 3:23 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 13 
 
Hermanson Heppner Krawetz 
Draude Gantefoer Toth 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
Weekes Harpauer Allchurch 
Stewart   
 

Nays — 28 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The Chair: — Committee members, this Bill has 55 clauses, 
which the Chair being unaware of any other amendments, it is 
broke down into a number of organizations, parts, I’ll describe 
it. For instance, association is clauses 3 through 6 and so on. Is 
it agreed that we vote that way? By division? Okay. 
 
Clauses 2 to 55 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1530) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73  The Licensed Practical Nurses Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:31 p.m. until 3:40 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 41 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley Hermanson Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 
Toth Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud Weekes Harpauer 
Allchurch Stewart  
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 10 — The 
Department of Health Amendment Act, 1999 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to comment 
briefly on Bill No. 10, an amendment of The Department of 
Health Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is largely housekeeping in nature and 
further clarifies the reciprocal nature of funding transfers for 
health care procedures between provinces in the country. And in 
review of this legislation in discussion, we see that this is 
merely a housekeeping Bill and it will further clarify funding 
transfers between jurisdictions within the country. And we have 
no difficulty with that and would support it moving to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 14 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had a number of our members have had an opportunity to 
talk to this Bill. And I guess the only comments that I might 
have is that because of the high taxation in this province we 
have to do things like give credits to the areas like the film 
industry. Because of the high taxation, they probably wouldn’t 
even look at this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, we saw in this budget this time 
where income taxes were lowered to a small degree, and then in 
the Finance minister’s second breath he turned around and 
expanded the PST (provincial sales tax) to just totally do away 
with any benefit that the income tax break would have had, and 
in fact even expanded it to the degree that it turns into nothing 
but a cash cow for this government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a number of occasions to speak on this 
Bill, and at this time we would like to pass this on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 22 — The Local 
Improvements Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again we’ve had a number of occasions to speak to this Bill. 
And from my understanding and the people that we’ve checked 
with on this Bill, they seem to have no big problem with it. 
 
I think it’s actually, as the minister’s own words said, it’s 
clarifying the appeal system, actually improving the appeal 
rights of landlords. And I think that’s good to see — making 
appeals boards more accountable — and I think that will be 
received well out there and actually bringing some consistency 
to the whole process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I would also like to pass this Bill off to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 23 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And my 
understanding on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2000, is mostly of the 
housekeeping nature. And at this point too, we will have some 
questions in committee but we would pass it on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 19 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2000 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
as we well know, government passes all sorts of legislation, 
some of it ponderous and some of it of not great weight. 
 
Bill No. 19 has six short sections in it. And there are two 
sections that I would like to comment on briefly, one is 43.1 
and one is 44.1 to 45. 
 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

And I think if we just have bit of silence we’ll a hear a breath of 
relief across the province because it says it is repealed. And I 
think it’s one thing this government needs to do a whole lot 
more of — is repeal a lot of the legislation that they have that is 
little more than red tape. And I suggest we move this one on to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 20 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, I think, 
comes as a . . . also creates a breath of fresh air for the people of 
this particular province. 
 
It recognizes the situation that SaskTel is underneath and has to 
work in a bit more competitive environment than it’s used to. 
And as I said earlier on, it comes as a breath of fresh air that 
now in socialist Saskatchewan we do not have to have 
government telephones and government extension lines — we 
can actually buy our own. 
 
And I think to the extent that this particular Bill, Bill No. 20, 
does that I would be prepared to let it go on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 
2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, has a few more things in it than some of the other ones 
did, and we may want to comment on it in a bit more detail. 
 
One of the things this particular Bill does is that vehicles that 
have been stolen, it gives SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) the power, Mr. Speaker, to go after those people who 
have stolen it for recovery of damages. And I think that’s a 
good move that those people who perpetrate some of the crimes 
in our country are forced to pay for some of the damages they 
do. 
 
There’s also an interesting line in this one, Mr. Speaker, that it 
says of all the things that could be stolen from your vehicle, lo 
and behold, radar detectors are not to be covered, Mr. Speaker. 
Interesting little line, barely takes up a line. But I think it 
probably is the first step this government is taking in trying to 
take away radar detectors from the people of this particular 
province and putting them under the regime that they enjoy so 
much to do. 
 
It’s another socialist attack on private property, and I guess if 

they want to start by radar detectors, they are entitled to start 
where they wish. 
 
But I do think that this particular Bill, Bill No. 35, comes very 
short, Mr. Speaker, in that it does not address PIPP (personal 
injury protection plan) or no fault. There are some of the things 
that need to be taken care of there are not addressed in this one 
at all. 
 
Government on that particular issue has become a very 
confused government, Mr. Speaker. First of all they created a 
committee, and when they had that committee created, those 
particular individuals looked at it and said, we can’t operate 
underneath this. And a number of key people from that 
particular committee chose to resign. 
 
It was unfortunate that government members, instead of 
realizing their weakness, said that we had been saying all kinds 
of mean and ugly things about those individuals. We hadn’t. 
They just, Mr. Speaker, put them in an untenable situation. And 
those individuals realized that they couldn’t do the work that 
they had decided to do, would have liked to do, within that. 
 
They’ve recently revamped that committee again and have 
some of the same weaknesses in there they had in the first one. 
And that is that for whatever reason the legal community has 
chosen not to be part of it at all. And I think that’s very 
unfortunate because in all of SGI’s work, the legal community 
plays a very vital part in that, and they’ve just decided to let 
them out on that. 
 
I think they should have met with that community and said what 
will it take to get you some involvement so that this committee 
has more credibility? 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, it seems very strange that when you’re 
going to create a committee that’s going to look at the things 
that need to be done with no fault . . . and there was a five-year 
commitment that this government made to do a review and they 
are doing that review. But with the number of people that have 
come forward with concerns about no-fault insurance, the least 
that this government could have done was to appoint one or two 
people onto that committee, Mr. Speaker, one or two people 
onto that committee to make sure that the hearings are done in 
such a way that that whole community feels they have some 
sense of ownership and responsibility in that committee. 
 
It would also have ensured, Mr. Speaker, that the victims of 
no-fault would not have had the apprehension that somewhere 
there were meetings taking place behind closed doors, decisions 
that were being made when the report was written that they 
would have no input on. And it’s very unfortunate that this 
government chose, when they’re looking at amending the 
insurance Act, that they didn’t look at those sorts of things. 
They should have. 
 
Also unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, is that no one from this 
government has attended any of the meetings to date, I believe, 
on either side of the issue — either the meetings that were put 
on by victims of no fault or this government’s own committee. 
And I think it would have been very good had they been able to 
be there, or if they would make that commitment to be at some 
of the meetings that are still taking place to hear first-hand from 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

the victims some of the concerns that are out there. 
 
And the victims, when they’ve been asked to go ahead and 
make recommendations — and I attended some of those 
meetings that SGI themselves have put on and the victims were 
given some opportunity to state some of the concerns — that 
they could have heard from the mouths of those victims 
themselves some of the pain and the suffering they’ve endured, 
and actually some of the physical and verbal abuse by this 
government’s insurance system. And I think it would have cast 
a substantially different light on the legislation that they’re 
going to bring in, if they will be bringing in any, to correct the 
shortcomings of that particular system. 
 
We’ve had situations where diagnosis of individuals has been 
very inadequate. Treatment on that inadequate diagnosis has 
taken place. Later on, when proper diagnosis was made, it was 
found that some of the treatment that had been originally 
authorized was treatment that was actually dangerous to those 
individuals. 
 
Presently, we’ve had SGI already say that there may be not 
enough money available to some of those people who, in 
serious accidents, are going to be suffering lifelong, especially 
some of our younger people involved in accidents, suffering 
lifelong on that, and that the money that SGI allows is capped 
and just isn’t going to be enough to meet the needs of those 
individuals to live a reasonable life in our society. 
 
The other one, which is a rather strange one, that in SGI and 
looking over their situations, they’re making a recommendation 
that seniors have been getting too much when they’re hurt in 
accidents. And it’s rather unfortunate that in looking for ways to 
go ahead and create a better system, that the first group they 
would go after and say we have to cut back the benefits that 
seniors are going to get. I would have liked to have seen some 
evidence on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To date, as my years as MLA, I’ve not heard one concern, one 
complaint of anyone saying here’s a senior involved in an 
accident, here’s the settlement they got, and they really ripped 
off the system. I haven’t heard that once — it’s hasn’t even 
been hinted at — and yet SGI seems to have felt that that’s the 
case. And I think that’s unfortunate, and personally, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll want to see some evidence on that before I come 
onside or anywheres near close to onside with SGI and their 
ideas on that. 
 
Having said that and had . . . put those particular comments and 
concerns on the record, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to let Bill 
No. 35, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 
2000 move onto committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 36 — The Motor 
Carrier Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 36 — an 

interesting Bill. And I think it has some validity to it because 
what this one does is go a little contrary to where this 
government generally goes. Because usually they feel they 
know better than anyone else in the country and they have to do 
their own unique, quirky little things. That creates a lot of 
difficulty for business and industry across the country to 
suddenly say, here’s Saskatchewan, and they’re on a totally 
different page than anyone else. 
 
What Bill No. 36, The Motor Carrier Amendment Act does, Mr. 
Speaker, is it puts into place a safety program for commercial 
trucks and bus companies, and all carriers will then have to 
obtain a National Safety Code certificate in order to operate. 
 
Now I think the positive side of this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that it means that all carriers across 
our country of Canada should be under the same set of rules. 
Now to the extent that those particular rules are acceptable to 
the industry in Saskatchewan, I think that’s a very good idea so 
that when motor carriers move from province to province, and 
that’s what they’re in the business of doing, they don’t find that 
rules suddenly change as they cross a particular border, as I said 
earlier on. This is a unique position from an NDP government 
that usually feels they see the light on every particular issue. 
 
The other thing that needs to be said here, and because this is a 
safety issue this one’s all about, is if this government was really 
serious about safety, they would have this piece of legislation 
they do. But they could even go a whole lot further, Mr. 
Speaker. Because what happens when these motor vehicles 
hauling material across our province have to drive on our 
particular roads. 
 
And as was presented in question period earlier on, Mr. 
Speaker, when some of these vehicles pick up pieces of 
highway and throw them at passing vehicles — and you saw the 
piece that was presented here in the House earlier on this 
afternoon, when that sort of thing happens. 
 
Then we have another safety problem, and that’s the roads of 
this particular province. And I think that’s the one place where 
this particular government refuses to take any responsibility, 
and that’s unfortunate, because this Bill deals with safety, and 
safety is very important to all of us. 
 
But it’s fine to legislate safety for truckers and then say, now 
your 50- or 60-foot truck is a safe truck. And now we’re going 
to put it onto thousands of miles of Saskatchewan roads that are 
totally unsafe — roads that are so unsafe, Mr. Speaker, that in a 
number of places school bus drivers do not travel on provincial 
highways in order to avoid dangerous areas and dangerous 
situations. 
 
I think that says a whole lot, Mr. Speaker, because school buses 
basically drive on dirt roads, gravel roads. They don’t drive on 
the best roads in the country for the most part, with the 
exception of a few that might be on the Trans-Canada or 
Highway No. 16. 
 
So when we’re dealing with a safety issue, it becomes 
important, Mr. Speaker, that this government realize that the 
key thing are the thousands of miles of roads that these trucks, 
these vehicles, these commercial vehicles have to travel on. 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

And a true statement of a concern for safety, Mr. Speaker, 
would have addressed that. And to date this government has 
done nothing. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to let this Bill 
move on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 54 — The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 54, 
Vehicle Administration Act, has a couple of key things in it that 
I think are worthwhile commenting on. It brings into place 
mandatory photo ID (identification) by the year 2003. 
 
And I think that particular item has a couple of positives that 
come along with it that we probably need to address. And that is 
if we’re going to deal with some of the other issues that have 
been talked about in this House and in our particular society in 
Saskatchewan, and that is dealing with access to bars and 
tobacco and those sorts of things. 
 
(1600) 
 
The problem of proper identification is always one that comes 
up. How do you identify the people, what pieces of ID can be 
easily counterfeited, and those sorts of things. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, as I said, brings into play the 
mandatory photo ID, and to that extent I think it’s going to be a 
benefit that goes further than just the vehicle itself, especially if 
it makes it virtually impossible to copy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said that, there’s a few other things that it does. It 
sets in place, Mr. Speaker, a mandatory minimum suspension 
for those convicted of drunk driving for the first time, zero 
tolerance for alcohol consumption for new drivers, and other 
restrictions for new drivers. 
 
I think it’s a point that needs to be made, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan, unfortunately — and there’s a few unfortunate 
things that we hold records on, Mr. Speaker — is that we have 
the distinction of having one of the worst records when it comes 
to impaired driving. 
 
And I know that every member of the House would like to 
combat that as much as possible, and to the extent, Mr. Speaker, 
that the photo ID may limit some of that and some of the 
restrictions that are put in — as I said, the mandatory minimum 
suspensions and some of those concepts — I think and I hope, 
Mr. Speaker, will make our highways a safer place to be. 
 
It’s just unfortunate that it takes this government nine years to 
dream up some of these ideas when the concept’s been around a 
long time. It would have been good and probably saved many 
lives had this government taken its responsibility earlier on in 

its mandate and brought some of these things into being. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to let Bill No. 54 
move on to committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 78 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 78 — The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
this Bill, this exact Bill had have been introduced today, my 
first inclination would be look at The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act and say I’ll bet you this Bill is dealing with 
turning every highway in the province of Saskatchewan back to 
gravel. 
 
But it isn’t that way, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve had ample time to 
talk about this Bill, so I can rest my suspicions and my concerns 
about this Bill. 
 
And we do though have a number of questions we’d like to 
address in committee, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I would let 
this Bill move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Labour 
to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Sandra Morgan is with me today, deputy minister of Labour; 
Cheryl Hanson, assistant deputy minister of Labour; Dr. Fayek 
Kelada, director, occupational health and safety services, 
occupational health and safety branch; Dawn McKibben, 
director, human resources and administration; John Boyd, 
director of policy and planning; Eric Greene, assistant director 
of labour services division; Jan Whitridge, manager of legal 
analysis, policy and planning; Doug Forseth, senior labour 
relations officer, labour relations and mediation division; and 
Peter Federko, chief executive office of Workers’ 
Compensation Board; along with Gail Krueger, WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) VP (Vice-President) of 
finance. 
 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I’d like to welcome 
the minister and her officials today. I have a number of 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

questions in a number of areas. I’d like to start out with the 
announcement recently that the government made concerning 
the Queen Elizabeth power station upgrading. And I would just 
like to ask the minister: is this a totally union job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, I’m sure that that 
information could be gotten from the member but that’s a 
SaskPower project and they do their own tendering. I wouldn’t 
know. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you give 
me and the people of Saskatchewan an explanation how the 
Labour Relations Board operates? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Labour Relations Board is a 
quasi-judicial body that’s charged with the responsibility, Mr. 
Chair, of administering the Acts under its responsibility. 
 
And to do that there’s a board composed 50 per cent of 
representatives of employer bodies and 50 per cent of employee 
bodies. And the representatives that are appointed are 
nominated from those communities. 
 
So I don’t actually pick any of the names. Those names come 
forward from those communities, and they become part of the 
body that adjudicates on the various legislation that that body’s 
responsible for. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The annual 
report 1998-99 shows there are 23 members on the board 
including the NDP member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
My question is, is it necessary to have that many members, and 
what per cent of members attend various board functions, and 
their duties at the time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Basically people are assigned, I think, 
to the various cases depending on some of their expertise, but 
there’s balance in the representation. And not all members sit 
on all matters. It depends on the availability of the board 
members. It’s not a full-time job. And so it depends on their 
availability in getting the balance of people to adjudicate the 
various issues. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to ask the 
Minister — so it’s conceivable that the Chair, the Vice-Chair, 
and one board member could sit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. It has to be three — an employee 
rep, an employer rep, and Chair or Vice-Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Now I’ve had many inquiries and complaints 
about the makeup of the board. It’s supposed to be 50 per cent 
employer, 50 per cent employee. And I’d like to ask the 
minister, is she planning possibly a judicial inquiry or a 
investigation into how the board’s made up to . . . if not to 
correct this imbalance, at least make the people of 
Saskatchewan confident of the makeup of the board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m sorry to laugh 
about this. But the fact of the matter is, is how can an imbalance 
exist when the employer reps are chosen by the employer 
groups, when the worker reps are chosen by the worker groups, 

when there has to be an even number of representatives from 
both of those groups. I just have a hard time understanding how 
you can, with that kind of process. 
 
Now, when I met with PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers 
Association) they were raising concerns with the Labour 
Relations Board. And when they were questioned as to their 
representation on that board, Mr. Schneider basically indicated 
that they hadn’t thought it was that important and hadn’t 
recommended anybody for appointment. 
 
So you can’t have it both ways. If it’s important, you have to 
appoint someone to participate. If it’s not important, then I 
guess you live with the decisions of the people that are there 
who thought it was important to appoint someone. 
 
But if you’re interested, I can read to you who the labour 
representatives are and who the business representatives are on 
that board. But I just reaffirm that there has to be balance in any 
panel and that the representatives themselves are chosen by 
those respective bodies. This is not a matter of the minister 
choosing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You announced 
that there may have to be a second Vice-Chair appointed. Has 
that Vice-Chair been appointed? And what will that person’s 
salary be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, there has been no appointment yet 
because there would be no authority for there to be an 
appointment until the Act would be proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — What will the salary be of the second 
vice-chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would have to be set based on 
a classification process where the job is looked at in regard of 
other jobs of similar responsibility. And a competition would be 
held before that position would be filled. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, it is a 
position of a number of union leaders in Saskatchewan that 
certification without a secret ballot is reasonable because it 
prevents cohesion . . . coercion by the employer. Does this not 
at the same time invite and encourage coercion by employees of 
union pushers and organizers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess the best way to respond to 
that is the current method of voting by virtue of signing a card 
has been in place since 1944. And we have had successive 
NDP, Liberal and Conservative governments that have all 
decided to leave that provision in place. 
 
And if anyone is found to be exerting inappropriate pressure, 
that card is considered to be null and void. And that’s a matter 
that’s adjudicated by the Labour Relations Board as well. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Is that the only mechanism? Is there any other 
mechanism that’s in place to ensure that coercion and 
intimidation by union organizers can be checked? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the same way that it would be 
impossible to determine coercion by the employer unless 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

someone documented that, in the same way it would be 
impossible to determine coercion on the union side of the 
equation unless someone documented that. So whether it’s the 
employer you’re talking about or whether the union that you’re 
talking about, someone has to bring that complaint forward. 
 
So if someone does, certainly the Labour Relations Board 
would look at it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
only problem is that the employer doesn’t have any access to 
their employee to discuss anything concerning a unionization 
effort. So I’m not sure why you’re comparing one to the other 
when the union has basically unlimited access to the employees, 
and so there’s a great opportunity for coercion and intimidation. 
 
Would not a secret ballot be the best way to ensure that 
coercion by anyone would be ineffective? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just reaffirm that the signing of a 
card . . . I mean in elections we have secret ballots; I think it 
goes a step further in the case of a union because they actually 
sign what constitutes their ballot. So in my view, that’s very 
much an affirmation on behalf of the person who has signed it. 
 
Now the person has the ability to withdraw their support from 
that card they signed. If they felt they signed it under duress, 
they can subsequently indicate to the board that they withdrew 
their support for it. As well if people felt they signed under 
duress, they certainly have the opportunity as well to apply for a 
decertification. 
 
But I will mention that the Labour Relations Board does 
consider these matters. And even though people would like to 
believe there is a lot of coercion, the fact of the matter is this is 
usually found to be unfounded. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — It’s interesting, Madam Minister, that you 
bring up the comparison of how we exercise our democratic 
rights in this province and in this country. By signing a card, 
it’s open to everyone to know that they signed it or they did not 
sign it. The only effective method to get around the coercion is 
to have a secret ballot regardless if they signed a card. What 
have you got against having a secret ballot, at the end of the 
day, to form a union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I’m sorry to take a minute on that. 
I just wanted to verify that the union is obligated to keep it 
confidential — who signed which cards. It’s not a matter where 
they make a list or something and give it to anybody. They 
don’t do that. Each card is confidential. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Where’s the checks and balances of keeping 
the union to their word? What’s to stop the union from 
members or other people to know who signed cards? What’s to 
stop the union organizers from intimidating workers? There’s a 
number of cases that I’ve been presented with of exactly that 
going on. 
 
Wouldn’t, at the end of the day, a secret ballot be the only 
effective way to have a fair and open process? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, I would just say to the member 
opposite that I like to believe that we have respect, both for our 
business leaders and for our union leaders. And the implication 
here that any person who decides to join the union, it’s through 
intimidation, I think is a rather unfortunate view of the world. 
 
And I would have to say that if there is any evidence — any — 
of any kind of intimidation, that card becomes null and void. 
And certainly anybody can bring forward any evidence to 
support their view that intimidation has occurred — either from 
the employer side or from the union side. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, if you 
have a Labour Relations Board that is pro-union and you have 
everything in favour of the union organizers and you have the 
employers not allowed to discuss unionization with the 
employees, it’s totally one-sided. It’s totally one-sided in favour 
of the union organizers. It’s not a matter of accusing and 
necessarily thinking that all union organizers are intimidating 
the workers, it’s just that the process is set up to be totally 
biased in favour of the union organizers and totally against the 
employers. 
 
And in this country where we have democracy, where a number 
of other provinces allow secret ballots, wouldn’t it be the best 
process, the fairest and the most democratic process, to allow a 
secret ballot, at the end of the day. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I will have to reiterate for the 
member that it is a secret ballot. They put their name on it; there 
is only the person who they gave it to that knows that they 
signed it. 
 
And in fact, in jurisdictions where they have the thing that 
you’re asking for, this vote, the fact of the matter is the number 
of certifications out of the number of applications is 
approximately the same and has been for many years. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, again, I go back to saying that 
since 1944 we’ve had this process and it’s worked relatively 
well because what you’re trying to do is balance some interests 
here. And the fact of the matter is, the person who pays your 
paycheque always has a large balance of power in any kind of a 
discussion because that’s how you live. 
 
And so you have to try to balance that with the reasonable 
opportunity for people to be able to exert their democratic rights 
within the workplace, if they wish to do that, because of course 
they may have an employer who’s very receptive to their input 
or they may not. That’s a condition that differs. 
 
But I would have to ask the member opposite just to clarify for 
me whether he believes that all the business reps appointed to 
this board are labour-leaning because they are 50 per cent of 
every adjudication. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. You 
keep coming back to comparing to our democratic process, but 
doing elections — first, the person has a secret ballot; and 
second, the parties involved have scrutineers to make sure the 
process is fair. What you’ve described is a process there was 
only one scrutineer — and that’s the side of the union — and 
the people counting the ballots are the union people. 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

Where’s the checks and balances to ensure that the other side is 
satisfied that there’s fairness in this process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, the fact of the matter is the people 
who count the ballots are the Labour Relations Board — 50 per 
cent employers, 50 per cent employee representatives. That is 
the process by which those ballots are counted. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. The 
only problem is that I don’t think there’s very many people in 
this province believe the Labour Relations Board is fair. I have 
had discussions with the former chairman of the Labour 
Relations Board and you rightfully say, back beginning in 1944 
to the present, we have this system and so on and so forth. 
 
And it is true that there was a fair Labour Relations Board in 
recent history — the Blakeney government, the Devine 
government, even the early years of your government; but 
recently it has become quite clear that it is not a fair Labour 
Relations Board, that the chairman has a bias towards unions. 
And when you have that circumstance set up, where’s the 
checks and balances in the system to ensure that the workers’ 
rights are protected — not only the workers’ rights but also the 
employer’s side of this situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess I’ll respond in two ways. 
One is I don’t know why you continue to insist that people 
appointed by the business community are pro-labour. I mean I 
guess you can take that up with the people who appointed them. 
I didn’t appoint them. I merely rubber-stamped them. 
 
The other comment I guess I might make is that several 
members of the business bar, the lawyers who typically 
represent business, were asked about whether Gwen Gray was a 
suitable person, and they were very supportive of her 
appointment. 
 
So I guess you can have your opinion about that. But I’ll tell 
you one thing that I know in the short time I’ve been Labour 
minister, and that’s that if the union loses they complain to me. 
If the business loses, they complain to me. Nobody ever thinks 
it’s fair if they’re the one who didn’t win. 
 
But on balance, if you look at the statistics, it’s pretty 
even-steven in terms of win and lose. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Has your government ever considered doing 
what I believe 50 per cent of the other provinces in this 
province have done, and allowed a secret ballot? What in 
particular about a secret ballot are you against? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The system that we have works quite 
well. And the fact of the matter is every change you make to 
every labour law, Mr. Chair, becomes very controversial. So if 
we have something that’s working, our idea is that we should 
just continue to do what we’ve always done that’s always 
worked pretty well. 
 
And like I say, the provinces that do the vote, it may satisfy 
some kind of view of democracy. But the card, the signed card 
confidential, has always been considered the vote. And we 
don’t see any difference in the certification rates that suggested 
a different process should be required. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
The only . . . well to go back again, the only problem is that a 
signed card is basically public knowledge, or it can be public 
knowledge, where a ballot in a secret ballot during an election 
is totally secret and there is no room for any mistakes, errors, or 
letting that view out. 
 
I’d like to go on to another area. There is an Internet link 
between the Saskatchewan NDP web site and the United 
Steelworkers of America’s web site. Would the minister care to 
explain the reason for this link? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well if there is a link, I didn’t do it. 
Because I’m totally unaware of it. If the member would like to 
and thinks this is an important matter to pursue, certainly he can 
provide me with that information and I can try to find out 
whether this is a good thing or a bad thing and what in fact it is. 
But I am not aware of any such link. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Randy, sorry, but . . . 
Order, please. I’m afraid that I’m just having some difficulty 
. . . I don’t want to curtail the member’s questioning, but this 
doesn’t . . . this question doesn’t appear to relate to a 
government matter. 
 
And maybe you could enlighten me if you think that it does. 
But I’m just having difficulty understanding how the question 
relates to the Department of Labour or to any aspect of 
provincial government affairs. 
 
But please, if you think it does, I’d invite the member for 
Redberry Lake to explain how it does and proceed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Be glad to, Mr. Chair. The point I’m getting at 
is the NDP Party has received $300,000 in donations from 
unions. I believe it’s $30,000 from construction unions. The 
minister herself has received $6,500 from unions. 
 
And the question is, about the link, is concerning donations 
from the steelworkers. And I’d just like to ask the question 
concerning the link. Is it so you can communicate directly with 
the steelworkers’ head office in Pittsburgh to obtain 
instructions? And has the government ever received donations 
from the steelworkers? 
 
And the reason why I’m asking this question is because your 
relationship with unions affect your ability to govern fairly and 
to bring in fair labour laws. And this brings the whole situation 
back to what kind of laws we have here and what kind of laws 
that your government is bringing in. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now, Mr. Chair, according to this 
logic, anybody with whom we associate who might actually 
vote for us is suspect because they might actually donate money 
to us. Like I thought that was the reason why people voted for 
you was because they supported you, and I’m not really sure 
what the member’s point is. 
 
I suppose we could go to their party’s web site and hunt out all 
the links and look at their donations from Conrad Black. But 
there’s really no point in going there because the people that 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

support you will support you, the people that support us will 
support us. 
 
But our responsibility, when in government, is to do the best we 
can for all the people of Saskatchewan in a balanced way. And I 
have never been confused about my public obligation in that 
regard. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I just want to say that I really 
think this line of questioning is . . . I really do not want to place 
unreasonable limits on the scope of debate here, but I fail to see 
how this line of questioning is related in any way to a 
government matter, and I’m going to rule it out of order. 
 
This relates to . . . this may relate to caucus matters or party 
matters, but it is unrelated to government matters and it’s not 
related to the Department of Labour. And I’d just like to invite 
the member for Redberry Lake to proceed with another 
question, and to pursue this other matter in another context. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Regina Manifesto 
of 1933 outlined the government’s mandate as, and I quote: 
 

In addition, workers must be guaranteed the undisputed 
right to freedom of association, and should be encouraged 
and assisted by the state to organize themselves in trade 
unions. 
 

Is this still the government’s position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t know of any modern society or 
economy that outlaws freedom of association for either the 
purposes of organizing unions or for expressing your public 
opinion on any matter of interest to the public. Although I 
suspect in Ontario today, they’re wishing they had such a law 
against the homeless. But the fact of the matter is, in this 
society, we are . . . we have freedom of association. It’s one of 
the basic principles of a democratic society. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If it’s about 
guaranteeing the workers’ rights to freedom of association — 
what does assist mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The member will have to repeat the 
entire quote, Mr. Chair, because I’m not able, I really don’t 
have the Regina Manifesto memorized and I’m going to have to 
. . . 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to read it again: 
 

In addition workers must be guaranteed the undisputed 
right to freedom of association, and should be encouraged 
and assisted by the State to organize themselves in trade 
unions. 

 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What I might do is give the member a 
bit of the history of how this all developed, both in the United 
States and in Canada. There were points in the history of the 
relationship between employers and workers where people 
started taking up arms to try to enforce their right for a say in 

their working conditions, their safety — the things that affected 
them. 
 
Both in the United States, under right-wing governments, and in 
Canada, they decided that rather than people having to take up 
arms, it would be preferable to have democratic processes put in 
place so people who wish to exercise those rights would not 
have to take up arms. 
 
And that is the source of these laws in both the US (United 
States) and Canada. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, well it 
just goes back to the right to choose. And how can any 
reasonable person on one hand, defend one’s right to choose to 
belong to a union, and on the other hand, deny another’s right 
not to choose? That’s what I’m getting at. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess it’s no different than when we 
make amendments to the electoral Act or when we do those 
kind of things in the legislature that try to strengthen the 
democratic process. 
 
The fact of the matter is all the labour relations legislation that 
exists in both the US and Canada, probably in all the G-7 
countries, have been put there to ease industrial relations, to 
ensure workplace democracy, and to ensure the support of 
democratic processes in a more broadly democratic society. 
And aside from that, I really don’t know what the member is 
getting at. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to go back to Doepker Industries. 
Reports of coercion were reported to the Labour Relations 
Board by Doepker’s employees. Why did the Labour Relations 
Board dismiss these out of hand? And are reports of coercion by 
unions on union and workers typically dismissed out of hand by 
the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, I ask you to indicate which of 
the business community’s appointees was . . . all of a sudden 
developed a strongly pro-labour bent in the investigation of 
those. Because I’m sure that each instance that was put forward 
was looked at, was investigated, and the Labour Relations 
Board, according to my understanding of that ruling, was very 
satisfied that there wasn’t a problem there. 
 
But you know, I would urge the member . . . There’s always a 
moment of acrimony during any kind of labour relations 
negotiations, bargaining, union formation. And instead I’d like 
to point the member’s attention toward this joint press release 
from Doepker Industries and the steelworkers that says that the 
United Steelworkers of America and Doepker Industries believe 
that they can embark upon a fruitful, good faith, collective 
bargaining process. 
 
Doepker wants to be able to carry on its business in the interests 
of its customers, owners, and employees. The union wants to 
negotiate a fair and reasonable collective agreement for 
employees that will hopefully result in a continuing 
commitment of employees to the enterprise. Their mutual 
objective is to make Doepker Industries a world-class 
manufacturer of world-class products produced by world-class 
employees. 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

And I just urge the member to understand that, during this kind 
of a dispute, it always gets rancorous. But in fact the parties 
have come together now, with the help of the Labour Relations 
Board I might add, and are starting to get on a new footing in 
their new relationship. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ve asked a 
number of questions concerning decertification and certification 
in the past, and I’ve received some information but not all of it. 
But I’d like to ask a few more. 
 
Of the requests to decertify, how many of them have been 
requested more than once in the past year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. The board would have those kind 
of data, but I don’t do random data analysis of their ruling, so I 
wouldn’t know that and certainly the member can request that 
directly from them. And anything that falls outside of 
confidentiality requirements for employers or employees would 
certainly be available. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, does 
the Labour Relations Board have the power to order business to 
keep employees on the payroll even if there is no work, based 
on the pretense of technological change taking away jobs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. The tech provisions that are in 
place have been in place for quite a long time. And I think 
there’s only been, we think, two or three applications involving 
tech change. So this has had a fairly limited application. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — And out of the applications, how many were 
granted? How many employees has it affected? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again this is data of the Labour 
Relations Board. And unless someone makes a specific inquiry 
of me, I don’t make an inquiry of them for that purpose. And 
certainly you’re able to inquire all of that information from 
them directly without worrying that it has been filtered through 
my lens on the way through. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well this is a 
very serious development, and a number of businesses have 
many concerns over it. And I just would like to know, does the 
minister know that this practice by the Labour Relations Board 
is one of the many reasons that businesses are afraid to set up 
businesses in the province? 
 
And when businesses look at the climate, they look at menacing 
taxes, regulation, what kind of infrastructure. But labour laws 
and regulations are high on their list, and this is one that has 
definitely been a hindrance to development in this province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you know, I guess I’d certainly 
take that seriously. One of my previous lives I was an economic 
development officer, and I was also at one point treasurer of the 
chamber of commerce in La Ronge, so I mean I care very much 
about these things. 
 
Just recently an Alberta garment manufacturer set up shop in 
Saskatoon. And quoting Mr. Bussoli, he said: 
 

One of the benefits here is that the plant is unionized, so 

we qualify for union contracts. (I’m sure he means 
uniforms and whatnot, which is a real benefit) Taxes are 
competitive and we looked at that as well. 
 

And then when I look a little further, I see that, after two terms 
of government that I suspect many of you voted for and gave 
donations to, there was 458,000 working in Saskatchewan. 
After two terms of our government, there’s 496,100 people 
working in Saskatchewan. 
 
If you want to give you the net in-migration and out-migration 
figures, I can do that. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that, year over year from last year, 
there’s 18,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan. We have virtually the 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and Regina has the 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada. And I don’t know what 
your argument is. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, my argument is that we would have a 
greater interest in . . . Mr. Chairman, the point would be that 
we’d have a greater interest investing in this province if we 
didn’t have draconian rules and regulations like that. 
 
I’d like to go back to the certification applications. I am told 
and I understand that the certification applications are handled 
quickly and decertification applications are put on the back 
burner, maybe delayed by many months. Is there a maximum 
time limit for decisions by the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now any information that we have 
would say that this isn’t true. And if you have other information 
certainly I think . . . You know the Labour Relations Board will 
meet with people to discuss concerns, and if you think there is 
real merit to that question . . . Like I say, we checked into it 
briefly and were told that that’s not the case. But certainly if 
you wanted to meet with them directly about that, I’m sure they 
would be willing to do that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A concerned citizen 
requested the transcripts of Doepker Industries’ Labour 
Relations Board hearings and the cost of obtaining this 
transcript was over $3,000. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister why is this information not available 
to all the people of Saskatchewan free of charge? And will it be 
available on the Internet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Any court transcript there’s a charge, 
and of course there’s many people who might spent a lot of 
time asking government for a whole range of information — 
including courts, including labour relations boards, including 
whatever bodies exist in the public interest — and so there is a 
cost to that. 
 
And I know that you very much believe in keeping costs down, 
and one of the ways that costs are kept down is so that when 
people ask for things that aren’t necessarily essential to the 
general public good, that there’s a cost associated with 
receiving that information. 
 
Now your suggestion about whether they put those up on a web 
site — I don’t know whether they’ve considered that, but it’s 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

certainly something one could ask them. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I’d like the 
minister to make this information available to me and I’d gladly 
pass it on to the individual. The Labour Relations Board file is 
no. 016-00 April 11, 2000. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to go on to workmen’s compensation, 
and I’d like to quote information from a letter I received. It’s 
concerning the November 29, 1999 request for proposals for 
interior design services for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation Board. And the letter goes on to say: 
 

The Workers’ Compensation Board of Saskatchewan 
recently had a request for proposals regarding interior 
design services for their Regina offices. 
 

And the person writes: 
 
I know of four Regina firms that responded, one firm from 
Calgary . . . one from Winnipeg. After weeks of analysis, 
the . . . (workmen’s compensation board) selected the 
Calgary firm. When asked the reasons for the selection, the 
designers were told “the Calgary firm did not have the 
lowest fees, but that the WCB wanted new ideas.” (The 
workmen’s compensation board) . . . has hired only one of 
the Regina firms in recent history, the last 10 years, so 
presumably the other 3 Regina firms could have offered 
those “new ideas”. Furthermore, even if (workmen’s 
compensation board) . . . did not feel the Regina firms were 
qualified we question the criteria for proposal (invites) . . . 
since not all Regina interior design firms were invited nor 
were other Saskatchewan firms outside of Regina invited 
to submit proposals. 
 

And the letter also goes on to say: 
 
The (workmen’s compensation board) . . . has responded to 
(the Interior Designers Association of Saskatchewan) . . . 
and has offered the unsuccessful firms an opportunity to 
attend a debriefing session to discuss the criteria evaluated 
and to explain why the proposals were unsuccessful. (The 
workmen’s compensation board) . . . and the Minister’s 
office have made it clear that the award to the Calgary firm 
will not be rescinded nor will the process be reopened as a 
fair competition. Our association is outraged (at the) . . . 
government . . . condoning WBC’s actions to support 
Alberta’s economy with Saskatchewan projects. 
 

And it goes on to say: 
 
Compounding the problem, and perhaps now making the 
Calgary firm more competitive, the most recent provincial 
budget adds another 6% to interior design fees. Interior 
design fees are not subject to provincial sales tax in 
Alberta, as there isn’t one charged in that province. 
 

And it goes on to a number of points on behalf of the interior 
designers: 
 

1. The four Regina firms all pay to (workmen’s 
compensation board) . . . and should be treated fairly. 
 

2. Presumably at least one of the Regina firms — perhaps 
all the firms had lower fees than the Calgary firm did. 
 
3. Unlike . . . (workmen’s compensation board), the Regina 
firms have a commitment to this province and to the City 
of Regina and deserve to be treated fairly. 
 
4. The interior designers from Regina who responded are 
all more than capable of (competing for) . . . the work. The 
service requested by (workmen’s compensation board) . . . 
was not unique and has been completed by Regina 
designers for other corporations. 
 

Also: 
 
5. The interior designers from Regina who responded are 
known for the excellent quality of their design product. 
 

And: 
 
6. The minister’s office has advised (the interior design 
association of Saskatchewan that) . . . they will make 
efforts to more carefully monitor these situations in the 
future. 

 
And of course it says, “Too little too late.” 
 
I guess it’s a matter of fairness on the part of the provincial 
government and it’s about our government providing people 
another reason to leave the province. 
 
Will the minister rescind this agreement with the Calgary firm? 
And will you reopen the process to a fair competition to interior 
designers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the first 
point I would make is I don’t believe in ministerial interference 
with decisions of the departments. And typically ministers don’t 
know who gets contracts till after they’re awarded through the 
fair tendering processes. So I would just begin by saying that if 
I was to blame for anything here, it was in being too fair in 
allowing the process to take place without my interference. 
 
Now the one comment I will make is all provinces in Canada 
are signatory to an internal trade agreement, which means that 
any contracts over a certain size have to be tendered across 
Canada. That’s one of the ways that companies from 
Saskatchewan get work in other places and that’s one of the 
ways that firms from other places get work here. 
 
All that being said, if you’re suggesting that I rescind a duly 
entered into contract — and I’m sure you don’t mean that 
because I know that you are opposed to retroactively changing 
contracts that have been entered into, so I’m sure that’s not 
what you mean to say. But what I will tell you is, I was as 
concerned about this, I think, as you are and asked the 
department to please review how they do these things in future 
so an unfortunate circumstance that might have been avoided 
doesn’t happen again. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of committees, 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials as well. 
 
I have a question related to the Workers’ Compensation Board 
as well. It does stem from a particular case of a constituent of 
mine; however, I guess the questions are more general in 
nature. Her particular case, I think, is extremely compelling and 
I think I’ve written to your office about it, and she’s gone 
through an incredibly long process to find some sort of remedy. 
 
Just very briefly, her own situation is such that she is certainly 
continuing to apply for work, and she wants to continue to 
work. However, she had carpal tunnel syndrome some time ago 
and an operation, for whatever reason, left her hands basically 
useless. Her name is Shirley Fedorowich from Swift Current. 
 
And in Shirley’s case, she even applied for a Wal-Mart 
greeter’s job because she thought that would perhaps be one of 
the jobs that she could do, and Workers’ Comp was 
encouraging her in that there would be several jobs that she 
could do. As it turns out, she couldn’t even do that job in terms 
of the odd pricing you have to do, and it’s truly a compelling 
case, I believe. 
 
But the question on the process is this. She’s concerned . . . she 
has not gone to the appeal process yet. She’s involved the 
Workers’ Advocate and the Workers’ Advocate has been 
working on her behalf, and he has just received a response from 
Workers’ Comp that again reinforces what I think was an unfair 
ruling with respect to denying her full benefits. 
 
But in any event, you know, her next — and the letter details it 
— her next step of course is to appeal. 
 
But when she appeals, she informs me — and this is the 
question, Madam Minister or Mr. Deputy Chair — when she 
appeals, she gives all right to . . . she gives up every right to 
make public her case in any way. It’s basically, in my 
understanding and what she’s informed me, is that she feels she 
has to sign a confidentiality agreement and then is unable to 
take her case public or, for example, unable to have her MLA or 
others advocate in a public way on her behalf. 
 
Could you please confirm that that’s the process that is used at 
Workers’ Compensation, and would you please explain the 
rationale for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s the Workers’ Compensation Board 
that can’t talk publicly about it. The worker themselves can talk 
publicly about it, and if the board is to respond, she has to sign 
a release that they can talk publicly about it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And no point in the process when she’s appealing 
is she effectively prohibited from talking about her case? And 
you’re saying also that the Workers’ Comp can respond, I 
guess, if she makes some public comment? If she signs — and 
it’s up to her — if she signs a release . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Thank you, Minister. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to continue on 
with some questions concerning workmen’s compensation 
board. Does the minister know that the health system is owed 
money from the workmen’s compensation board due to lack of 
payment for doctor services provided to workmen’s 

compensation board claimants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This matter has been raised with us and 
we do have someone looking into it. But I apologize — we 
don’t have the answer yet because we’re just undertaking the 
investigation right now. They have to go through billings in two 
systems and whatnot. So they’re looking at it right now. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, have you taken steps to stop the 
practice? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the problem was more one of a 
technical nature in terms of the technology to be able to check 
the dates and whatnot of billings that came through. And 
they’ve worked together with the Department of Health and feel 
that that will not be a problem in the future, but are still looking 
at the back records to see what may have happened before they 
got that system more integrated. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, would you have any idea of how 
much money is owed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t know if any is owed. I mean 
they’re just checking on whether there’s even any substance to 
this. So there’s no way without tracking all the individual cases 
to know and that process is just happening. 
 
So I think it would be impossible to even say whether that 
factually is the case or not. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, how many 
meetings and hearings does the chairman, Stan Cameron, 
attend? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because it requires a 
meeting-by-meeting matchup with the president’s calendar and 
the board because . . . the estimate of the time that he actually 
spends in hearings is a third of his time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, how 
much money does Stan Cameron make as chairman of 
workmen’s compensation board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The remuneration for that job is 
$99,990 per year and I would presume that that was based on 
classifying the responsibilities both in terms of number of 
people and budget managed, etc. within that corporation as 
responsibilities of the Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, could you also tell me how much 
money does the rest of the board make? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are two other members of the 
board, Norm Brown at $5,484 a month, and Darlene Light, 
$5,484 a month. And these are both full-time . . . this is a 
full-time job. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to ask the minister, has the workman’s compensation board 
chairman’s wage decreased since Mr. Peter Federko has been 
hired as CEO (chief executive officer) and taken up much of the 
chairman’s duties? 
 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, just so we have all the 
information here, the salary hasn’t changed. In 1992, apparently 
the committee review, which meets every four years and is a 
public process, recommended that those two positions be split. 
So that’s how that split initially took place. 
 
There was a lot of problems with the financial solvency of the 
WCB and a number of other issues, and certainly one of the 
roles that Peter Federko has had in there, coming out of a 
financial background, has been to look at things like the 
actuarial basis for the . . . both the assessments and the 
administration of the plan itself. So there’s been a function there 
that has been greatly strengthened, that has not been specifically 
centred on the adjudication of claims but on the financial 
operations of the WCB. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, so I assume from your answer that 
the combined wages of Mr. Federko and Mr. Cameron is 
greater now than the single wage of Mr. Cameron before Mr. 
Federko was hired? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because there is additional work being 
done in the fiduciary area now that seemed to be very necessary 
to do, yes that would be true. As well, as the number of 
employers in Saskatchewan increases so does the . . . and the 
number of people employed increases in Saskatchewan, so does 
the volume of work. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’ll treat that as a yes. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the Workers’ Compensation Board 
advertising budget and what per cent has been spent so far this 
year? And also what is the money being spent on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The budget for the year is $600,000 but 
really virtually nothing has been spent. There has been some 
discussions around whether there’s a need for a public 
education campaign around both Workers’ Comp — both from 
a prevention point of view but also an awareness point of view. 
But at that point, there has been no decision to proceed with 
that. So at this point, that expenditure is largely unexpended 
except for some pamphlets and a few things like that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I met with the 
CEO of workmen’s compensation board a while back. Mr. 
Federko told me that the board keeps the premium rates up 
higher than necessary to encourage . . . to employers to 
encourage them to keep safety a priority. 
 
Now I’d like to point out the employers of Saskatchewan are 
bound by occupational and health safety rules and regulations, 
and I might add, good judgment where safety working 
conditions are concerned. 
 
Do you agree with Mr. Federko’s comments concerning high 
workmen’s compensation board premiums? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s two ways in which that 
consideration is given. One is that the rates have to reflect the 
real costs and the risk levels in the particular industries. 
 
But the other one is that, as you would in any responsible 
organization that has a large fiscal role, financial role, you also 

have to retain a certain amount of your surplus for eventualities 
that do crop up time to time, whether that be a serious accident 
that affects many people or a problem like we had with the 
situation of the widows’ payout. 
 
So there is a portion that is kept for those purposes, but that is 
based on what is considered to be the industry norm for the 
ratio of that kind of fund to the overall requirement on rate 
setting. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, that’s not quite what I was getting 
at. What Mr. Federko was getting at at our meeting was that the 
employers, if the rates were reduced to what they should be, 
that the employers would just forget about safety concerns; and 
this is a way of keeping these employers basically in line so that 
they would consider safety concerns at the workplace. 
 
I found his comments very disturbing. He’s treating the 
employers of this province like little children. 
 
And I want to know if you agree with what he said. And do you 
consider these premiums too high based on what he said? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s really a matter of how you 
conceptualize how the process works. Now the rates are set the 
way they are so that they cover the true costs of paying out that 
insurance. 
 
However, when employers have been very good performers, 
they receive rebates, but the actual cost reflects the true cost of 
what that insurance plan is. And it’s only by the non-necessity 
to expend those funds on their behalf that those funds are then 
rebated to them. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, well that’s not what Mr. Federko 
said. And I’m quite clear on that — that the premiums are kept 
higher just to keep the employers in line so they consider safety 
matters. 
 
And I’ll ask the question again. Do you agree with this practice 
by workmen’s compensation board? 
 
And I would just like to say that the employers of this province 
are very concerned about safety. And what they need more is 
their money to be kept in their businesses so they can create 
more jobs and hire more people. And the workmen’s 
compensation board is acting like Big Brother in this situation, 
keeping rates high on some pretense that the employers don’t 
have a clue in the world about safety matters. 
 
And I would just take exception to what he said. And I’d just 
like to again ask you: do you agree with what he said 
concerning high premiums? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, I will first of all say that the 
board has a very co-operative relationship with employer safety 
organizations around the province and they do many jointly 
sponsored efforts. 
 
On the other point, the insurance reflects the real cost of 
insurance. And what you’re suggesting — just to take the flip 
side of the argument — is that you would charge them less than 
the real cost of insurance, and then when they perform badly, 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

send them an extra bill. 
 
So the rate that’s set now reflects the true cost of insurance; 
however, if because someone is a particularly good employer 
they don’t use up the usual and real cost of insurance, then they 
get a rebate. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Madam Minister, that’s not what he said. 
And he cited Alberta as an example of the rates are very low 
and that somehow there was some correlation between low rates 
and high accident rates on the workplace. And what he said was 
that they keep the rates high specifically to encourage 
employers to consider safety matters, and he felt that if they 
lowered the rates to what they actually were, that somehow the 
employers wouldn’t be concerned about safety with the 
employees. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess the best way that I can explain 
it is that it reflects the real cost of insurance in the real world of 
insurance, and if Mr. Federko caused you to believe that, he 
now agrees with the way I’ve described it. And we now are 
amending whatever you believe that discussion was in the past 
and we are now all agreeing on the same thing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Madam Minister, I take it that you agree 
that he made the comments in the past. And I’d like to say it’s 
on record; it’s public record that he said it in other settings too. 
 
So I take it that that is no longer the practice. But if it has been 
the practice in the past, what should the rates be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The rates should be the rates as 
calculated by people in the insurance industry to cover the 
actuarial costs of anticipated payouts under that insurance fund. 
And if by some wonderful occurrence someone does not use 
what is considered to be normal and based on actuarial tables, 
then they get a rebate. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials. 
 
My questions are regarding the pension lawsuits. In May 1981, 
the Government of Saskatchewan, under Premier Allan 
Blakeney, implemented changes to the superannuation Act 
which allows temporary, part-time, and casual employees to 
join the new plan. 
 
In regards to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance employees’ 
pension plan, SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union) is suing SCIC (Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation) for back pension. The corporation 
didn’t inform the employees that they could belong to this plan 
and the employees want to buy back the lost years. 
 
My question, Madam Minister, is how many government 
agencies have been served with this statement of claim? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Maybe just to clarify from the member, 
I appreciate the question but Justice is responsible for the 
pension Act and Finance for pension administration, so you 
would have to ask those ministers because this is really a matter 

that I’m not familiar with. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. I didn’t know that, Madam Minister. 
 
From what I gather there’s 250 employees affected by this. Is 
there going to be any cost to the employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, as much as I sincerely would 
like to answer your question, I really have no idea and you’ll 
have to bring it back on either Justice or Finance questions. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’d 
like to change the topic to balancing work and family. 
 
In October, 1997 the Saskatchewan government introduced the 
Balancing Work and Family Initiative to discuss workplace and 
family issues. During the 1999 provincial election, the NDP 
suggested legislation to allow every parent the right to at least 
five family leave days every year to help balance their family 
responsibilities. Then in the fall Throne Speech, the government 
announced that you would introduce legislation to implement 
family leave to help families find time for necessities like 
children’s medical needs and school visits and so on and so 
forth. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business has 
conducted research which reveals that employees of small 
businesses tend to be the most satisfied with the job. Why? 
Because of the level of flexibility for personal needs. 
 
Most small businesses in Saskatchewan are very small and are 
able to work out appropriate workplace arrangements with their 
employees. In fact, about 75 per cent of Saskatchewan 
businesses employ fewer than five people, and 95 per cent of all 
businesses have fewer than 50 employees. 
 
Why did the government’s primary research in balancing work 
and family task force focus on a handful of large, independent 
companies as well as a mixture of businesses within the range 
of 100 to 499 employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess what I would say is that our 
primary thrust is not legislation in the balancing family 
approach. It’s to talk to employers about best practices, to talk 
to employees and unionized employees and their representative 
about best practices in the workplace. 
 
Certainly some people have these things in their contracts; other 
people it’s informal arrangements with the employer. And it’s 
our goal to get the discussion going and to facilitate best 
practices. And we certainly acknowledge that small employers 
usually have close relationships with their employees and are 
very sensitive on that front. 
 
I think where this will become a discussion is during the labour 
standards review because one of the things labour standards 
tries to do is look at the real environment in which workers 
work in today’s society. And there’s no question that we have 
more two-parents-working families than we’ve ever had before 
and we have more single parents working than we’ve ever had 
before. 
 
So there may be things that need a remedy. Whether or not 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

those things need the five days of leave, I think we’re going to 
leave that up to the labour standards discussion to discuss 
whether in fact there is a necessity, and if so, is that the best 
way of approaching it. 
 
So I guess I would just say today that we’re not married to that 
particular solution but are certainly conscious of the needs of 
the modern economy. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, I guess my question goes 
back to the task force that only discussed the issue with large 
employers. Small business make up . . . large employers make 
up less than 5 per cent of the Saskatchewan business 
population. And I believe a discussion surrounding the issues 
that affect Saskatchewan workplace cannot exclude the main 
job creator in the province — that’s small business. And a true 
picture of the workplace issues facing the Saskatchewan 
economy will not be evident if the view of the small businesses 
are not actively portrayed. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister what companies did you use for your 
research? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The provincial work family survey that 
was conducted by Dr. Linda Duxbury involved 40 employers 
and 5,000 unionized and non-unionized employees. It included 
4 large and 15 medium-sized private sector companies, 8 
provincial government departments, 1 commission, 2 Crown 
corporations, and 10 not-for-profit organizations. And as well 
management, professional, non-professional, and technical 
workers took part. 
 
We did have focus groups that involved small business, and I 
think everybody agreed it was something that they needed to be 
conscious of and to try to find solutions to. I think what was 
less definite was what those solutions were. And certainly our 
goal would be to solve as much as possible as we can in a 
flexible way that suits the employers, suits the employees. 
 
But I also say that one of the purpose of labour standards — 
like environmental standards, like health standards — is to also 
ensure a certain standard in our society based on public interest 
as expressed by the public. So as we go through the labour 
standard review, we wouldn’t automatically discount changes 
that might have an effect on families. But on the other hand, our 
approach is not looking to legislate all these matters. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, it goes back to the small 
businesses in this study and I would like to know why the 
government ignored the small businesses who are already 
flexible and able to work out appropriate workplace 
arrangements with their employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Small businesses were full participants 
in all the community meetings that were held. And again I think 
I would have to say that we’re very sensitive to the fact that 
what’s going to work for an employer with a hundred 
employees is not what’s going to work for a workplace with 
three or four employees. 
 
So I think we’re sensitive to that issue, and certainly if you 
would like a copy of the Duxbury report that was a result of 
these consultations, we can certainly get a copy of that to you. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I appreciate that. 
 
Getting back to this topic, though, 75 per cent of Saskatchewan 
businesses employ less than five people. How do you think 
they’ll cope when they have to replace their small staff, 
particularly during peak periods? 
 
And I think that’s very critical in this whole area. Even talking 
to large employers, this is a very, very tough situation to 
manage when suddenly, basically without notice, that a 
company or business is going to lose an employee and they 
have to scramble to make up time somewhere else by asking 
other employees to come in on overtime; and naturally the 
employees have the right to say no to overtime. 
 
How do you think the small businesses will cope with this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’m not sure what they’re coping 
with because we haven’t done anything. So I think we should 
worry about them coping when we actually talk about actually 
doing something that has some reasonable prospect of actually 
becoming real. So I suppose they’re coping with the absence of 
us having done anything fairly well. 
 
But what I will say is I do take this seriously, and we see a 
solution that’s workplace by workplace, community by 
community, and not some overarching, sweeping solution; 
unless in fact a very good case could, or might be made, that 
some measure is dramatically needed and that discussion would 
take place during a labour standards review. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, when it is implemented, do you have an 
idea what it’s going to cost employers, and how that translates 
into lost jobs, and how many jobs it will lose? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, seeing as I haven’t got the 
slightest clue of what it is we’re implementing, I don’t know 
how I can speculate on how what we don’t know we’re 
implementing will affect someone. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I think the point is . . . the point I’m 
getting at is, you don’t know what implications that policy will 
have. And before you implement anything, you should know 
what the cost to employers will be, how many job losses there 
will be, and that that study should be taken long before you 
implement any such measures. 
 
Can you tell me the job description within the Department of 
Labour of the person in charge of balancing work and family? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That individual for this phase of the 
work that’s being done on that hasn’t been hired yet, and work 
is just going on now with the Public Service Commission to 
define that job and the process for filling that job. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Many business 
owners that I talk to fear that legislating unpaid family leave 
may be the first step towards creating . . . creation of paid leave. 
In fact if you follow the labour . . . your views on the subject, 
you don’t blame the business community for having those fears. 
 
The Leader-Post, Tuesday, December 7, 1999 review, when 
asked about the possibilities of time being paid, you said, and I 



June 15, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

quote: 
 

We’ll see when we get to the point of legislation . . . 
Labour law changes incrementally. 
 

Is this your intention, to introduce family . . . paid family leave? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, and in fact I would say at this 
point, I have no intentions because I plan to see what comes 
forward in the labour standards review, as recommended by the 
reviewers who spend all of the time meeting with people to get 
their input on the labour standards review. And at such a point 
as recommendations are made to us, we would then examine 
them and I’m sure hopefully would ask all the same questions 
that you’re asking today. And certainly you would be involved 
in that process as well. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I hope you 
consider the small businesses in this situation that you’re 
considering and what it will do to the small business 
community in this province. 
 
I’d like to move on to one other item. The federation of labour 
was quoted shortly following the Throne Speech as calling for a 
7.15 an hour minimum wage. Is your government entertaining 
an upcoming review of the Saskatchewan minimum wage rate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Normally what happens is I think most 
provinces look at their minimum wages on a regular basis. And 
at this moment we don’t have a sitting board in Saskatchewan 
so there would be no one to bring forward a recommendation at 
this particular time. 
 
But we’ve been quite a while now that we haven’t had a sitting 
minimum wage board and I am going to have to make that 
decision soon about putting a board back in place so they can 
receive information from people. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to go on to occupational 
health and safety. Just want to get your views on this. 
 
Given that the safety and safe working conditions are a high 
priority for employees, the employers, and society as a whole, 
should the government and the employees help fund a share of 
the occupational health and safety instead of being 100 per cent 
funded from workmen’s compensation board which is totally 
funded by employers? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Legislation in the WCB requires that 
industrial safety is funded from WCB rates. And apparently this 
is not an exception to the way it’s done in other places in 
Canada. This is a very standard way that it’s done. 
 
Mr. Weekes: —It’s come to my attention, Madam Minister, that 
the Labour department presents a bill to workmen’s 
compensation for about $3.5 a year for occupational health and 
safety. Workmen’s compensation pays it. It doesn’t seem to . . . 
no one seems to know where the money goes. 
 
Could you give me more detail where that money goes? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The industrial safety programs are 
what’s funded out of this money and a detailed invoice is sent 
to the WCB on how all these monies are expended. That 
information is also available. 
 
It’s reviewed by Treasury Board, it’s reviewed by cabinet, and 
it’s also reviewed in Estimates. So if people have I guess 
concerns, there certainly is a great deal of information there to 
examine on how the industrial safety program is both paid for 
and administered. 
 
I have to say I get requests quite often for an expansion of the 
role of industrial safety, and actually recently now, with the 
expansion in the forestry industry, had a request from the 
industry itself to expand the occupational health and safety 
activities and the inspections that would take place in the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Just two, three more questions, Madam 
Minister. Public Accounts, ’98 and ’99, occupational health, 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour received $10,500. Could 
you explain what that was for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s to help sponsor their annual 
health and safety conference where they highlight these issues 
amongst their members, who are often part of workplace 
committees. It’s partly so people understand their role in those 
workplace occupational and health safety committees as well as 
emerging issues in the various industrial safety sectors. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It also has stated 
that there is an increase in the number of occupational 
committees. How many active occupational health committees 
are there to date? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Every workplace of over 10 employees 
is supposed to have a committee but they don’t all have them. 
And this is one of the reasons that people argue that we should 
have more enforcement officers. 
 
We’ve tended to go with the model of encouraging workplaces 
and requiring them to have these committees but we don’t 
always know exactly; but our best estimate at this time, unless 
new committees have formed since we had this data, is that 
there’s 3,606 committees. And in 1999-2000, 420 committees 
were formed. And the number of occupational . . . that are 
required to submit minutes that we have on file are 12,032. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What per cent of 
occupational health safety infringements have a follow-up 
meeting to ensure the infractions are looked after? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — All these minutes that are sent in from 
the occupational health and safety committees are reviewed. 
And if there’s something that, I guess contravenes the Act 
would be the best way of putting it, it’s up to the occupational 
health and safety officer to identify that, to identify to the 
parties what remedies has to be taken, and to give them a time 
frame in which to comply with the remedy. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to thank the minister and her officials, 
and that’s all questions I’ll have at this time, Mr. Chair. 
 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2000 

Subvote (LA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LA02), (LA03), (LA05), (LA04), (LA07), (LA06), 
(LA08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the members opposite for their thoughtful questions, and as 
well, to all the officials for assisting in the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:24 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


