





























































Hansard: June 26, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2165 
 June 26, 2000 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 85 – The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the hon. 
minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have two 
officials to assist me in review of the Bill in committee here today. 
To my immediate left is the deputy minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training, Neil Yeates, and seated directly 
behind him is a senior policy advisor, Tracy Sletto. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister and his officials here this evening. Mr. Chair, before we 
can consider Bill 85 there are some issues that I feel maybe we 
should discuss that relate directly to the Bill, and that has to do 
with funding to post-secondary institutions, particularly the 
universities. I understand that there was . . . the minister has made 
a decision on funding to both the universities and that’s resulted in 
a tuition fee increase announced by the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). And I wonder, Mr. Chair, if the Minister could 
perhaps respond to the significant tuition fee increases that were 
announced on Friday by the U of S. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. The hon. 
member will be referring to the announcement by the University 
of Saskatchewan on its tuition increases. The University of 
Saskatchewan will have been advised that the funding to the U of 
S in terms of percentage increase on their base is an increase of 
two and a half per cent, and have set their tuitions then, bringing 
together a balance, Mr. Chair, of their responsibilities. The board 
of directors is really charged with the responsibility of 
balancing tuition, which is a cost factor, together with access 
and quality of education. And they’ve done that, Mr. Chair, in 
my view, in a responsible kind of way and have therefore 
announced the tuition increases for the next academic year. 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Chair, that there has been a 
long-standing and important relationship between the province 
and universities — and I know the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood is familiar with this because we’ve 
discussed it in this Chamber before — an autonomous 
relationship which does give the authority for these important 
decisions to the board of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s fair to say as well, Mr. Chair, that in announcing the 
tuitions that the University of Saskatchewan did point out that 
they continue to be very competitive compared with this part of 
the country, and accordingly have set them, I think, with the 
confidence that they are exercising good judgement in the best 
interest of students at the U of S. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
response. I wonder if the minister could provide some 
information that he was unable to provide to the House during 
Committee of Finance deliberations, and that has to do with 

funding to the two universities in the current fiscal year. 
 
At the time when I asked the minister for those figures, there 
was some decisions to be made. I would expect that those 
decisions have been made as to the total number of dollars that 
each university will be given as far as an operating grant, and 
also give the percentages of . . . I believe in the fiscal year 
’99-2000, 70 per cent of the funding went to the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), 26 per cent to the U of R 
(University of Regina), and 4 per cent to the federated colleges. 
Have those ratios changed? Could we have the actual number of 
dollars to each university and the percentages of total? 
 
The Chair: — I will provide an opportunity for the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education to answer the question or to respond 
to the question, but I look at the Act respecting a 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit and the Chair is genuinely 
hard-pressed to see the connection between the connection and 
the Bill before us. So I’m urging the member to either make the 
connection or not pursue that line of questioning. I’ll give the 
minister an opportunity to respond though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll not require the 
hon. member to get creative in his question and simply respond 
to the question that he put. The hon. member may be aware that 
I met with the University of Saskatchewan board of governors 
on Friday and will be meeting tomorrow with the University of 
Regina board of governors, and then will comment on what has 
been referred to as the . . . flowing from the DesRosiers report, 
the university funding formula after that. 
 
But in a nutshell, to respond directly to the hon. member’s 
question, Mr. Chair. As he knows, the funding to the university 
sector has been increased by 4 per cent in this fiscal year. Both 
universities have been advised that the increase to their base is 
two and a half per cent and therefore, Mr. Chair, logic would 
tell you that one and a half per cent of the university funding 
will address the funding formula. 
 
And I think that, in a nutshell, summarizes the funding 
distribution as it breaks down this year. 
 
It would be also fair to say, Mr. Chair, that one of the things 
that I would look forward to, as would a number of other 
provinces, would be to see a greater level of assistance by the 
federal government in support of the operations of not only 
universities, but other post-secondary institutions as well. 
 
It was a significant disappointment to me this year, when we 
were preparing the budgetary planning before the budget was 
set, that the hon. member may recall there was some 
speculation at one point in time that there may be bad news 
coming from the federal government through CHST (Canadian 
Health and Social Transfer) funding; that it was anticipated that 
the bad news would be that they would provide to all of Canada 
an amount in the neighbourhood of $3.5 billion one-time 
funding not increased to your base. 
 
Mr. Chair, when the federal government announced its budget 
earlier this year, there was bad news I’m afraid; however, it was 
not 3.5 billion, it was 2.5 billion. It was one-time funding. But it 
wasn’t for one year, it was for four years. 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

And what that meant, Mr. Chair, in terms of directing funds to 
those significant areas in the province of Saskatchewan Health 
and Post-Secondary Ed — Health being a budget nearly 2 
billion, Post-Secondary Ed very close to 500 million — that in a 
budgetary area of $2.5 billion, nearly half of the program 
spending in the province of Saskatchewan, CHST funding 
worked out to $20 million per year. So that’s placed some 
restraints. 
 
However having said that, Mr. Chair, I think it’s fair to say as 
well that the province has certainly seen it as a priority to 
support university as well as other post-secondary institutions 
with an increase of 4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I guess the reason for my line of 
questioning is that Bill 85 deals with access to universities and 
post-secondary education, and so funding to those institutions is 
critically important because it is reflected in tuition fees which 
can limit access to students attending. 
 
But I will go on and deal more directly with the Bill at this 
point in time. The Bill indicates that the programs that students 
take to become eligible for the tax credit must be at least six 
months in duration, full-time study. And I’m just wondering if 
the minister could provide us with some examples of short 
courses that students may take that would qualify both and does 
it apply both to private schools and public institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the students — graduates I 
should say — who would be eligible to claim the tax credit, 
which will have a personal financial advantage to the graduate 
in the amount of $350 but is arrived at through a formula, which 
means that their taxable income above and beyond the basic 
deduction is $3,180 in addition to that, before they would pay 
tax. 
 
This is a benefit that applies to the graduates, then, from 
programs of six months in duration or its equivalent. And what 
this would mean, Mr. Chair, is that virtually all of the university 
and the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) kinds of programs would fall into that kind of 
category. They generally tend to be one, two, four years or 
longer and clearly more than six months of study. 
 
But it is important to note as well, as the hon. member raises in 
his question, that students who are studying at private 
vocational schools where the course of studies is six months or 
longer will be eligible to receive the graduate tax credit. And I 
would also add for his information and the information of the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, that apprentices who 
become journey persons will also be eligible to benefit from the 
graduate tax credit. 
 
The rationale is to provide financial assistance directly to those 
who are engaged in post-secondary education in a way that 
offers a bit of a reward. That was consistent with the advice that 
people told us at the public meetings in January — I know the 
hon. member attended many of — and also, Mr. Chair, 
therefore doesn’t differentiate between the length of the course 
of studies, but only to say that if it is a significant course of 
studies that qualifies a graduate to establish their career here in 
Saskatchewan, then we appreciate that and we want to assist in 
the process of covering costs directly and enable those people to 

benefit accordingly. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister could indicate 
how long a graduate would have to take advantage of this tax 
credit. Quite often students who have graduated find that it’s 
not to their advantage to take tax credits in the first year or first 
two years of employment and that some . . . quite often there’s 
maybe an apprenticeship program or a training program where 
they’re paid at a significantly lower salary and then two, three, 
or four years down the road they receive quite a significant 
increase in salary and it may be to their advantage to defer using 
the credit for a period of years. 
 
Could the minister indicate how long a graduate would have 
before they would lose that credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the 
graduate can carry it over for up to four years and claim it at his 
or her preference based on what they see is most advantageous 
to do. And also I would add, Mr. Chair, that it is, in the Bill, 
retroactive to January 1 of the year 2000; so in other words a 
graduate who is graduating by course of studies as of that date 
or later. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. Section 4(1) is the area that there’s a formula given for 
determining the tax credit. It’s: TC = 11% x $3,180. I wonder if 
the minister could explain how they arrived at that formula? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, and to the hon. member, and I 
will do my best to earn his confidence because I appreciate that 
he was speculating that my math skills are really fairly 
well-developed and we’d like to encourage him to retain that 
conclusion. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the place that the graduate tax, post-signer 
graduate tax credit, will come on the income tax form reduces 
the tax payable. And what it signifies is this, is that a 
post-secondary graduate will be able to make . . . have income 
of $3,180 above and beyond the basic tax deduction before 
they’ll begin to pay Saskatchewan tax. And that’s precisely why 
the figure 3,180 applies. And as you see in the Bill, it says then 
rounded to the nearest dollar. And if you do 11 per cent times 
3,180, rounded to the nearest dollar — wonders never cease, 
Mr. Chair — it will come out to $350. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your answer. I take 
it that those . . . that formula may change as tax rates change 
and so on, or would it require an amendment to the Bill — to 
the Act, I should say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I know the hon. member is 
referring to the fact that there are significant changes in income tax 
here in Saskatchewan; that in fact they will begin in a significant 
way starting July 1, this weekend, and then will lead to a new 
formula for calculation of taxation on January 1 of the year 2001, 
with some adjustments on years thereafter. 
 
However, I think to answer the hon. member’s question directly, I 
do point out that the calculation which I think many will say is 
clearest when the proposed income tax changes have been 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

completed — the calculation will be clearest — 11 per cent times 
3,180. But by having it in the Bill in this form, what it means is 
that even though the tax rates may change, the formula remains 
the same, and therefore the benefit is the same, without having to 
amend the Bill in order to keep the same advantage to graduates 
who are claiming it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one more 
question, I would think, and that is with the administration of this 
tax credit program. Will there be additional staff required to 
handle the application forms and the approval procedures and that 
sort of thing, or will the existing staff be able to handle that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. We’re 
currently working on the most effective method of 
implementing the administration of it. And what we’re currently 
looking at is the means of interfacing with institutions through 
electronic means to minimize the actual amount of labour that’s 
required in order to implement the tax credit. 
 
For those who are the benefactors, of course, it will just be one 
additional receipt and one more calculation as they fill theirs 
out. But I’m optimistic that the implications will be really fairly 
minor if we’re able to use modern technology in order to 
achieve this. 
 
The hon. member may be aware that just this morning I 
attended the official opening of another of our career 
employment service centres in Saskatchewan. And I know the 
hon. member takes great interest in the use of technology to 
assist in the whole process of achieving the objectives of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, and how we’ve 
been able to very effectively increase the volume and the 
quality of good information to both employers seeking workers 
and workers seeking employment or training or financial 
support, including people at the high school level even or 
institutions. All of this is happening without increasing the 
number of people who are there providing this because we’re 
able to take advantage of modern technology in order to do that. 
 
So when I look at the implementation of this I see a parallel, 
and it will certainly be our objective to be as cost effective and 
to use electronic technology to maximize the administrative 
effectiveness of this. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answer. That would conclude any questions I would have 
dealing with this Bill. I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the minister and his staff for providing the information 
that we have requested regarding this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, let me express my appreciation 
to the hon. member from Last Mountain-Touchwood for his 
questions. I think, in answering his questions, he’s asked a 
number of the questions that people do want to know and I 
would hope that he would circulate this exchange as broadly as 
possible because it would certainly be in the best interest of 
everyone to have these things that he was asking well known. 
 
And I also want to join him in saying thanks to the officials for 
their assistance in the design of the graduate task credit and the 
implementation of it in the interests of students of 
Saskatchewan. 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52  The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move that this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 53  The Wildlife Act Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1999 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 5, The Parks Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Income Tax Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 81 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Income Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 85 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 85 be 
now read for the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of Health 
to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. To my left is Glenda 
Yeates, the deputy minister of Health. To the associate 
minister’s right is Marlene Smadu, the assistant deputy 
minister. Behind me is Carol Klassen, who is also an assistant 
deputy minister. And to Carol’s right is Rod Wiley, the 
executive director of finance and management services. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Welcome, Madam Minister, and your officials. 
Tonight I’d like to ask you a few questions about when patients 
are admitted to hospital. And firstly, when a person is admitted 
to a hospital, are all the drugs covered when they are staying in 
the hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — All prescription drugs are covered by 
our publicly funded health system. 

Ms. Bakken: — Minister, irregardless of whether they are under 
the normal . . . like paid for normally when you are not in 
hospital, they are paid irregardless of which drugs they are 
when you are in hospital, is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When you are in a hospital in an acute 
care setting and if you are prescribed a prescription by a 
physician, your prescriptions would be covered through our 
public health insurance program. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, we have some issues then 
because in our hospital in Weyburn people are being charged 
for drugs when they are staying in hospital. I’d like you to 
explain to me why this is happening. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, could the member be more 
precise? Which prescription drugs is she talking about? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, I understood that you just 
said whatever drugs that they are prescribed when they are in 
hospital, then they are paid for. I don’t have the name of the 
drug in front of me, but it was something that the doctor 
prescribed for this person that was in the hospital. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously we need more detail. If the 
drug was prescribed while the patient was in the hospital, the 
drug would be covered by our public insurance system. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, I’ll be 
happy to get some further information on this for you. But I’ve 
talked to some of the other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and this seems to be a common practice in the 
hospitals. So it is something that should be looked into. 
 
Further to that, when a person in Saskatchewan goes to 
emergency and sees a doctor, is there any fee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If you visit the emergency room, there 
are no charges. If you go to the emergency room with a 
particular broken bone and you want to choose a particular cast 
or if you want to choose a particular ambulatory item, then 
there would be a cost for a more expensive item. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, again we have 
a situation then where hospitals are now charging fees for 
emergency care, and I would like to know is this something that 
the health districts are deciding on their own or are . . . is this 
something that is the blessing of the Department of Health. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Once again, Mr. Chair, we would need 
to have more detail. If I attend at an emergency room with a 
particular problem and I see a physician, I am charged nothing. 
If I attend and see a physician, the physician fee is covered by 
the public insurance program. 
 
If I require a cast for my arm and if I want an upgraded kind of 
cast, that, that would be something that I would pay an 
additional cost for instead of a plaster cast. We just provide the 
basic cast if you’re attending a hospital. If you want an 
upgraded cast, you would pay for it. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, this had nothing 
to do with a cast. It was simply a visit to the emergency. The 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

person was admitted, and when they left the hospital, they were 
given a bill for the emergency visit. And I will be happy to get 
that further information on that for you. 
 
Madam Minister, if a patient goes by ambulance for a 
procedure, something that the doctor has sent them for, and 
when they get to Regina or Saskatoon, wherever the 
procedure’s being . . . supposed to be administered and it 
doesn’t happen and they’re returned back to their home, who is 
responsible to pay for this ambulance fee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If the person was over the age of 65, 
the public insurance system would subsidize a portion of that, 
of the ambulance fee. If the patient was under the age of 65, 
they would be responsible. 
 
Basically the public health insurance program covers 
physicians, hospitals, and nursing care. That is 100 per cent 
covered by the public insurance program. 
 
As the member will know, there are many ambulances in the 
province that are within the private sector, and they are not seen 
as part of the insured public health system. So there is a co-pay. 
The Department of Health does provide grants to each health 
district for emergency services. 
 
The Department of Health does have air ambulance where, I 
think, the most a person would pay for air ambulance is $350 if 
they’re transported by air. And if they were a senior I believe 
that the most they would pay is $250. The rest would be paid by 
the public insurance system. And if they’re under the age of 65, 
they would pay for it themselves, and there might be a small, a 
very small portion that was paid for by the public health 
insurance program. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. We’re not talking 
about an emergency. I’m asking about when a person is sent by 
a physician for a procedure. The procedure never took place. 
They were sent back to where they originated from, and then 
they receive a bill. Now how is this appropriate when this 
person went because they were sent by a physician? It was 
through no fault of their own that the procedure never 
happened. Why should they be responsible to pay for the 
ambulance fee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member will know, most 
physicians in the province of Saskatchewan are not paid like an 
employee in the health system. They basically are private 
business people actually that charge the public health insurance 
program a fee for service. Physicians direct patients to a 
particular place and they are sent by an ambulance to a 
particular place. In the case that the member is talking about, if 
the hospital for whatever reason does not provide the service 
that they were to provide and the person has to be sent back, 
that person pays for the ambulance trip if they are not a senior 
citizen and if they are not covered by a supplementary health 
program or the children’s benefit program or workers’ 
compensation. That person pays for it. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Chair, and to the Madam Minister, 
again I hardly see where this is appropriate. This lady that I’m 
referring to — and I know this is not an isolated case — her 
doctor phoned to make sure that the procedure would in fact 

take place when she arrived. She was assured that it would take 
place. She was sent to Regina. 
 
When she arrived in Regina, she had her X-rays with her, but 
they proceeded to do the X-rays again for whatever reason; she 
has no idea. So there was a cost to the system. Then she waited 
two hours to have a CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan 
and was then told that the CAT scan was not going to happen 
that day because they were booked till midnight, and she was 
sent back home. She has now received a bill for $593 for 
absolutely nothing. And now she’s going to have to take an 
ambulance to go again because she cannot go by a car. So I 
would like you to tell me how you find that appropriate. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I don’t. And that is why we 
have put together an emergency medical services project. We 
have contracted with two people who are to make 
recommendations to me by the end of September outlining a 
design for a provincial emergency medical service system that 
is citizen-focused, is coordinated, and it ensures the 
effectiveness of available resources. And I think we spoke 
about this the other day and I’ll just outline the terms of 
reference for your information. 
 
The first question that the two project leaders are to address is: 
how should emergency medical services dispatch and response 
processes be organized to ensure coordination among EMS 
(emergency medical services) providers and designated 
hospitals and health centres? How should the EMS system be 
structured to ensure consistent and timely response by 
professional personnel to citizens across the province, and what 
are the associated costs and the priorities for implementation? 
And the third question they’re asked to address is: based on the 
recommended design and the cost of a provincial EMS system, 
how will the system be cost shared between the province and 
the users of the system, and what is the proposed rate structure 
for generating the users’ portion of the system’s costs? 
 
The member is absolutely correct. I’ve heard this issue myself. 
And part of the dilemma is that we have physicians who 
basically operate outside of the health districts, in a sense, 
because they are private contractors, and then we have the 
health districts. Physicians are sending people to health centres 
or hospitals with ambulances, and we don’t have a coordinated 
approach to this. And I agree with the member absolutely that 
it’s unacceptable for a citizen to be transported at the doctor’s 
request to a centre and then they lay there and wait while the 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is not performed or the 
CAT scan is not performed. And we absolutely need better 
integration and coordination, and that’s why we’ve contracted 
with two people, Dr. James Cross and Richard A. Keller, to put 
together a framework for a system in the province of 
Saskatchewan that is coordinated and integrated. 
 
(1945) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I think that’s very 
encouraging that you are doing this. But I guess my concern is 
that in the interim the people that are sent by ambulance then 
receive this bill. Many people can’t afford this. It’s a hardship 
even if they get the service — never mind if they don’t get the 
service. And now she’s going to have to pay again because she 
has to go by ambulance again. 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

So what is your plan in the interim to alleviate this hardship for 
people that have to go by ambulance and are directed by their 
doctor to do so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as I indicated . . . And I don’t 
know the person’s financial situation, but obviously she’s not 
over the age of 65 or it would be capped at $250. And 
obviously she is not a low-income resident receiving 
Saskatchewan Health supplementary health program or the 
Child Benefit Program or Workers’ Compensation. 
 
The only thing I could suggest . . . and I certainly understand 
the case that the member makes and it’s a compelling case 
because that case has been made to me. I do know that there is 
flexibility through the health districts for the person to pay over 
time. But it doesn’t answer her immediate problem, and that’s 
why we have the review going on to try and address the very 
question that the member raises. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, this is going on all across the 
province. And I guess the issue here is that you say you don’t 
know her financial situation. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan the financial situation 
shouldn’t be the issue. We’re supposed to have accessible, 
affordable health care for everyone. It shouldn’t matter if you 
have the finances to pay for it, or if you are on low-income, or 
if you’re on Workers’ Comp. That should not be the issue. You 
shouldn’t have to take a means test to decide if you’re going to 
pay for your ambulance, and especially when it was out of your 
control. 
 
People don’t say, well, when I get to the other end am I actually 
going to be able to receive care. They take their doctor’s word 
for it that it’s going to be there, and they get in the ambulance 
as they’re told and they go; and then they’re the ones that are 
stuck with the bill. So indeed we need to do something about 
this. And if something could be done in the short term, it would 
be much appreciated. 
 
I’m going to just move on to another issue and that’s about 
home care. Madam Minister, what is the acceptable ratio of 
nurse managers to nurses actively serving patients in home 
care? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, just before the associate 
minister answers that question, I would say to the member that 
ambulance services are not an insured service. It is not an 
insured service in this province nor is it an insured service 
anywhere in Canada. 
 
I think that is why one of the questions that the Fyke 
commission will look at is what’s in a publicly funded, publicly 
administered system. Because originally it was doctors, 
hospitals, and you know, nurses, the people in acute care 
facilities. And we have added on to our publicly funded system 
through co-pays, with our citizenry, whether it’s a co-pay for 
prescription drugs, home care, long-term care, ambulance, and 
so on. 
 
So I guess I certainly want . . . I respect the member’s point. 
And that’s why the review of the EMS services in the province. 
But also that’s the larger question that the Fyke commission 

will look at because the health system, as we know it, has gone 
well beyond hospitals, doctors, and nurses into other areas of 
health policy. 
 
And we know that ambulance is important, and we know home 
care is important, and chiropractic care is important, and eye 
care is important, and dental care is important. But these have 
. . . historically have not been paid for 100 per cent by our 
medicare system. And she’ll answer the . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — If I can remember it. 
 
We don’t have a formula for how many managers per X number 
of staff or for services. We let the districts decide that they have an 
adequate amount of supervision for what services they deliver. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, or Madam 
Associate Minister, have you ever looked at this? Because we’re 
fighting for scarce health care dollars, and in some districts we 
have one nurse manager for two nurses that are out working in the 
district. And I find this appalling when we are fighting for people 
to go out and actually serve clients. We have a shortage in 
hospitals of nurses, and yet we have got all these nurse managers 
in home care, and in some cases in acute care, that are being tied 
down with administrative duties instead of out serving the public. 
 
Have you looked at this or would you be willing to look at this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — First, generally, I want to say that the number 
of managers in the system has decreased dramatically with health 
reform. We have heard anecdotal evidence of some districts that 
have more managers than others, in particular in home care, but 
have not had anybody come forward with names of a district or 
numbers or any substantive proof that this is actually happening. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Madam Minister, you tell us that the 
number of managers have decreased, the number of management. 
In the Living Sky Health District, for example, we have a CEO 
(chief executive officer), we have 6 directors, we have 22 nurse 
managers, and we have a board. Now would you like to tell me 
how you justify that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t have an organizational chart of 
the Living Sky area but what we have found, when I said the 
management has decreased since health reform, most of the 
districts are reporting about a 3 to 4 per cent of their total global 
budget in management. Before health reform each of those 
facilities had management structures in place. 
 
Now they have an integrated system where they actually have 
. . . they share management structures across many facilities. 
And they do report, and it’s been verified that they do have 
about 3 to 4 per cent of their global budget on administration. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, would you 
like to tell me how you classify a manager then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Basically the managers, as we define 
managers, report directly to the CEO, and they are in finance, 
administration, human resources. And the direct supervision is a 
lot of times done by in-scope people, and they might have a 
dual function — some in-scope, some out-of-scope. 
 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I guess in light of 
the fact that we have such a shortage of on-ward nurses, has it 
ever been considered by your department to look at people that 
aren’t trained as RNs (Registered Nurse) carrying some of the 
administrative duties so that we can re-engage our RNs on to 
the wards? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well it certainly has been considered 
by the department and the health districts and a number of 
changes have been implemented in the workplace so that 
registered nurses are providing more hands-on care instead of a 
lot of the paperwork that they have to do. 
 
Some of the paperwork is associated, well a lot of the 
paperwork is associated, with liability questions. People are 
more prepared to see lawyers these days in terms of medical 
suits than they have been in the past and a lot of this paperwork 
and charting has come about as a result of wanting to ensure 
that everything that was supposed to be done was done so that if 
something happens, then they are protected by the work that 
they do through their paperwork. 
 
I can also say that recently we just passed licensed practical 
nurse legislation which will allow licensed practical nurses to 
use their full scope of practice, and I think that certainly is 
going to help registered nurses. Because as was said in the 
legislature earlier, licensed practical nurses, even though they 
had the appropriate training, were not able to hand out certain 
medications, registered nurses had to do that work. That’s 
something that will take some of the load off registered nurses 
as well as there’s LPNs (Licensed Practical Nurse) that can put 
in catheters. And I think that’s going to help a little bit with the 
workload with registered nurses, and there’ll be other things 
that licensed practical nurses can do to assist registered nurses. 
And we’re hoping to develop more of a team approach to 
nursing with nursing assistants, licensed practical nurses, 
registered nurses, and registered psychiatric nurses providing a 
team approach to nursing care in the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, well if there’s one 
complaint that I hear often, and I’m sure most of the members 
do, is that they go to the hospital, there’s all these nurses. But 
the nurses are the nurse managers. The nurses on the ward are 
run off their feet trying to actually give on-hands care. 
 
There doesn’t seem to be a rationale between those that are 
doing the book work and managing managers. We have how 
many levels of managers but they never get anywhere near 
patient care, and yet the people that are trying to give the direct 
patient care do not have adequate staffing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One of the things that we are hearing 
from nurses on the floor is that they would like to see a nurse 
manager in their area because with the various changes that 
have taken place you might have a nurse manager that is 
managing two wards, and the nurse on the floor doesn’t have 
someone that she can speak to, and they’re actually asking us to 
make sure that there are more nurse managers on the ward 
because their ward may share a nurse manager with someone 
else. 
 
Now that is in the larger facilities. Perhaps in the smaller 
facilities that may be what you’re talking about, but I’m told 

that nurse managers in those smaller facilities are hands-on 
nurses, that they are providing not only management but they’re 
also providing nursing care on those wards. 
 
So I guess I’d like to hear a little more detail because that’s 
certainly not what nurses are saying to the associate minister 
and myself. 
 
(2000) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, well I’m sure 
it varies from hospital to hospital and from health centre to 
health centre. You hear both sides. And some nurse managers 
feel that they cannot do hands-on work with patients because it 
is out of their scope; they’re not supposed to be doing that. 
 
I’ve been told by nurse managers that they slip in and help but it 
really is not what they’re supposed to be doing under their 
mandate or under their contract. So I think we have something 
strange here because I’ve been told that they are not to do 
hands-on training. 
 
So I think that is something that . . . If that is what is supposed 
to be happening then I think that should be known across the 
piece and that nurse managers can assist where assistance is 
needed. And I think that would help in many cases to alleviate 
the workload of the nurses on the ward. If you could clarify 
that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, there may be . . . you may 
be talking about a sensitivity to the work of the bargaining unit. 
And, you know, nurse managers are out of scope, and there may 
be some nurse managers that are sensitive that they may be 
doing work of the bargaining unit. But I do know that there are 
nurse managers that are helping out in the wards and they’re 
having no difficulty with the registered nurses on the floor. 
 
Now what you may . . . the incident or the area that you’re 
talking about, maybe there is some particular problem with the 
nurses on the floor if that nurse manager helps out. But the 
nurses that I’ve spoken to don’t mind if the nurse manager helps 
out because they want an extra set of hands to help them on 
those floors. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister. I want to touch on a problem that the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy brought up. And I want to make sure you 
know, Madam Minister, and I think you do, that these are not 
isolated cases. 
 
I talked to you about the case where I had a gentleman from 
Esterhazy was ambulanced to Yorkton and by the time he got 
there, there was no bed; taken back to Esterhazy and within a 
short time later they realized this man was getting sicker. He’s 
ambulanced to Regina, gets to Regina, and guess what? By that 
time there’s no bed and he was ambulanced back to Esterhazy. 
 
The story doesn’t end there, Madam Minister. It goes on 
because the gentleman is getting sicker and sicker as this is 
happening. Finally it gets to the point where they have to get 
him into Regina, into the hospital here. They do that, realize 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

just how sick this gentleman is, they air ambulance him to 
Saskatoon. And, Madam Minister, you know as well as I do — 
and I’m sorry to have to say this — but the gentleman passed 
away. 
 
Now no one out there can say for sure that this had anything to 
do with this gentleman passing, and I’m not insinuating that for 
a moment. But I’m sure that any person that is sick out there, 
this ambulance ride is doing their health no good, and it may 
have had a part to play in that, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, some of the bills that these people . . . and the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy talked about there, through 
no fault of their own this happens. They’re taken from one 
place to another; there’s no bed there. 
 
We hear of bills out there for ambulance rides of $1,100, $800, 
$750 — these fees and this amount is not out of the ordinary. 
And through no fault of their own — there’s no bed at the other 
end when they get there, Madam Minister — usually I think the 
person that makes the mistake, the Health department at that 
point, should be picking up this tab. 
 
Our ambulance fees out there, Madam Minister, are high 
enough as it is, and out in rural Saskatchewan we seem to have 
what you don’t like to call, but I do — it’s a two-tier health 
system — because we pick up the tab out in rural 
Saskatchewan, where in the city here it doesn’t seem to happen 
that way. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would hope when the health care report 
comes in that I hope it addresses this issue and makes this a 
much more level playing field for rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, that wasn’t the question that I had, but I 
wanted to make sure that you knew that this is not an isolated 
case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, the question I had is: can 
you tell me how many people are working in the 
communications end of Sask Health? How many people are 
involved in communications? The question is for Sask Health 
itself. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are 19 positions in the 
Department of Health and my understanding is they’re not all 
full. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, then can you also tell me then, within the 
health districts themselves, how many people would be 
involved in communications? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We wouldn’t know. You would have to 
get that information from each of the 32 health districts. We 
don’t keep that detailed information. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I find that 
somewhat amazing there’s 19. And I know in my health 
districts out there, I think I’m a part of three, and I think each 

one of them actually have people that work in communications. 
And I sometimes wonder what we’re communicating. Bad 
news, because out in rural Saskatchewan that seems to be all 
that I ever hear about our health system. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me then . . . and I might be . . . 
correct me if I’m wrong, but the total costs for Sask Health, and 
if I’m getting the numbers right are $3.429 million, Madam 
Minister. Is that the right number for administration of Sask 
Health itself? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The administrative costs would include 
the minister’s offices, the deputy minister’s offices, which 
would be the ADMs (assistant deputy minister) and the deputy, 
finance and management services, and human resources. 
 
I just want to make a point about the 19 people in 
communications. There is a very large correspondence unit 
because, as you know, you write regularly. All of that 
correspondence has to be answered. There is also a support to a 
lot of public health information programs — diabetes, quit 
smoking, the population health kinds of things. I think we have 
some people that write speeches for the ministers, or the deputy 
minister, or the assistant deputy ministers, or whatever, speech 
writers. 
 
And we have a publication that is sent out to the health districts 
and that, of course, would be put together by the 
communications branch, and all of Sask Health’s pamphlets and 
communications like — how does the prescription drug plan 
work, how would you apply for it — all of the information that 
is communicated with the public comes out of that 
communications unit. 
 
So it’s not just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it’s just not PR 
(public relations). There is a lot of work that’s done in terms of 
public information for the public and how to access certain 
programs like high cost drugs, chiropractic care, children’s 
health benefits, supplementary health benefits, and so on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, okay, we’ve got the figure of what it costs for 
Sask Health for administration. Can you then elaborate on how 
many people actually work for Sask Health? And I’m not 
talking in the health districts again, Madam Minister, just 
strictly Sask Health? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are 572.4 full-time positions in 
the Department of Health. And let me tell you I want to go 
through what they are. In administration there are 55.9 people; 
district health services, which could include acute and rehab 
services, long-term care services, home-based services, 
community services, EMR . . . or EMS services, health facilities 
capital, and district program support, there’s 158.5. 
 
In the provincial health services — this would be the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, the provincial lab . . . No, it 
wouldn’t be the cancer agency. It would be the provincial 
laboratory and provincial program support; there are 222 
people. 
 
In medical services, now this would be to pay physicians, and 
chiropractic services, optometric services, dental services, out 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

of province, all of the payments, people there are 97.6. And 
then the drug plan and extended benefits, there’s 38.4. And they 
would do administrative work around the prescription drug 
plan, Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, supplementary 
health program, family health benefit program, the HIV (human 
immunodeficiency virus) program — that would all be in the 
drug plan and extended benefits — for a total of 572.4. 
 
What I do want to say to the member is that the provincial lab 
has 109.4 people and they do all of the lab tests. So that’s not a 
support to me. Then there is a huge number of people that pay 
out money. That’s 97.6 in medical services and another 38.4 in 
drug plan and extended benefits. And then there is the district 
program support people. 
 
So from my point of view — I’ll just put this on the record 
because my colleagues think the Department of Health has a lot 
of people — from my point of view a lot of the people in the 
Department of Health pay money, or they write cheques and 
look after all the administrative work around the drug plan, 
physician services, chiropractic care, optometric care, and so 
on. There are very few people in the Department of Health that 
provide support to the people out in the health districts and so 
on. We really have devolved that to the health districts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, then I think it was the Associate Minister of 
Health that talked here a few minutes ago in response to a 
question that administration, and if I heard her right, was 
running around 3 to 4 per cent. But if you add in, Madam 
Minister, and a lot of what you’ve talked about now within Sask 
Health has to be classed as administration and I know what 
you’ve said tonight is some of that does not fall under 
administration, but some does. But we’d certainly be a lot 
higher than 3 to 4 per cent if we added all that into the total . . . 
take that total right out of the 1.9 billion that you’re spending on 
Health and took percentages out of it of what administration 
actually costs. Would you not agree, Madam Minister, that’s far 
higher than 3 to 4 per cent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well it doesn’t feel like it’s higher 
because, I’ll tell you, it takes — from my point of view 
sometimes it takes too long to get things done because we have 
lots of people doing . . . in the department that do blood tests 
. . . or run the blood tests or whatever, the lab people provide 
direct services to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And in fact if you look at that, $40 million is dedicated to 
programs that benefit all Saskatchewan people through direct 
provision of various health services, like the provincial 
laboratory and the immunization programs. 
 
And then there are other parts of the Health department that 
what they do is they support physicians by paying the money, 
or pharmacists, or chiropractors, or dentists, or — what else 
have we got here that . . . where they’re involved. I’ve lost my 
piece of paper, sorry. The optometrists. Out of province, you 
know, people who travel out of province for services and 
various provinces and territories have to be paid. The 
prescription drug plan, Aids to Independent Living. 
 
(2015) 
 

From my point of view, we could use some more administrative 
staff to solve problems because there are tonnes of problems in 
the health system. That’s not to say that . . . The majority of the 
health system works just fine, but there are glitches and 
problems, and from my point of view we could use some more 
people to help us solve some of the problems that you raise in 
the legislature sometimes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, and to your officials, I have a number of questions 
tonight. And I’d like to start out by asking you about the money 
that SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) would pay to 
Department of Health for tests and procedures and treatments 
that they would require. Can you give me that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We get a little over . . . we don’t have 
all the detail that you’re wanting so the officials are going for 
memory — we get a little over $5 million from SGI to pay for 
physician services and acute care in hospitals for victims of 
automobile accidents or vehicle accidents in the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, can you 
tell me how much money you receive from Workers’ 
Compensation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we don’t receive any monies from 
Workers’ Compensation. They deal with their program directly 
with the physicians in the health districts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, when a citizen of 
Saskatchewan needs a medical report in order to receive a 
licence and there is a fee charged by the doctor, does the 
Department of Health get that money, does SGI, or who 
receives it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If a person is required to have a 
medical then the money is paid by the individual or it could be 
paid for by the third party requesting the medical, but that 
money does not come to the Department of Health or the 
Government of Saskatchewan, that money is paid to the 
physician. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know that there is no direct 
costs that you can acknowledge for procedures like an MRI, but 
like in a business you know what it costs you to perform a 
certain type of treatment. Can you tell me what the cost of an 
MRI is in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, we provided . . . in 1999-2000 
there were 10,833 MRIs performed in the province, and there 
will be more performed because those MRIs, not all three were 
in operation for the entire fiscal year, ’99-2000. So there were 
10,833 MRIs performed in ’99-2000 in comparison to 5,031 
performed in ’98-99. Now that was on three MRIs at a cost in 
excess of $3.9 million. 
 
So this results in the average cost of approximately $365 per 
scan, but that excludes the maintenance contracts on the new 
units, and there are two new units in the province, one in 
Regina and one in Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, when SGI or Workers’ 
Compensation requires that one of their clients require an MRI, 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

did I understand that the health system will pay for that and not 
Workers’ Compensation or SGI? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Workers’ Compensation pays, as I said 
earlier. They pay for the cost of hospital services, physician 
services. SGI pays the Department of Health I think $5.5 
million a year, and the SGI MRI would be paid for by the 
Department of Health through the health district budgets. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, you had indicated it would 
be about $365 for an MRI. And I don’t know what the time 
frame on that is that you’re in the . . . how long you’re in the 
procedure. But I know that if you want to go to Edmonton or to 
Calgary or someplace, you can have an MRI done, and they 
charge a certain amount of money. 
 
I would imagine SGI or Workers’ Compensation, if they can’t 
get the tests done in the time frame they would like to in 
Saskatchewan, they go out of province and have it done. Have 
you had had any discussions with them as to the cost of having 
work done here in Saskatchewan as compared to going outside 
of the province to have the work done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The way our health system works in 
Saskatchewan, people have access to MRIs or CAT scans based 
on need, not based on preferential treatment because they are a 
client of the Workers’ Compensation Board or SGI. 
 
So if you are in need of an MRI and you are an emergency or an 
urgent, you get a MRI very quickly. And if you are not an 
urgent or an emergency person, then it’s based on need — who 
has the greatest need has access to the system first. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I imagine your department 
must have discussions with these two agencies. If they have to 
send a lot of their patients outside of the province, they 
probably say to the Department of Health, if you had another 
MRI or if you had more time or personnel to operate the 
equipment, you could save . . . you could bring a lot of money 
into the province by allowing us to work inside of the province 
instead of outside of the province. 
 
So there must be some number that SGI or Workers’ 
Compensation works with to determine to talk about this with 
your department. 
 
So you had indicated $365 plus another cost on top of it which 
is the overhead in any business. So I guess I’m just trying to ask 
you if you are looking at what we are leaving in this province. 
If your department is concerned with the number of patients 
who have to leave the province, whether it is not just exact cost 
of the procedure, but the travel cost. Whether it’s . . . and the 
time spent outside of the province. That’s all cost that comes 
back to the people of this province, whether it’s through our 
Workers’ Compensation rates or through our insurance rates. 
Maybe there is a way to be saving some money. So, Madam 
Minister, have you had further discussions with them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can tell the member once we added 
the two additional MRIs . . . we now have three in the province. 
So basically we’ve tripled the numbers of MRIs in our province 
in the last year. And since we’ve done that, we have reduced the 
waiting times for MRIs. We’ve expanded the capacity, the 

numbers of MRIs that can be performed in the province because 
we have three machines. We should be able to provide, you 
know . . . and I gave you the numbers. Just in ’99-2000, we 
performed 10,833 scans in comparison to 5,031 the year before. 
That was an increase of 115 per cent. And those machines 
weren’t operating the full fiscal year. So my point is that we’ve 
reduced the wait times because we’ve tripled the capacity, and 
it’s not as much of an issue as it was — say — a year and a half 
ago. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I guess when you have your 
Minister of Health meetings across Canada you must discuss 
issues like the cost of providing MRIs and that type of service. 
Is Saskatchewan’s rate or the cost of having an MRI in 
Saskatchewan, is that comparable to other provinces? Is it 
something that is . . . I’m talking about MRIs, but other 
surgeries as well, or other treatments. Is it the same cost right 
across Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member — and this 
is what I find surprising when I go to ministers of health 
meetings — because when you’re in Saskatchewan you’re 
constantly hearing that our health system needs a lot of 
improvement, right, and you’re constantly being criticized. And 
this really is a portfolio, not only in this province, but all across 
the country, where the ministries and the ministers are under a 
great deal of pressure because there’s always more and more 
that the citizenry and opposition politicians and people just 
want you to do. 
 
The good thing is that when you do go to the minister of health 
meetings and you listen to the problems that are being described 
in places like Toronto or Calgary or Edmonton or Vancouver or 
Montreal, our problems don’t seem nearly as large and as 
daunting. Because we’re a smaller province, you know, we can 
solve some of our problems. It’ll take some money and some 
reintegrating of the system and reorienting of the system, but 
we can solve our problems. 
 
And one of the things that constantly amazes me is that people 
say, you people in Saskatchewan, you’re so much further along 
than we are, and our problems are so much bigger, and you’re 
making your way through this. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now I know that you find that hard to believe. I do know that. 
And actually, I find it sometimes hard to believe because when 
you sit here, day in and day out, you think oh, the system is just 
in a huge difficulty. 
 
But for the vast majority of people, the system is not difficult. It 
works very well. But there are occasions when it doesn’t work 
well, and that’s what we have to fix. We know that there’s lots 
of improvements that are needed. 
 
But it doesn’t matter where I go. Yesterday I was at three . . . 
two 90th birthday parties. And I was at a long-term residents 
function in my constituency. And person after person told me 
about their good experience with the health system. 
 
Now one person had a problem with a cataract surgery and it 
didn’t work, and she’s upset about it. But for the vast majority 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

of people — and these are older people — they told me that 
their experience with the health system was good. 
 
And when I was at a family supper last night, my cousin — 
who has an entirely different last name than mine — last week 
suffered some serious paralysis, and she saw her GP (general 
practitioner). She had an MRI within, I think, 36 hours. She saw 
a neurologist. She was diagnosed with MS (multiple sclerosis) 
on Friday, and she’s seeing a neurologist today. And is she 
going to get Copaxone or Betaseron? 
 
The system can and does work very well if you are in an urgent 
situation or an emergent situation. And in the case of my 
cousin, I think they might have thought she had a tumour or 
something like that, but she ended up having MS which is a 
horrible thing to have happen. But the system worked, and her 
family was very pleased. 
 
And I know you hear those stories, member, that the system 
works well. I know you hear those stories because I do, day in 
and day out. 
 
The difficulty is that when all we hear is about the terrible stuff, 
people think the system doesn’t work. And there are many, 
many times —most of the time — the system works very well. 
And I have case after case after case. And people stop me in the 
street to tell me, gee, I was surprised it worked. I was surprised 
it worked. They also stop to tell me when it didn’t work too, but 
most times the system works. And I think that we need to be 
cognizant of that and recognize that the system does work and 
people are thankful for it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, first of all I’m 
pleased that your cousin is . . . well I guess having MS is not 
great. But the system worked; that’s fine. But, Madam Minister, 
I know that the polling that you’ve done and the polling that 
we’ve done has said that 80 per cent of the people in 
Saskatchewan think that the system is in a failure mode. So 
that’s not something that . . . I don’t think most of the people in 
the province, from all the studies and the surveys that both your 
government and we here are saying that they have a problem 
with the system. 
 
Madam Minister, when you talked about meeting with the other 
health ministers, I guess maybe that’s a good thing for the 
health ministers because misery loves company if you’re saying 
that you get to share stories. 
 
But we have a number of questions that we have to get through 
tonight, and I’m waiting for the answer to the first one I asked 
you, and that is, would the cost of an MRI be the same here in 
Saskatchewan as it is in, let’s say, Alberta and Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When we do reciprocal billing, with 
any other place in Canada for an MRI, we pay that province, I 
believe, $655. As I indicated to you, the cost of an MRI is about 
$365 in the province, but that excludes the maintenance 
contracts on the new units. So our costs seem to be less than 
what we are paying other provinces. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, if a patient from Workers’ 
Compensation or SGI is shipped out of the province to do the 
test, who pays for it — is it SGI or is it Department of Health? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In the case of Workers’ Compensation 
they would pay for it and in the case of SGI they use the 
publicly funded system. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, we have the two new MRIs 
in the province now. And you tell me that you’ve improved it or 
there is 115 per cent more efficiencies or tests being done. So 
can you tell me what the waiting list is now for MRIs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I believe it’s anywhere between three 
and four months depending on whether it’s Saskatoon or 
Regina, whether it’s City Hospital, the General, or University 
Hospital. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, how much money did Sask 
Health pay for patients to receive treatment outside of Canada 
last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This comes out of the annual statistical 
report, ’98-99. We haven’t got the work completed for 
’99-2000. The United States, for physicians, $483,000; and for 
hospitals, $1.2 million for hospitals. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, is that number going up or 
down over the last five years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised it’s about the same. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, because of the way the 
system works maybe you’re not able to keep abreast of the 
number of people who’ve decided to have treatment or costs or 
procedures done outside of the system that they pay for 
themselves. But maybe when you’re having your meetings with 
your cohorts across the province maybe this discussion does 
come up. 
 
And I’m wondering if the fact that a lot of people are doing the 
travelling themselves and paying for it themselves, is an issue 
that’s being brought up with health ministers. Is it a discussion, 
is it an issue where you can see that across the province this is 
getting to be a problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ll tell you where it is. I think we’re 
the only province in Canada that is not sending cancer patients 
to the States for treatment, that we have enough services and 
service providers in the province of Saskatchewan that we are 
not sending people outside of our province for cancer therapy, 
whether that’s chemotherapy or radiation therapy. There are 
many provinces that have entered into contracts with cancer 
agencies in the US (United States) to provide service because 
they have shortages of certain personnel. We’re not in that 
position. 
 
As well, the member probably does know that people in the 
province of Saskatchewan have had a historical relationship 
with the Mayo Clinic. This is something that goes back into the 
’30s and ’40s and ’50s and there are times when people decide 
to have their . . . they want to get themselves checked by the 
Mayo Clinic and they make those decisions. 
 
Now if those services are available in the province of 
Saskatchewan or in Canada, in order to be approved by the 
Mayo Clinic you need prior approval. If those services are 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

available in Saskatchewan or Canada we do not give prior 
approval and people have to pay for those services themselves. 
And that’s their personal decision. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the prior approval is the 
problem. It is the issue right now because people determine that 
they want to have something done, or they feel they need to 
have it done and they have to wait till someone has told them 
that this is the right time . . . or it’s now the time that they can 
have the work done. 
 
Madam Minister, this last week past I had someone who . . . one 
of my constituents said they needed to have an MRI. They said 
it would be done within two weeks. They received word it 
wouldn’t happen for three more weeks and they made that 
determination themselves to go to Edmonton so they didn’t 
have to wait. The system had decided that they should wait and 
they knew they couldn’t wait. 
 
So I know that those records aren’t something that your 
department keeps track of but it is happening and we have to 
not turn a blind eye to it, Madam Minister. It’s happening more 
and more because people are just frustrated. And we have to 
recognize that just because it’s not on your paper doesn’t mean 
it’s not happening. 
 
Madam Minister, I also have some contacts in the 
Lethbridge-Medicine Hat area on the district health boards 
down there, and they tell me that with the increase in the 
long-term care rates in Saskatchewan with the recent budget, 
they have been getting many, many, many phone calls from 
seniors or people who will be part of a long-term care home, or 
should have been part of a long-term care home in 
Saskatchewan who see the benefit of moving to Alberta now 
because of this additional cost. 
 
Are you getting calls? And I’m sure you must be because I’ve 
had the calls myself, from this district health board saying we’re 
going to be inundated by Saskatchewan residents who are going 
to be trying to use our long-term care homes. How many calls 
are you getting in this area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Actually we’re not getting inundated by 
phone calls. What people are right now getting their incomes in 
so that by October 1 we’ll be able to have the new calculation 
for fees for long-term care. 
 
I visited a long-term care facility on Friday and answered some 
of the questions of the residents. Many of them were surprised 
to know that a significant amount of the . . . or a significant 
number of the residents will benefit by the new definition of 
involuntary separation, and many of them had questions about 
that that were very interesting to answer because there’s a lot of 
misconception out there about this concept and the fact that 
there will be 900 people that are going to have . . . their rates are 
going to be lowered. 
 
And there’s also the fact there’s only 20 per cent of long-term 
care people will have their rates increased, and that increase 
will go from a dollar to 464. So there’s not going to be a huge 
increase in all the people, all the 20 per cent. 
 
And I think that people in long-term care just need the right 

information and they need some time to get that information. 
And I think a lot of the districts are doing a very good job 
putting that information out to the residents. And the people that 
I met with on Friday were . . . appreciated the information and 
the correct information. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Associate Minister. Madam 
Minister, you said that there was 900 people were going to have 
their rates lowered. Is that correct? And Madam Minister, then 
you use the total . . . the figure of 20 per cent would have an 
increase. 
 
So let’s compare apples and apples. If it’s 900 were going to 
have rates lowered, how many are going to have their rates 
increased? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s just over 9,000 people in 
long-term care — 20 per cent of those would qualify for an 
increase in the rates by a calculation . . . the new calculation. 
 
But there is also the second part of the long-term care fee 
announcement, and that is the definition of involuntary 
separation and the new calculation that they can avail 
themselves of, and that is, if one person, the person that’s in the 
home, you use their income alone. You have the option of doing 
that. 
 
Right now, it’s the . . . you combine the two incomes of the 
spouses and divide by 50 per cent, divide by half. And the new 
way will be you take the income of the person that’s in the 
home and whatever way is most beneficial to you, whatever’s 
the lowest, that’s the one you use. So 900 people will see a 
difference in that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I don’t imagine that you are, 
you’re getting calls from people who are trying to figure out 
what they’re going to do with their future. They’d be calling 
places like Alberta and other places where they’re looking at 
options, and it’s going to take a while before it goes through the 
system. That’s just the way things are. 
 
People don’t call the minister’s office and say today I’m 
thinking about doing something different because, as you said, 
with 19 people in communications, they don’t have time to 
listen to what everybody’s thoughts are for the future. 
 
So I’m very concerned that we’re going to see some . . . losing 
some of our senior people as well. 
 
Madam Minister, I just have one other area, and I’m just going 
to clarify. I believe you said that an air ambulance cost was a 
maximum of $350. And is that just if you’re a senior or is that 
any air ambulance cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Air alone, it’s $350. That’s the 
maximum that you pay. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, then why wouldn’t I have 
my constituents from Kelvington and Wadena and Porcupine 
get an air ambulance because they’re paying 7 or 8 or $900 or 
$1,100 for a road ambulance and you can fly cheaper than that 
and you’d get there and you wouldn’t have to go on the roads. 
Madam Minister, how can we compare these two issues? 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Air ambulance is for people who are in 
critical condition. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The critical condition is determined usually 
when you get to the hospital, or at some time . . . I mean, there 
is some pretty critical conditions out in areas. We have 
accidents all over the place where people are in critical 
condition. 
 
Madam Minister, this, I would imagine, is going to make a few 
people frustrated when you figure out that an air ambulance trip 
is cheaper than a road ambulance trip. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Physicians determine whether or not 
you’re in critical condition. And air ambulances are, you know, 
regularly sent across the province. And if the person is in 
critical condition, there could be a pediatric transport team in 
that air ambulance, there could be paramedics, there could be 
physicians, there could be registered nurses, highly trained 
critical care nurses that would travel in that air ambulance. So 
air ambulance is for people who have been determined through 
medical terminology and through medical diagnosis that they’re 
in critical condition. And I have never had any complaints about 
the air ambulance system in this province, which is the oldest 
air ambulance system in North America. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would imagine that 
everyone is delighted with the air ambulance system because 
they do work very well. From what I hear they’re doing a great 
job. But if you have to be determined . . . if it has to be a 
physician that determines you’re in critical condition, if there’s 
an accident out by Saint Front, Saskatchewan, there is no 
physician there. They’re going to call an ambulance, which is a 
road ambulance, and they’re going to take him down some of 
these horrible roads and get you to Saskatoon and then they’ll 
tell them they’re in critical condition. 
 
Madam Minister, how can we . . . when you’re looking at the 
whole ambulance issue in this province I do hope you’re 
looking at the idea of ambulance costs being the same for 
everyone because it’s supposed to be accessible to everyone. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The road ambulance system has 
protocols and they often stop at the nearest hospital or health 
centre and there are determinations that are made whether or not 
a person is in critical care and the air ambulance is called. And 
those people that make that decision are physicians in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the Minister. Madam 
Minister, when your government embarked upon a new health 
care plan in the province, you closed a number of rural hospitals 
and you gave assurances to those residents of those communities 
that there would be continued health services in those 
communities. Does your government still stand behind those 
statements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We indicated at the time that health 
services available would be based on the health needs of the 
community and we stand by the original goals of health renewal in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister. Madam Minister, there is 
a fear in some communities where hospitals were closed that there 
may be a further reduction in health care services to those 
communities. One of those communities is the community of 
Cupar. 
 
The Boyd report indicated that the Regina Health District should 
have a look at the services provided in that community. Is your 
department . . . are you prepared to assure the residents of Cupar 
that there will be medical services available in that community for 
well into the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously health services are dependent 
upon citizens living in those communities and the kinds of needs 
that those citizens have in their communities. Health services also 
depend upon the availability of personnel that can provide those 
services. And so what I could say to the people of Cupar is that 
the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to a publicly 
funded, publicly administered health system that is sustainable 
into the future. And what’s interesting . . . And I had a very 
good discussion today with a group of people that were in from 
a rural community, and we talked about the pressures in the 
health system and the pressures that they hear about on coffee 
row. 
 
And let me give you an example. Every day on coffee row, and 
I bet if you go to coffee row you will hear this, there is a 
continued discussion about Saskatchewan’s tax system and how 
people would like to see their taxes further reduced. And every 
day in the legislature we hear calls from members of this 
Legislative Assembly for Saskatchewan to have a competitive 
tax system with Alberta. I think your members may have asked 
for that in the past. Every day in this legislature, we hear about 
pressures in our transportation system and we need to have 
highways to get people to and from their places of business or 
their homes to their services. And then every day in the 
legislature we hear about the need for additional funding for our 
health system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cupar’s closing? Cupar’s closing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ll just say this. The member asks if 
Cupar’s closing. It’s very easy to sit there and ask if Cupar is 
closing at the same time that you make demands for a 
competitive tax system with our Alberta neighbours. Every day 
you talk about more money for health care, every day you talk 
about more money for highways, and more money for 
education. And it’s very easy to ask for tax cuts and more 
money. 
 
The question is, how do you do that? How do you do that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You can babble from your seats. But 
every day that’s what you ask. 
 
And so all I’m saying is we’re going to provide services to the 
people of this province based upon their health needs and based 
upon the capacity of the system to deliver those health services 
in those communities, based on a sustainable tax system, and 
based upon program spending that doesn’t get us back to the 
dirty old days of the Tories that we all went through in the 
1980s. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I can assure the minister 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

that there are people living in Cupar and they do require health 
care services. And the minister will know from your own 
polling that health care rates very highly among the concerns of 
citizens of the province. And, Madam Minister, and they feel 
that that’s a very high priority in their lives, and they feel that 
services should be . . . accessibility should be given to people 
no matter where they live in the province. And that’s an issue 
that we’re dealing with here, Madam Minister. 
 
Now the citizens of these areas that had their hospitals closed 
and agreed to have a lesser level of service in their communities 
went along with these closures because there was some 
assurances given that there would be at least a minimal amount 
of health care service in the community, particularly when a 
community has a long-term care home which requires physician 
services, Madam Minister. 
 
Are you prepared to . . . I guess the fear of citizens in those 
communities such as Cupar is that if physician services are lost, 
the next step will be the closure of the long-term care home. 
 
Can you assure the citizens in communities such as Cupar and 
other communities across the province that that won’t be the 
first step in the complete loss of health care services in the 
community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just for the information of the member, 
in the province of Saskatchewan we have 41 health centres that 
are attached to special care homes. And in those health centres 
we have emergency care, clinical community-based services 
such as mental health, addictions, health promotion, 
observation, assessment, convalescence, and respite. 
 
We also have 14 stand-alone health centres that provide clinical 
care, mental health services, addiction services, and health 
promotion services. We also have 10 health and social centres 
where we have itinerant clinical services that are provided along 
with mental health and addiction services. Then we have six 
northern nursing stations that provide emergency assessment 
and triage, as well as clinical care and health promotion. And 
then we have three community health action centres which 
provide mental health services, addiction services, and other 
human services. 
 
And for the information of the member, in 1993, or prior to 
1993, there were 11 health and social centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan which provided physician services on an itinerant 
basis, as well as other health and social programs. And these 
health and social centres usually provided services on a less 
than five days per week basis. In 1993 there were 51 facilities in 
the province that were converted, so that was between 1993 and 
1996. They were converted to health centres . . . not 52, 51, 
because Loon Lake was identified as a conversion and it never 
occurred. And yet I always hear people talk about the 52 
hospitals; there was only 51 in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There have been four additional hospital conversions since that 
time by the health districts, and they made the decisions based 
on a number of factors. But what I can say is that the factors 
could have included availability of physician services and 
24-hour, long-term-care nursing coverage, and so on. And those 
hospitals were in Kinistino, Rose Valley, Cudworth, and 
Wilkie. 

So that’s the information I can tell the member opposite, that 
we have a number of health centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan and they provide a number of health services, but 
the health services do vary depending upon the health centre. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, it’d be interesting to 
see what the numbers are after the health budgets are approved 
later on this year. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, in the areas where health care 
facilities are closed, what is your department’s policy regarding 
disposal of the facilities that are no longer required? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This happened when, for instance, 
there’s been a hospital or a health centre added on to long-term 
care and the hospital is left and it becomes a vacant building. 
There have been discussions in the communities and 
communities have made recommendations on what should 
happen to the facilities. And they can become community 
facilities or they can be sold. It really is dependent upon the 
work that’s done between the community and the health district. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister. I would like to just 
deal with another area of my constituency that would be centred 
the area of Wynyard. As the minister will know, there is a new 
facility being added to the hospital, a long-term care home. 
Also the Living Sky district was rumoured to be considering 
perhaps closing that hospital two or three years down the road 
and that sort of thing. 
 
I wonder, could the minister give some assurances to the 
residents of Wynyard as to the viability of their hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can assure the member opposite that 
as long as I’m the Health minister there will be one hospital on 
the highway between Yorkton and Saskatoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How long is that going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And it could be a long time. There are 
not many people that want this job. So I can assure the member 
of that. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister would care to 
pinpoint where that hospital will be located on Highway 16? 
Will that be in Wynyard or Lanigan or . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is a very large capital project 
that’s going on in the town of Wynyard. As you know, I think 
it’s a 51-bed nursing home that’s being added on to the hospital. 
And Wynyard is a very, as you know, it’s a large community. 
It’s situated along the No. 16 Highway between Yorkton and 
Saskatoon. And it seems to me that we would always want to 
see some form of health service along that highway particularly 
for people who are going down that highway because there are 
accidents. As you also know, there are . . . it is located in an 
area that has quite a large population. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the Minister, I 
think, especially from our side of the House, we’re hearing 
concerns all over the province in rural communities that have 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

hospitals of possible hospital closures and that’s no secret to 
you. We bring them to you all the time. I’ve got a community, 
actually I’m quite fortunate in the constituency that I represent, 
Indian Head-Milestone, that there’s really a couple of hospitals 
that remain open. People in my constituency feel that you’ve 
. . . that the government’s already closed their hospital, and that 
was called the Plains hospital. That represented . . . that covered 
a large majority of the people in my constituency. 
 
The hospitals that remain open though, I’m getting lots of 
phone calls from the people in that area, and one of the real 
concerns, and I think we had approached your department 
regarding that, but what are the minimum standards that a 
hospital has to meet to remain a hospital? People in the 
community that I’m dealing with . . . is there sort of a checklist, 
I guess, is what I’m asking for. 
 
People in my constituency have a concern with their hospital. 
The people in that town may not just necessarily 100 per cent 
trust the health district, and they don’t know if their hospital is 
being let . . . be run down perhaps a little bit. I have an example 
of a X-ray machine that is out of date, and the community is 
thinking about whether they should go together and purchase a 
X-ray machine to put into their hospital so they meet whatever 
is the minimum standard. 
 
I think probably the biggest thing that the people in this 
community are feeling is that they’re trying to fight against 
something that they can’t see. They’re trying to defend against 
something they can’t see. They don’t know what has to be in or 
what will warrant closing a hospital out of the blue which they 
have had absolutely no choice of, no chance of defending. 
 
So is there some sort of a checklist, I guess, to start with, that 
hospitals have to meet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In order for a facility to be a hospital 
obviously there has to be . . . you have to be able to have The 
Hospital Standards Act covered. You need to have 24-hour 
nurse coverage. You need to have 24-hour physician coverage. 
 
What I can tell you as well is that it is very helpful if you do 
have acute care patients in your hospital because we do know 
that there are several times in the province when there are acute 
care facilities where there is not an acute care patient in that 
hospital. So it’s helpful to have acute care patients in those 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The acute care patients . . . and I realize that. 
I think people in the Wood River constituency have talked quite 
loudly today on the coalition and what they think of health care 
and roads and everything else, but that’s a whole other issue. 
 
The acute care beds, now is there a minimum, an average, they 
have to have per night? You know I’ve heard different 
situations. Well they have to have 12 acute care positions on 
average. But then when they keep dropping their acute care 
beds, they can never go hardly above that, but they can drop 
below, and then they can’t stay to average. I mean it’s how they 
play the numbers. 
 
So how does the, you know . . . I guess what I would like to get 
from you then is you say you’ve got to have acute care; I would 

like a checklist that I can go back to the communities and say, 
yes, we meet all these standards; now what are the reasons for 
closing the hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll get the little checklist to you. But 
one of the things that is important for a hospital to stay in 
service, you need to have people who are in the hospital. And 
there are many circumstances where health districts are 
providing 24-hour nursing coverage, and there may not be an 
acute care patient in that hospital. And that is obviously a 
concern. 
 
In order for a hospital to remain a hospital, you need to have 
patients who are acute care in nature in those hospital facilities. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister then, so does there 
have to be an average of how many acute care stays over a 
year? Or what is that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It helps if it’s more than zero. You 
need more than an average daily census of one in order to 
maintain 24-hour nursing coverage, and that’s part of the 
difficulty. 
 
I mean I think you’re a business person, or you’ve said you’re a 
business person. You wouldn’t have staff covering your 
business if you had no customers coming through your door on 
a 24-hour basis. And that’s some of the dilemma. 
 
Do you spend $1.2 million a year to have 24-hour nursing 
coverage, have all of the people in the building when you don’t 
have enough acute care patients in that facility. And when 
you’re covering that facility 24 hours a day when you may not 
have an acute patient for two or three or four or five days. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister. I’m quite aware 
that if there are no patients in the hospital then what is the point of 
having the hospital open. That’s not the point. 
 
The point was, is what is the census that needs to keep . . . you 
need to have in a hospital to keep it open. And it’s not a little 
checklist to communities like Indian Head that are going to fight 
to keep their hospital open. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I said I would provide you with the 
checklist. We’ll get that for you. I don’t know why you’re getting 
so upset. I will get that information for you. I was just trying to 
explain that in order to have a 24-hour acute care facility you need 
to have enough patients in that facility. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’ve understood that, and I agree totally. My 
question was . . . and when you — and you can check in Hansard 
— when you call it a little checklist, when you have people 
fighting to keep their hospital open — to them it’s not a little 
checklist. Okay? So if I get a little raised up in voice that’s the 
reason. 
 
As far as the acute care census, you never did answer the question. 
What is the census in the hospital to keep it open in a community? 
What is the number? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Deciding how and where we provide 
services is not just a matter of looking at the average daily census 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

or any other single measure. Services need to be available within a 
reasonable distance, and there needs to be emergency response 
services available as well. And this is really part of the larger 
discussion that the Fyke commission will undertake. And part of 
that discussion is a service delivery model — whether we locate 
services, how do we provide those services and so on. And that is 
one of the mandates of the Fyke commission. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, I never heard any numbers as far as 
what the census is in a hospital over a year per night at all. And 
that was the question I had asked. 
 
So I guess the whole point is people are fighting mad to keep their 
facilities and they’ve got to the point . . . And I know the people 
that I’ve talked to have got money that they would like to put into 
their hospital; they’d like to put it in to keep it up to standard or get 
past standard once they find out what the standards all exactly are. 
But they’re sure not going to do it and then turn around and have 
it, three months later, closed. 
 
And that’s exactly what people are fighting against in the province 
right now is that they’re sick and tired of the words that are said: 
well we’re not going to close hospitals. No. That’s not washing it 
because they’re going to cut them down to health centres and 
health centres are cut to absolutely nothing. 
 
And the people are looking for answers. They want to fight to 
keep what they’ve got in their constituency. And then when we get 
answers like what I’ve heard from the opposition . . . or from the 
government side. 
 
That’s exactly why people get fighting mad over it. I haven’t 
heard the number for a census. I’d like to hear a number for a 
census so that I can go back to my community and say here’s 
what you need to have in a hospital and here’s the hospital stays 
that you need to have so that they know what they’re fighting 
against, so that they got a chance to keep their hospital open. 
And then when the health district comes across and says it’s 
closing, they can go against them. But right now they don’t 
know who they’re fighting against right now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. What 
I do note with much interest is the words of the Health critic, 
where he indicated that he could not guarantee all hospitals 
would stay open in the province of Saskatchewan if the Sask 
Party became the government in this province. 
 
Secondly, I remember the words of the Leader of the 
Opposition who indicated that Saskatchewan had too many 
hospitals in the early 1990s. He said that in Hansard, in the 
House of Commons. And he too has said in this province that 
we need to take a look at health services. And we have said that 
we are not going to close any hospitals in this province while 
the review is going on. 
 
Now the member can grandstand, and he really is a 
grandstander for his constituents, and I understand that. That is 
what he sees his role as. But what I will say to the member is 
that he also comes from a political party that day in and day out 
advocates tax cuts in the province; let’s be like Alberta. In fact 
we call it Alberta envy that comes from that side of the House. 
 
So they want tax cuts, they want increased spending on health 

care, they want increased spending on highways. And I just say 
to the member, we are not interested in going back to the days 
of the 1980s when we had the Conservative Party in this 
province and they put this province into bankruptcy. And we’re 
not interested in going there. 
 
And when the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to 
truly understand the motivations of the members opposite, then 
they will decide whether they want that member to represent 
their interests on this side of the floor or whether they want an 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government to represent their 
interests on this side of the floor. 
 
And there will be an election. And I know he’s excited; they 
won the by-election in Wood River. And there certainly is a 
message for the government but this is a government that will 
learn the lessons of that by-election. And we will see those 
members in three years in a general election, and we will see 
who is truly going to represent the members of the . . . people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening, Madam 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d just like to take up where my colleague 
has left off. And as far as average daily censuses and the 
determination of what a facility will be in a given community, 
I’m going to ask you first, Madam Minister, is your government 
following the recommendations from the Murray report? When 
that report came through I believe it was called Future 
Directions for Health Care. 
 
If you are following that report there is a very clear definition of 
different kinds of hospitals in different centres, and one of the 
criteria that’s in that report is that in order to qualify as a 
specific kind of hospital, such as a base hospital, your average 
daily census must be at a certain level. In order for you to be 
qualifying as a community A or a community B hospital, your 
average daily census would have to be at a lower level than that. 
And so that would mean that different services are provided in 
different centres. 
 
So according to that report, if you are following the 
recommendations of that report, Madam Minister, I would ask 
you to notify the Assembly here today what a base hospital is 
and what the average daily census of a base hospital is? 
 
I’d ask you also to notify us here today of what a community A 
hospital is and a community B? And what the average daily 
census is in order to have that kind of a facility operate in your 
community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have not adopted that particular 
recommendation of the Murray commission. What I can tell the 
member is we have a population-needs-based funding and we 
do not differentiate between populations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
I’m really quite surprised to hear that you are . . . say that you 
are not following the recommendations of the Murray 
commission in the Future Directions for Health Care because it 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

seemed to me that quite a few professionals and so on were 
looking to that report as a direction for your government. 
 
(2115) 
 
And I’d like to know what it is that you are following then, and 
maybe the very fact that you’re not following those 
recommendations — or any other recommendations — explains 
the reason why health is in such a chaos in this province right 
now. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to ask you a few questions about 
SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network). I’d like to 
know how much was spent to set up the corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think the member did make some 
comments. I do want to say this, that I was a member of the 
legislature when the Murray commission was undertaken, and 
in fact Dr. Murray is a constituent of mine. And I’ve spoken to 
him about the Future Directions for Health Care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I can tell the member is that there are several 
recommendations from the Murray commission that have been 
followed by the government, but I did say I was commenting 
specifically on his definitions of hospitals and how they were to 
be funded. 
 
I said that we did not follow those specific recommendations 
and our funding formula for health districts in the province of 
Saskatchewan is based upon the needs of the population. It’s a 
population-needs-based funding formula which is adjusted for 
such things as the age and gender of the population, the health 
status of the population, the demographics of the population, 
and if there are First Nations in the population that have higher 
health needs. 
 
So there will be some regions of the province, based on the 
population that they have within their health region, which 
would mean that that health district will get more funding than 
in other regions of the province. 
 
An example might be in the far west part of Saskatchewan. It’s 
a very young population. They don’t have as many senior 
citizens as other areas of the province, and they don’t have as 
many aboriginal people as other areas of the province. They 
would have a smaller per capita funding than other parts of 
Saskatchewan where they have an older population that use a 
number of health services or an Aboriginal population that use a 
number of health services. 
 
So what I’m trying to say to the member is that we have gone to 
a population-based formula which also considers a person’s 
health status and health needs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. I think that health districts and their boards have put to 
you a number of times that they wish in fact that your 
government would consider the unique needs of each district. 
They have been asking for that and they tell me that they 
haven’t had much response from your government as far as 
setting up health districts according to the needs in that health 
district. 

Madam Minister, I recognize that you’re leaving the room, so 
that I will I guess issue my questions to the associate minister. 
 
How much, Madam Minister, was spent to set up the SHIN 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We had a fairly detailed discussion on 
SHIN with the member from Melfort-Tisdale and shared a great 
amount of detail with him, that he has. 
 
The original cost of SHIN, what was put towards the SHIN 
network, the establishment of that was 40 million. To date 
they’ve only spent I believe 32 million. And that includes all 
the projects, all the infrastructure, all the base buildup of the 
system that we have now, including all the connections that 
have been made for different programs. But we do have that 
detailed information and I can give it to you also. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
why was SHIN set up as a Crown corporation rather than an 
arm of Saskatchewan Health? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think everyone knows that I was on the 
original board of SHIN, and it was set up basically because the 
health network was going to service the whole health system 
which included health districts. Many of the provider groups 
and the board itself was representative of many of those 
provider groups, and we wanted to have a board so that we 
would have input into the governance of the health information 
network as it got going and as it was running. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
are there any — SAIC (Science Applications International 
Corporation) is involved as far as I understand — are there any 
similar projects in Canada that SAIC has successfully 
implemented within Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think your question was does SAIC have 
any other interests in Canada. I don’t know their other business 
interests in Canada. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Madam Minister, Harvey McLane has 
been appointed as advisor to the Minister of Health. SAIC is an 
American-based company and they have been involved in 
setting up systems for two-tiered health in the United States. 
Harvey McLane supports two-tiered health also. 
 
So, Madam Minister, is this not a concern of yours that this all 
adds up to the promotion of a two-tiered health system? It is a 
concern of most residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much. SAIC has done 
work in the United States with the Department of Defense, 
which has nothing to do with health. They also have done some 
work with HMOs (Health Maintenance Organization). 
 
But what we’re talking about is an information system which 
cuts across the whole health system. And we need that 
technology to move information, to integrate the system, to 
make the system more efficient. And the information systems in 
health are quite a ways behind other sectors in the world. Health 
has come late to the information technology. We’re very 
pleased to have information technology come into Health now, 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

and certainly see it as something that is nothing to do with 
privatization. The SAIC provider, or partner, has done many 
other information systems including the Department of Defense 
in the United States. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Madam Minister, speaking of the relevance of SAIC 
with information technology, I’d like to ask you about the 
relevance of Con Hnatiuk. He has been set up as the Canadian 
director of SAIC. Does he have any background in this field of 
information technology? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s not our position to determine who 
SAIC hires. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
what is Mr. Hnatiuk’s role with SHIN? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our contract for SHIN, our partner is 
SAIC. Who they hire to do what is not our concern. We deal 
with the company. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, but I would 
think that it would be, I guess, incumbent upon you to look into 
the roles of people that you have that are representing setting up 
any kind an information technology or anything else that is 
connected to your department. I would want to make sure, I 
think, that the most competent people are in place so that 
money is not wasted. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to ask you how much of the 40 
million that is going to SAIC eventually is staying in 
Saskatchewan or Canada. How much of the $40 million is 
awarded to Saskatchewan or Canadian people through 
contracts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I will copy the information we gave to the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale and give the same to you, if that’s 
what you’d like. Because we have quite a bit of detail on the 
individual costs of the different statements of work and what 
actually has been accomplished by SHIN and we have that 
broken down into different categories with different costs 
attached. We gave that to the member already but we’ll give 
you a copy as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, will you 
be including in that statement some information regarding 
whether they’re a Canadian- or Saskatchewan-based company 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. I recognize the 
Deputy Premier on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that in 
the by-election tonight in Wood River the Sask Party had a very 
big victory. So if the people on the other side want to gloat a 
little bit I think we all have to allow a little bit of flexibility here 
tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — As the Deputy Premier knows that’s not a point 
of order and it’s not well taken, however the universe will 

unfold as it is supposed to. 
 
I do ask committee members to allow this Health estimates to 
continue and there will be some conversations go on but I ask 
that you keep the noise down so that these estimates can 
continue. 
 
To the hon. member for Humboldt, I cut you off middle of what 
you were asking so I’d ask you to repeat the question so the 
minister can hear it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, in the statements that you will provide to the 
member from Melfort and myself, I would ask you to also 
provide information regarding how many . . . not only how 
many contracts have been awarded to Canadian- and 
Saskatchewan-based companies, but who those companies were 
and what portion of the $40 million in fact will they be 
receiving as part of their contract? And if you could identify 
those companies or individuals I would appreciate it very much. 
Thank you. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to refer this next question to the 
Minister of Health because it’s somewhat of a supplementary 
question to the member rather from Weyburn-Big Muddy, a 
question that she had posed to you earlier this evening. 
 
And it’s in regards to whether prescription drugs are being 
supplied in hospital and when they are not being supplied. 
Madam Minister, I have heard also that for instance seniors that 
are in hospital are allowed and are having prescription drugs 
administered to them free of charge, which seems to make 
sense. And that is the way it has been forever and a day. 
 
However I have also had seniors speak to me of the fact that 
they are being released from hospital much earlier than they 
used to and, if they go back into a nursing home where they 
came from in the first place, they are having problems having 
those same prescription drugs paid for. 
 
Now a nursing home is a health facility as well as a home . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s not a health facility? Okay, I 
mean is there the same consideration given as far as granting 
prescription drugs free of charge to patients that are returned to 
a nursing home, especially when they consider it prematurely 
from a hospital, and are they then able to access prescription 
drugs free of charge once they are back in the nursing home? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, to the member, we have not 
had drugs available in hospitals free of charge forever and a 
day. That became available in this province in 1962 when the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government 
brought in health insurance to the province. So that’s point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, the member will know that our public 
insurance system covers hospitals, doctors, and nurses . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . If the member has something to say, 
maybe she should get on her feet and say it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister . . . 
 
(2130) 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

The Chair: — Order. Members . . . Order, order. Now I’m 
simply going to ask that the Health estimates be allowed to 
continue. The Minister of Health had the floor and give the 
Minister of Health the opportunity to complete her answer. And 
I ask for the co-operation of all members in allowing these 
estimates to continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the 
member is that in the province of Saskatchewan, as in the 
country of Canada, under the Canada Health Act, certain things 
are covered by our public insurance system. Hospitals, nurses, 
and physician services are covered by what’s called universal 
medicare, since the introduction of medicare in this province in 
1962 and into Canada in 1968. 
 
When the people talk about ’62, it is an important year because 
that’s when the citizens of this province decided that never 
again were people going to be bankrupted because they did not 
have money to pay for their doctor bills. Now I know that that’s 
not important history for them, but it is important on this side of 
the House because that is the history that people out of this 
political party on this side of the House, that’s our history. That 
is our collective history and that is the history of people who do 
believe in universal medicare, and I know that these people over 
there don’t. 
 
What I will say to the member is that nursing homes are not part 
of the Canada Health Act. They are partially subsidized by the 
citizens of this province. And in fact we pay about 70 per cent 
of the cost of nursing home care in the province, and the other 
portion of the cost is paid by individual resident fees based on 
income, Mr. Chair. And when you are a resident in a nursing 
home, you may have to pay for some of your prescription drugs 
depending upon your income because we have an income-based 
drug plan in this province that is based upon your ability to pay. 
 
So what I will say to the member is if you are in a hospital — 
and this happens all across Canada — your prescriptions that 
are prescribed by physicians are paid for. And when you return 
to your place of residence, you then either through a 
co-payment or through the insurance plan that is available to 
you, you pay for your prescription drugs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, so from what you 
said I take it then that nursing homes are not considered a health 
facility. They have nurses in them, they have nurses’ aides in 
them, they have doctors coming and going from them, but 
they’re not considered a health facility. They’re not a health 
facility. Not a hospital. 
 
Part of the problem here, Madam Minister, is . . . opposition 
members as well as people throughout the province trying to 
deal with this decrepit health system to be able to understand 
what the definition is of different facilities. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a letter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well it certainly is. The way people in this province are 
describing it to us it is a state of disrepair and is in really, really 
horrible shape. Now, Madam Minister, if in fact what your 
statement . . . the statement you’ve made is true, and I take it 
that what you’re doing is . . . you’re saying that nursing homes 
are basically homes. They’re a facility where people can pay 
rent . . . can pay a fee to be there, and so they’re more of a home 

for them to stay in than they are a health facility. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just said to the member that 70 per 
cent of the cost of nursing home care in the province of 
Saskatchewan is paid for through our tax system, through our 
tax system. Nursing homes are not hospitals. They are not 
health centres. They are nursing homes. 
 
Under the Canada Health Act . . . there are five principles of the 
Canada Health Act and our universal medicare system covers 
the cost of hospital care, covers the cost of physician care, and 
covers the cost of nursing care — in hospitals. 
 
And since the introduction of universal health care in this 
country, there have been other services that have been added to 
our health system through a co-pay. And one of those services 
is long-term care facilities. But long-term care facilities vary all 
across the country. We do not have a universal standard all 
across the country in terms of what is paid for through the 
public system and what is paid for by individuals. And in fact in 
the Maritime provinces, people can pay up to $3,000, $3,500 a 
month for those services. 
 
What the member doesn’t understand is the nature of our health 
system in Canada. And what I’m saying to you is that 
historically nursing homes are not covered by the Canada 
Health Act, but provinces have added huge subsidies to those 
long-term care facilities. And in the case of Saskatchewan, we 
subsidize long-term care facilities at 70 per cent of the cost of 
those facilities, and the individual in the nursing home, based 
on their income, provides the other 30 per cent. And what that 
means, what that means is it is their home, but they also have 
some personal care and nursing care services available to them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I have a letter here from a 
constituent who is really quite upset that their father, staying in 
a nursing home, has had to face the nursing home increase for 
the rate of staying there by 50 per cent. And I’d like to read you 
the letter because you should know that there are many, many 
people throughout the province who are very upset about this. 
And I would like you to listen to this letter; it’s not that long, 
and then I’d like you to respond to it. 
 

It is with a mix of outrage and fear that we respond to your 
decision to increase the fees for our father’s stay in a 
nursing home by 50 %. The question one would ask is how 
is it reasonable or fair to raise the housing rate of a frail 
and ailing senior by this exorbitant amount? 
 
This decision will cause significant hardship for our 81 
year old mother who is on the family farm and wishing to 
remain independent there. She has numerous expenses that 
are incurred in the upkeep of her property. 

 
Madam Minister, she goes on to say: 
 

This is an unacceptable affront of the sick, the weak and 
the infirm who have not the strength or capacity to make 
their voice heard strongly above others. What other group 
in society would tolerate a 50% increase in rent in one 
year? We would suggest to you that it is our opinion that it 
is grossly unfair to be treating seniors, our pioneers, in this 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

fashion. 
 
It is our request that this intolerable decision be rescinded 
immediately. 
 

Now, Madam Minister, this constituent points out that the 
increase in the rate for staying at that nursing home is like a 
rent. And from what you have said just previous to my 
comments, it sounds as though yes it is a sort of a rental rate 
that they’re paying and it seems to me also, and I know in fact, 
that it is your government that has increased these rental rates. 
 
So how would you respond to this person that has written this 
letter? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — First of all I’d like to say that the resident 
fees right now are based on ’98-99 income. The resident fees 
that will be calculated as of October 1 will be based on 
’99-2000 income which nobody has got those calculations yet 
in individual districts. So residents who are assuming that their 
fees will increase X number of dollars don’t have that official 
announcement as of now. Those are still being calculated. 
 
And when we’re talking about long-term care, I was particularly 
talking just a while ago about the concept of involuntary 
separation where a couple who has one person in the nursing 
home and one person not, has now a different formula that they 
can use to calculate their resident fees, and whichever way 
works more to their advantage is what they can do. 
 
And as I said also, 20 per cent of residents in long-term care 
will only be affected by this in varying degrees of $1 to $464. 
So if you have a specific letter, a specific incident that you want 
us to deal with, you can certainly pass it on to my office. 
 
But in general terms, the fees will not be calculated until 
October 1 because we’ll be using ’99-2000 incomes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, in respect of your 
comments just a moment ago about involuntary separation, I 
have had constituents come to me — seniors — who have 
indicated to me that your department has suggested this to them. 
And their comments to me have been how very sad that we 
have to go through involuntary separation. 
 
That is exactly what they were told by people referring this 
advice and idea to them. That I understand what you’re saying 
here today is involuntary separation may mean that they can 
separate their incomes and so on, and so that way it will be 
more financially beneficial to them. But I would suggest then 
that the people from your department that give them this advice 
clarify with them that they don’t have to go through a 
separation. To many older people, to many seniors, those 
people are receiving that information as though they have to 
actually have a separation, and it really does incense them. 
 
Madam Minister, I have another constituent who is wondering 
about why there is no day program for rehabilitation services 
that they can access from Saskatoon City Hospital or anywhere 
else in Saskatoon. I’d talked with you some time ago, Madam 
Minister, about a gentleman named Rudolph Bettker from 
Aberdeen. Now Mr. Bettker had a stroke and he was, after the 
stroke he spent four weeks at Royal University Hospital and 

from there they moved him to Saskatoon City Hospital where 
he spent an additional two weeks. And then it was 
recommended to the family that they put him into a long-term 
care facility, but the family took him home. 
 
Now the Bettkers need or would like to see rehabilitation for 
Rudolph which he does need after a stroke, naturally. Saskatoon 
City Hospital will not accept Mr. Bettker because two people 
are required to work with him. Mr. Bettker was reluctantly 
referred by his doctor to Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon for 
rehab. He has to spend from Monday to Friday at the Parkridge 
Centre to get that rehab at his own expense. If he were still in 
City Hospital or could get the rehab through City Hospital, it 
would seem to me that he could do that as a day patient, and his 
family could take him home for the evenings. Aberdeen is not 
that far from Saskatoon. 
 
So first of all he would be, I think, recovering a lot quicker if he 
could be with his family more. The only place that they can 
refer him to is to the Parkridge Centre for rehab services. And 
further to that, Madam Minister, he wants to be able to at this 
point get further and more rehab because he has progressed a 
little bit over the past year and he needs more rehabilitation. 
However, at Parkridge Centre they seem to be granting a more 
extensive rehab to people over the age of 65, so they tell him. 
They get more rehabilitation than patients do that are under 65 
years of age. 
 
So Madam Minister, I would ask you to just reply as, why does 
Mr. Bettker have to pay for his stay at Parkridge when in fact 
your Department of Health does not have provisions for rehab 
for him at the Saskatoon City Hospital? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before we get to the question about the 
day rehab, I want to go back to involuntary separation and 
clarify that that is not a legal term and it has no legal 
implications. It is a term used for calculation only of resident 
fees. 
 
And to the day rehab question, we will get the information to 
you in a letter. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have one more 
question, and this question I would like to frame as a question 
that pertains to your statements many times that there is no 
intent on the part of your government nor are there any 
undertakings by your government or in this province to have 
privatized health care. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, in the Saskatoon City Hospital, there’s 
a rehab clinic called kinetics. Could you tell me if kinetics is 
non-profit clinic, non-profit clinic or is it a for-profit clinic? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’ll check it and make sure, but we 
believe it’s SGI’s floor. But we’ll check and make sure. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, I don’t know whether it’s 
SGI’s or not. I don’t believe it is. All right. 
 
I also understand that on the Alberta side of Lloydminster — 
Lloydminster, the Alberta side — this same sort of clinic is 
being set up by the Saskatoon Health District and the Saskatoon 
Health District is running that as a for-profit clinic, and that 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

for-profit clinic is funnelling its money back into the Saskatoon 
Health District to try to get finances here to run. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, would you comment on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll get that information for her. 
 
What I will say to the member is that . . . And I think that most 
people in the province of Saskatchewan do not find our health 
system to be a joke or a farce. 
 
Now I know that the members over there promote that 
regularly. And in fact — and I just want to say this — in fact 
there’s been numerous documents written about people who are 
opposed to the publicly funded health system in this country. 
What they’re trying to do is systematically discredit it. 
 
And what I would want to know from the member opposite, do 
you believe in a publicly funded and a publicly administered 
health system? Do you believe in the five principles of the 
Canada Health Act? Or do you believe in a two-tiered system 
. . . private system? Because I know that your candidate, Mr. 
Huyghebaert, who was elected tonight in Wood River, he 
believes in private health care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And the member from Indian Head said . . . And they applaud, 
they applaud. So I guess they are in favour of private health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan. Well I will want to run in 
the next election on a platform that puts this party on the side of 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care and that side 
on the part of private health care. 
 
I do know that many of those members are supporting 
Stockwell Day, the new leader, the potential new leader of the 
Canadian Alliance, and I can hardly wait till the next federal 
election to see what happens. Are Canadians going to support 
political parties that believe in a publicly funded health system 
or are they going to support a political party that believes in a 
US style of health care in this country? 
 
(2145) 
 
So it’s going to be an interesting federal campaign. We’ll see 
what happens. And it’s going to be a very interesting provincial 
campaign, because every time the member from Weyburn 
stands up, every time she stands up and she tells us how she 
believes in the private health system, I report that to my 
constituents. Because I want them to know exactly where you 
people stand on Saskatchewan’s health system and I will say to 
the members opposite, I will say to the members opposite that 
they are systematically running around the province trying to 
discredit our system. And that’s what happened prior to 1962. 
 
And I’m looking forward to the next election campaign when 
we will decide . . . Saskatchewan people will have a clear 
decision to make: do they want the privatizers which we had in 
the 1980s — and we know where that got us, $15 billion in debt 
— or do they want a political party that believes in a publicly 
funded and publicly administered health system? And I will 
make this bet, that the people of this province will stand for 
public health care any day of the week. And we’ll have that 
opportunity in three years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, it is your very government that 

has diminished services in this province to such a low point that 
there is absolutely almost no other option. Don’t talk to us 
about accessibility; don’t talk to us about your government 
providing accessibility. Because you know very well, Madam 
Minister, that many patients in this province, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, are having a great deal of difficulty accessing all 
kinds of health services, accessing doctors. We know that 
there’s problems getting just decent health care because we 
don’t have the personnel and staff in place to provide those 
services. 
 
So you can spout your rhetoric all you want, Madam Minister, 
about your government purporting for publicly funded health 
care, but if you’re not providing the services . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You are not and you know that you are not. 
That is very, very clear. 
 
And let me give you one example here, Madam Minister. I have 
a constituent of mine who came to me a couple of days ago. 
Madam Minister, her son has a heart problem, a congenital 
heart problem. He is 12-years-old. He has been seeing a 
pediatric cardiologist annually for the last years. He sees Dr. 
Tyrell who is well on in age now. The last check-up Dr. Tyrell 
said this is not good; his condition is worsening because his 
body is growing faster than the valve in his heart. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, that was the extent of the consultation. 
These parents left the specialist’s office in shock, and they had 
trouble getting a hold of him again because he is so busy; he is 
so backed up. He has a waiting list of three to four months for 
young people needing to see him. Patients, young children that 
are in very, very dire consequences, they have conditions, heart 
conditions, and they need to see a doctor. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, we have one pediatric cardiologist in 
this province. In Alberta, if you want to talk about that system, 
they have in Edmonton alone, they’ve got six pediatric 
cardiologists. In Calgary there are another three, and there are 
18 in total in Calgary. At least those people have the services. 
 
So what is this constituent of mine having to do? She’s having 
to take her 12-year-old son to a pediatric cardiologist in Alberta. 
Is that accessibility in Saskatchewan, or is it . . . what is it? It’s 
not accessibility; it’s a shame. That’s what it is. This person has 
to go out of province just to alleviate their fears, to get another 
reference from doctors there about how serious their son’s 
condition is. 
 
You have chased . . . your government has chased many, many 
specialists out of this province because of your tactics, because 
of your health care system. So, Madam Minister, is this 
accessibility? People, my constituents and others are . . . the 
members of the opposition have had many constituents coming 
to them, telling them the same thing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the member opposite, what I do 
want to tell the member opposite is that we have more 
specialists today in the province of Saskatchewan than we’ve 
had in years. We have more physicians in the province of 
Saskatchewan than we’ve had in years. I found a very 
interesting editorial in the Herbert, Saskatchewan journal, dated 
May 24, 2000, and I’m going to read it all into the record. 
 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Last month a study conducted by the Canadian Institute for 
Health Information rates Saskatchewan first or second 
among Canadian provinces in most surgical procedures. 
How can that be? As every person in Saskatchewan knows, 
our health system is falling apart, the worst in Canada. 
How can we explain this apparent contradiction of 
information? We know it can’t be true. Our politicians 
have told us our health system is in shambles. And now the 
Tories tell us now that the NDP are in power that the 
system is in shambles. We have told ourselves that the 
health care system is poor. For the last 20 years we’ve 
proven to ourselves that our health care system is the worst 
in Canada. 
 
We haven’t stopped at the health care system. Our 
perception is that everything about our province is terrible. 
We have the worst of everything. Every other province is 
better, richer, smarter than we are. Just ask your neighbour 
or your friends in Alberta. Saskatchewan has an inferiority 
complex. We need a good psychologist. It is an attitude 
that’s so persuasive that we are literally chasing our youth 
out of the province with nightmarish stories about how bad 
it is in Saskatchewan. Our kids graduate from high school 
or university and the first thing that they are told is, get out 
of Saskatchewan as soon as you can. It’s become a vicious 
cycle. We’ve lost a generation of our smartest and our 
most energetic people to Alberta. Imagine what Regina and 
Saskatoon would look like if those people had stayed in 
Saskatchewan. Imagine the tax base. Calgary is 
Saskatchewan’s biggest city. There are more people from 
Saskatchewan living in Calgary than there are in 
Saskatoon. 
 
On every level Saskatchewan compares itself to Alberta. 
Politically, socially, and economically we compete with 
Alberta. None of the other provinces in this country do. All 
of the other provinces are just happy to be doing better 
than Newfoundland. And Newfoundland accepts its lot in 
life. But Saskatchewan looks to Alberta. And if we can’t be 
as successful as Alberta then we might as well be doing 
worse than Newfoundland. 
 
What makes matters worse is that we compare our 
perception of Alberta with our perception of ourselves. 
Then we compare apples and oranges. Finally, we use 
rumours and half-baked logic to convince ourselves that 
Alberta is the land of milk and honey and Saskatchewan is 
a dust bowl in the middle of the depression. 
 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live in almost every 
economic and social category. We’re in the middle of the 
pack when compared to other provinces. Our health system 
is better than we think; our taxes aren’t as high as we think; 
and we’re not Newfoundland. That describes those people 
every day of the week, every hour of the week, every 
second of the week. They have Alberta envy, and you 
know what? Yesterday when I was out and about people 
were telling me they are sick and tired of the opposition 
doing nothing but talking about Alberta. 

 
These are Saskatchewan people. They’re proud to be 
Saskatchewan people, they’re proud of what this province has 
accomplished, and they don’t want to listen to the people 

opposite promote doom and gloom, Alberta, Alberta, Alberta. 
They want people to start talking about all the good things we 
have in Saskatchewan. And there’s many things, many things, 
in this province to be thankful about but these people don’t 
realize it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
don’t think the people of this province feel they should be 
listening to either that side or this side. The fact is the 
Saskatchewan Party has been listening to the people and that’s 
why Wood River results are as they are tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — It is not for the people of Saskatchewan to listen to 
us, tell them what to do. It is for us, as their elected 
representatives, to listen to them. You have not been listening to 
them and that’s why the results are as they are tonight in Wood 
River, and I think you would recognize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, Madam Minister, I just want to 
ask you a couple of questions pertaining to the proposed 
hospital that is to be coming up in Humboldt. Now as you well 
know the people of that area, the whole district, is anticipating a 
new hospital. However the health district has cut $800,000 from 
their budget expenses in order to comply with your balanced 
budget requirement. 
 
Now the balanced budget requirement seems to me to be a good 
requirement. However when you just ask that requirement in 
midstream, it must be very difficult for people to know what to 
cut, especially in view of the fact that they’re anticipating 
having the same services in place in that hospital in Humboldt 
that they have had before. 
 
We question what’s going to be cut here? Is it going to be some 
of the services, some of the wards, some of the staff? What is 
going to be cut? And no one can know, Madam Minister, 
because you have not indicated whether or not you’re approving 
of their budget. 
 
Madam Minister, will you give your assurance to the health 
district who have spoken to you, as well as the people of that 
district on the health board. In speaking with you, rather, they 
have the indication and they certainly have the faith and belief 
that your government is going to supply them with the needed 
funds, not only for the hospital but also to maintain the level of 
services that they enjoy today. 
 
Madam Minister, can you give them that assurance tonight? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell them is that the 
redevelopment of the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital project has been 
recommended for planning, that there is a . . . the proposed 
project includes a joint-use facility between the St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital and the Central Plains Health District, and the whole 
notion behind the integrated project is to improve coordination 
of health services in the Humboldt and surrounding area. 
 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

What I can tell you is that the local facility planning committee 
and my department are continuing to work on the planning for 
the project, and the project is a hospital. The district has 
contracted the health planning services with The Ellard Croft 
Design Group to ensure that the services planned for the new 
facility meets the current and future health needs of the people 
in the Central Plains Health District. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I guess I 
want to know if the same level of services is going to be 
provided that exists right now. And, Madam Minister, if that is 
in fact going to be provided, does that mean that there may be 
funding cuts or a diminishment of services in other areas of the 
health district? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that the 
facility planning group is working in co-operation with the 
department and that no decisions have been made. But it is a 
hospital. 
 
I know that you have indicated to people that you had a leaked 
document and that the hospital wasn’t going to be completed 
and that’s not true. I mean there is going to be a new facility in 
the Humboldt area and that we’re planning with the community. 
And health services will be available in a hospital in the 
Humboldt area, and the planning process hasn’t been 
completed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. To 
the minister. Madam Minister, I gave no one the indication that 
I had a leaked document. I had a conversation with the RM 
(rural municipality) of Humboldt regarding my concerns and 
concerns of my constituents — concerns they brought to me 
about the possible downgrading of the services that they were 
now enjoying. 
 
They had every reason I guess to question, and naturally they 
would question. The transition unit was closed at the hospital. If 
in fact a hospital is a hospital if it has so many daily census, so 
much of a daily census. And if it’s not a hospital, if it doesn’t 
have that, if transition unit beds have closed and other beds 
have closed, naturally people would be wondering what is 
going to happen as far as services that they’re hoping are going 
to be provided. They’re wondering about that. These were 
questions brought to me, concerns brought to me, and there was 
a discussion surrounding, you know, people’s concerns that I 
have with the RM of Humboldt. 
 
I think in fact that it was someone other than even the RM of 
Humboldt who brought up the remark that I had a leaked 
document and that there was confirmation of a downgrading. I 
never ever said that. There was nothing confirmed by myself. It 
was general conversation. 
 
(2200) 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would suggest you talk to your source of 
information from the Humboldt area and find out where he or 
she got those comments from because they certainly did not 
come from me. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I thank you for giving me your answers 
tonight, and I thank your officials for their assistance. I’ve had a 

great number of questions, I guess, to you over the last year or 
so and have issued a number of letters to your department for 
assistance. And where you provided assistance I thank you, and 
for where you couldn’t I have just relayed that to my 
constituents that you would not or could not respond. So I thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the member’s information, the 
transition unit was a long-term care facility within the hospital. 
It was an acute care bed. Just for your information. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve got a few questions before we 
report progress tonight. But in regards to health care and . . . a 
couple of things. Madam Minister, I attended a funeral this 
afternoon of a gentleman who a little over a year ago was in an 
emergency room in this city and actually spent two days in the 
hallway. And I had a call from the family and we did call the 
department at that time in regards to that. 
 
But I also ran into a gentleman today as I was coming in in the 
hospital who did indicate that he was quite pleased with the 
service he received in the emergency care. However, he did 
mention as well he couldn’t believe the number of people in the 
emergency ward, emergency room I should say, I guess. 
 
And his question was, why are all those people there? And I 
think one of the problems that might be arising and certainly 
one of the hospitals is city core. That’s one of the problems we 
do have over the years is the number of people who continue to 
refuse to see the clinics and I’m not sure what we do in 
addressing this concern. Certainly I’ve had people suggest 
maybe that’s an area where you start looking at a fee, if people 
aren’t there for strictly emergency. 
 
So I’d like you to respond to that question, if it’s been 
something you’re addressing or how we are going to address 
that problem. As well, Madam Minister, there’s another 
question I’d like to ask and get a quick response, and that’s 
regarding hospital stay. 
 
A lady had called me and she was put on a long waiting list, 
ended up on a very long waiting list as the result of a problem 
that arose from a surgery that didn’t go right and suggested she 
see another doctor. I guess she was moved in fairly quickly, was 
quite pleased except for one problem. She was dismissed in two 
days. Two days later she ends up back in hospital for 10 days 
for post-op care. This is a concern that’s being raised on a 
number of occasions of infections that are showing up. 
 
And it would seem to me, Madam Minister, I’m wondering 
what kind of numbers are you getting and if we shouldn’t start 
re-evaluating the amount of post-op care, if we shouldn’t be 
giving that extra day or two, or even sending a patient to a local 
facility for two or three days post-op recovery and save 
ourselves a cost on the other end when they have to end up back 
for further hospital stay as a result of major infections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do monitor readmissions, and there 
has been virtually no change in readmissions since the numbers 
of days that people are staying in hospital have declined as a 
result of new technologies and so forth. 
 
What I will say to the member is that I’m interested that you're 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

. . . the person you were speaking to was able to get in faster. 
And I would say to anybody who’s listening, that if they are on 
a . . . they have been waiting for some time for their surgery, 
they need to check again with their physician because their 
health status may have changed. 
 
And the other thing is that various specialists will have various 
lengths of time for waiting. And we’re hoping to have a system 
similar to British Columbia in place in the future where people 
will know that their particular specialist, where they stand in 
terms of the wait, and where they would stand if they went to 
another specialist. Because oftentimes people might be with one 
particular specialist and that specialist may have a number of 
patients, and there are other specialists in the province that 
could provide that service and their waiting times might be 
lower or smaller. 
 
So people really need to understand when they deal with their 
specialist, the length of time, and what the length of time might 
be if they were to be referred to a different specialist. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. Again 
while I could go on at length on a couple of questions here, I’d 
like to ask about three questions in one. It’s specifically 
regarding the Moosomin facility. 
 
Now we have had funding for . . . approved for a planning 
stage. And I was just chatting with a gentleman tonight 
wondering exactly where things are now that the planning 
stage, as I understand, is over, whether construction is going to 
be announced shortly. 
 
A second thing, Madam Minister, is a request for a meeting 
with the town. The town have requested a meeting. I understand 
a letter was sent in October to which your response was write 
earlier in the spring because last fall wasn’t appropriate or you 
didn’t have time. And to date I don’t — just from the call I had 
made tonight — there doesn’t appear to have been any response 
to the call to meet with the community group. And so I’d like to 
know exactly where things stand with regards to the facility, 
and whether or not you are prepared or willing to meet with 
representatives from the town of Moosomin regarding health 
care in their area. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you know I have met with the town 
people before. So I have had a meeting with them. And there’s 
no question that I said I would try and meet with them again 
and I just . . . there are many other pressures in this job, but I 
will meet with them. 
 
This project is moving along. It is now at the functional 
planning stage where they’re actually planning for what 
functions will be located in the special care . . . or in the facility. 
And my understanding is that the department is quite pleased 
with how the project has moved along and we’re getting very 
close to finalizing the details. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Just one quick question. Would you mind just 
responding to the town in regards to meeting with them or for 
the media please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes I will. I think . . . 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Madam Minister, my question just concerns the 
Central Butte Hospital and long care facility there. Is there 
plans this year to join the two? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member will know, the Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District, that is something that they 
have been proposing, that there would be an integrated facility 
of a health centre with long-term care. And we have not given 
approval to the health plans throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Madam Minister, it hasn’t been approved 
yet? Okay. Have you been approached at the Manor — I believe 
that’s what the long care facility is — that there has been water 
quality problems there. Have you taken that into consideration, 
when you’re going to improve the plan? I know there’s some 
people there that would like to see the Manor attached to the 
hospital rather than the hospital attached to the Manor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I have met with a delegation of people 
from Central Butte, as I have met with delegations from all 
across the province when they’re talking about health facilities. 
And I can tell you that I am aware of the town’s concern and the 
area’s concern about the water problem at the Manor. And they 
believe it would be difficult to have the health centre attached to 
the Manor because of the drainage problem in that area. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — And, Madam Minister, this last one. Just on 
that, there’s also a mould problem, an air quality problem too 
that I think that was brought up to your attention there. They 
think that it’s going to cost close to $200,000 to fix it, and that’s 
why there’s more pressure or more people wanted the Manor 
moved to the hospital. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There has been an occupational health 
and safety issue. The funding has been provided, and I 
understand that it has been corrected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d like to invite the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sure, thank you. First of all immediately 
to my left is the deputy minister of Highways and 
Transportation, Ron Styles. To my right is the assistant deputy 
minister of operations, Barry Martin. Seated directly behind me 
is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy minister of corporate 
services. And seated to my left in behind the deputy minister is 
Fred Antunes, the director of operations support and planning. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the last 
time I stood up we talked about reverting thin membrane or 
TMS (thin membrane surface) surface to gravel, and at that time 
we were talking about 47. 
 
I got a call on Friday morning about equipment moving east on 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

Highway 48. Can you give me an idea if there is going to be . . . 
Highway 48’s going to be reverted to gravel, and from where 
and how far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, on Highway 48, the 
information we provided to the media and to yourselves was a 
short-section — 3.7 kilometres. But it wasn’t our intention to 
use the milling equipment, so we’re not aware of that 
equipment being used for any sections of No. 48. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
equipment, so what equipment would’ve been rolling, moving 
down east on Highway 48 Friday morning? Would there have 
been . . . is there some work going to be done on No. 8? 
Actually the call I received they would have already been 
passed No. 8. They were getting close to the Manitoba border. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are speculating that it might have 
been heading to Highway 308. There is a short 3 kilometre 
stretch to be done there between the Manitoba border and 
Junction No. 8. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is Highway 
48 will continue to have its thin membrane and everything will 
be done to try and maintain or upgrade that thin membrane 
surface that it won’t be turned into gravel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Except for the 3.7 kilometres which 
we’ve outlined, we’re trying to maintain the surface as a thin 
membrane surface. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, where you’ve reverted highways 
from thin membrane to gravel, will that section of road become 
an area that’s extremely dusty? It’ll probably have dust or rocks 
flying, but the concern as well is with gravel roads you have 
large clouds of dust at times. Will this have some sort of dust 
prohibitive in it as well as far as the road bed goes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With the asphalt mixture that exists on 
those surfaces right now we wouldn’t anticipate that there 
would be any dust or very, very little dust, let me put it that 
way. And as the years went on if those sections stayed in gravel 
as gravel mixed in and they actually did get a little bit dustier, 
they would be entirely contingent on where they are located. 
 
So if they’re in close proximity to a small community, or to a 
community, I should say, I would suspect we’d be more 
receptive to dust proofing. But just because they’ve been 
reverted to gravel doesn’t mean that they would automatically 
have dust proofing applied. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, when it comes to some 
of this thin membrane surface and some of the reasons that road 
is . . . or surface actually starts to break up is partly because of 
the fact that areas do not have a very good roadbed underneath. 
Other areas is because of the thin membrane and the heavier 
traffic on it. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there a method whereby you could actually add 
some strength to that surface? For example, the No. 9 south of 
Yorkton, about a 4 to 6 inches of crushed gravel, oiled up and 

basically resurfaced, resealed the whole road. And it appears 
that it’s actually added better structure to that road surface. 
 
Is there something of that magnitude that could be done with 
some of these thin membrane surfaces to actually add some 
structure and smooth out the roads? Because what you have in 
many cases, even though you’re patching, you still have the 
valleys and you’re moving side to side because you really 
haven’t levelled out that road surface. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Given the pressures on a thin membrane 
surface in Saskatchewan right now, we’re doing all sorts of 
things to . . . trying different innovations. Most recently, you 
will have seen probably the press clippings and releases out of 
Saskatoon where we’re working with the University of 
Saskatchewan to try to develop a surface that is structurally 
very, very hard. 
 
But with respect to your . . . the specific example that you cite, 
it works to a degree in some areas. But I understand, I’m told 
that it depends entirely on what sort of roadbed it is applied to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, a report in the paper 
this week, Kipling The Citizen actually did a report on the 
southeast planning committee. I guess there was some 
discussion. And has there any been . . . discussion been 
undertaken with your department? There’s a grid road that 
happens to run basically directly from Kipling right through to 
the Moosomin and No. 8 Highway. It crosses No. 9 Highway. 
Has any discussion been undertaken in regards to possibly 
making this a dust-free surface and putting any kind of level of 
pavement on it, at least for a heavy haul from No. 9 and then a 
lighter surface for the rest of the way to Moosomin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ve worked with the area 
transportation planning committee apparently to define that 
route as a heavy haul truck route, but there haven’t been any 
discussions with respect to dust proofing or hard surfacing that 
we are aware of. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
That’s what I was kind of gathering but the reason I asked that 
is because I had a number of calls and people have been asking 
is that what’s going to happen to that grid road. I think that’s 
coming from some of the discussions the southeast planning 
committee has had, and some suggestions that have come 
forward and I think that, if I’m not mistaken, that’s what the 
report was carrying. However I wouldn’t complain if you put 
highway surface past my family farm. 
 
Mr. Minister, one further question before and some other 
colleagues have a question. And this is in regards to the 
twinning of No. 1 Highway and I believe it’s now twinning east 
of Wolseley. 
 
And a call that came to my attention was coming from a family 
who is quite . . . raising the concern about why they are being 
asked to give up some more of their land. And I believe they 
must be on the north side of the highway because of the fact 
that the power line runs on the north side. And this is just one 
family, I think. I don’t know how many other families. 
 
But I gather from the last time No. 1 was expanded that a fair 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

chunk of their land was . . . I shouldn’t use the word 
expropriated because most people, I think, tend to be more than 
happy to have a good road go by their place, but the concern 
they have is that they’re being asked to now give up another, in 
this case they’re talking about 20 acres. And the feeling is if 
you went on the south side of the No. 1 that it would be much 
cheaper to build a road there for the simple reason, two reasons: 
on the north side of No. 1 as it currently exists, the power grid 
runs right along the highway right-of-way so that would have to 
be moved. And secondly, in a number of locations, this north 
side of the road actually has steeper gullies than the south side 
of the highway. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give me a comment, 
and if I haven’t already . . . I may have even talked to your 
office regarding this specific situation, but if I haven’t I’ll get 
the specifics and get a response. But in general that’s what 
we’re talking about. Why aren’t we actually expanding to the 
south of No. 1 for the twinning rather than on the north side? 
And I believe we’re talking here east of Wolseley, the new 
surveying that’s going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, first of all, you are 
correct. It would be additional costs, some additional costs 
going on the north side. But all in all here are some of the 
considerations in going on the south side. 
 
There would be an extra set of curves that would have to be 
built into the road. There would be added construction costs 
because I’m told by the engineers here — and I don’t 
understand this, I’m just going to try and explain this — 
because of transition, the additional transition costs. Is that 
correct? And also they have to go around a cemetery. So that’s 
the rationale for going on the north side of the road. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll try and 
get to some more personal details to you so you can respond 
directly as well. 
 
But having travelled the road — yes, there’s a cemetery sitting 
there on the south side. And as I discussed with the constituent 
the fact that you’re not going to be bouncing back and forth 
from one side to the other. 
 
Also before you . . . at the twinning you’ve also got that motel 
and service station right at Wolseley, so the same thing would 
happen. You either go on the north side and then you cross and 
then you come back in. I can understand that. But maybe just a 
clarification from your office as well and some of the questions 
that she’s raised. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, my question is about Highway 42. 
Are you going to maintain that as a highway surface or are you 
going to revert it back to gravel? I know that there is some of it 
going back this year. 
 
Is there a kind of a long-range plan to include it in the budget 
for next year to pave that stretch that’s being put back to gravel? 
 
(2230) 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In terms of the section reverted to 
gravel, as we’ve outlined again to the press and to yourselves, 
there is 12 kilometres this year that was reverted to gravel. The 
rest of it we’ll try and maintain as a thin membrane surface. 
 
And with respect to next year, we budget on a year-to-year 
basis, so we’re not able to tell you specifically what’s available 
for next year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Basically is there any kind of a long-range plan 
for the highways? Because as you know that they’re all 
breaking up. Are you trying to budget some every year in the 
future? Or are you just basically going year by year to see how 
much money you’re going to get, then you just pick and decide 
at the beginning of the year which highway is going to be fixed, 
which is going to be reverted to gravel? 
 
Or do you have, let’s say a 10-year plan of a certain number of 
highways that you’re going to save, no matter what? Or are you 
just going to . . . basically playing it by ear, year by year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With respect to the gravel reversion 
again, I’ve said it a few times in the House, but I’ll say it again 
here tonight. There isn’t any plan about gravel reversion. 
 
In terms of a long-term plan, our plan is to try to maintain thin 
membrane surfaced roads as best we can. 
 
We’re working with the area transportation planning 
committees to identify primary corridors and haul routes. As 
you will know, just the announcement just the other day, with 
the closure of I think it’s 230 wooden elevators accelerated by a 
year and a half — that, and accelerated rail line and branch line 
abandonment — these are things that we wouldn’t have even 
budgeted for last year because we wouldn’t know what some of 
these folks in the private sector had planned and how 
dramatically that affects us in Saskatchewan here, especially on 
our thin membrane surfaces. 
 
So our plan is to try to maintain thin membrane surfaces as best 
we can. And we acknowledge the challenges, though, with 
respect to the dramatic changes in transportation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You should probably though realize . . . or you 
should be realizing every year there is always going to be more 
tonnage going down the highways. I mean, you should have 
realized that in the early ’80s because most farmers realized 
that. So you should have been possibly planning for it back 
then. 
 
On the designated haul routes, if an area decides to use a 
designated haul route, will there be money from the Department 
of Highways and maybe a promise that they will keep the thin 
membrane surface in the area if they use a designated haul route 
and they just ban trucks and heavy tonnage on the thin 
membrane surface? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Not to start a debate here, but I want to 
remind the member that we weren’t doing the planning in the 
’80s, not our government . . . wasn’t doing the planning with 
respect to highways in the 1980s. 
 
With respect to truck haul management and partnerships that 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

might or could exist . . . might currently or could exist in the 
future with rural governments, certainly that is an option. And 
as a matter of fact, it actually does exist I think in your 
constituency with the potato hauls that are going on right now 
in that area. With respect to whether or not the province has 
jurisdiction on limiting heavy haul truck traffic on thin 
membrane surfaces, right now we do not. The province does not 
have that jurisdiction to limit heavy haul on thin membrane 
surfaced roads. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know the 
Highways doesn’t. But I was going . . . if the area would be . . . 
if the RMs get together with the towns, it would be the RMs, if 
they would put a ban on . . . because it was, I believe it was 
even brought up by your officials today saying that they would 
maybe look at maintaining a thin membrane surface if there was 
no guarantee of heavy tonnage on because it would cost less 
money to maintain it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — On a long-term basis, it certainly is a 
policy option that we are looking at. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, getting back to 42 and 19, I 
know I’ve hit this point home a lot, but I still want to still make 
it a . . . try to impress upon you that in that whole area, the only 
way to service that area is 19 from Saskatoon or from 42 for the 
people from Moose Jaw, Regina. 
 
I mean there’s another article in the paper today, even letters of 
coming in, calls even from urban centres, saying we can’t get to 
that area, or we’re not going to go back. And on the highway 
being broken up on both them over the last years, I believe with 
the pipeline going in, there was a lot of pipe being hauled down 
there. And I was wondering, did you get any money for that, or 
do you take into consideration that putting maybe a little more 
money on them two highways because basically it wasn’t as 
much local tonnage breaking up the highways as it was pipe 
being hauled for that pipeline going through the last two years. 
But people in that area basically didn’t have any control over. 
Well that’s what I’ll just ask you for that. Now have you got 
any money from the pipelines? I know they were hauling legal 
loads, but there was lots of days that there was bumper to 
bumper semis on that highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My understanding is, no, there is no 
arrangement with them. They hauled all of their pipe in within 
the prescribed weight limits. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I know they hauled with 
the legal load limits. But there was so many trucks going over it. 
Same as grain. They’re hauling legal load limits too. But with the 
pipe being hauled in there for that area, which generates a lot of 
money for the province through the manufacturing workers . . . the 
whole province does good. And I’m not running down the 
pipeline. I was just saying that the people in that certain area feel 
their highways were busted up a bit by these trucks and the 
pipeline going through. So they’re wondering if you as the 
highway department or the whole government looks at that as a 
consideration saying maybe we should throw in a little more 
money on to the highways in that certain area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My understanding is that we have 
reconstructed about half of No. 19 so far, and our plan then is to 

finish the rest of 19 up to about Central Butte in the long term. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, just a quick follow-up to the minister. I 
just made a quick phone call which at this time of the night was 
probably not the best one to make. But I was just informed that 
from Highway No. 8 to the Manitoba border there is about 10 
pieces — about a kilometre — that’s actually been reverted to 
gravel and was just worked up the other day. And the caller I 
talked to had called me the other day and indicated that yesterday 
the road wasn’t bad; today it’s already getting pounded out. 
 
So I think it’s just something just to bring to your attention that 
actually there was some work on 48 where there was some 
patchwork done about a hundred yards at a piece and talk was to 
revert at least 4 kilometres in that section to gravel. 
 
And the second thing that was brought to my attention is some 
discussions apparently with the Department of Highways just 
recently about reverting heavier traffic on to the grid system to try 
and maintain 48 and more discussions coming up in the very . . . I 
believe even next week or the week after there’s supposed to be 
some more discussions. So I’m wondering if you’re familiar 
with that, Mr. Minister, or your department’s familiar with that 
discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, to the member, all we’re aware of 
is that 3.7 kilometres that I had referred to earlier. I mean we’re 
working with the area transportation planning committees to try 
and identify the main corridors. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is I’m not entirely clear on what it is 
you were asking in the question as well. I don’t know if I’ve 
answered it well enough. Right now we’re planning on the 3.7 
kilometres and that’s it. The rest of it we’re trying to maintain 
as a thin membrane surface. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, is this point quick. As I 
understand, from Highway No. 8 through the Manitoba border, 
as we indicated before that was going to be continued thin 
membrane. I’m informed that there is about 10 separate sections 
of about a hundred yards each, roughly about a kilometre, that 
was actually reverted to gravel. And that’s what I . . . maybe 
you could do a double check on that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, Highway 312 has recently 
received the distinction of . . . to join the gravel club. And I 
guess the question I have, there are a number of economic 
development issues that are happening right in that area that are 
concentrated around Highway No. 312. One, is a de-branding 
plant at Rosthern. The other one is there’s another five-barn hog 
operation that looks like it should be on the go, which is about 
halfway between Rosthern and the Laird intersection. 
 
Do economic developments of that sort give you some reason 
not to go ahead and turn 312 into gravel? Or is that the sort of 
thing where you say, now we have more traffic so now we can’t 
keep up the highway so we have to turn to gravel? Is this a plus 
or minus as far as the gravel development is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’d say the answer is neither one of 
those. It just highlights for us that we need to find a different 
solution than currently exists. 
 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

Mr. Heppner: — Amazing. How are you going to find a 
different solution between gravel and keeping 312 the way it is? 
I’m not sure of what you’re going to do there unless you’re 
going to give us a good two-lane or a four-lane, and that’s not 
what’s needed there. 
 
The other question I have, and I think this has been brought to 
your attention numerous times, and that is where . . . near 
Can-Oat on Highway No. 11 where the railway crosses, that has 
become a very dangerous crossing there with semis going the 
wrong side. And I think there’s negotiations going on between 
you and the railway to get that done. I think that needs to be 
accelerated drastically because there are a lot of concerns 
coming in about safety of where the railway crosses Highway 
No. 11 at the Can-Oat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll commit to the member we’ll follow 
up on that and give you the information later. We just don’t 
have that information with us tonight. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it was about 1996 I talked to the deputy 
minister of Highways about upgrading and improving Highway 
368. Highway 368 serves the industries in St. Brieux and in 
Annaheim — Doepker Industries in Annaheim and Bourgeault 
Industries in St. Brieux — as well as a number of other industry 
there that serves the farm community. 
 
There are a great number of people also that have jobs 
associated with those industries, and I must say that I was very, 
very pleased after a lengthy discussion with the deputy minister 
at that time that they decided to take care of that highway and 
make sure that it was upgraded, and a part of it has been done 
and is in very good shape. 
 
The problem is that from Lake Lenore to St. Brieux there is still 
a need for upgrading and of course it’s important that that area 
of the highway is completed because the truck traffic that’s on 
there as well as the traffic associated with the people working at 
those industries, it’s very necessary that that be finished. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I was wondering if there’s any plans by 
your government to complete that stretch of highway so that 
there can be a well-completed highway, a highway that can be 
utilized by the people at Bourgeault and at Doepker as well as 
truckers coming and going, and that they can ensure . . . or you 
can ensure them rather that they will have a safe highway to 
travel on. 
 
The stretch of highway that is not completed is really in quite 
bad shape and people are very concerned about it. So I’d like 
your response as to whether or not your department has any 
plans of completing Highway 368 construction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The first part of 368 I’m told was done 
under CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure 
Program) funding. There isn’t any long-term plan right now 
unfortunately to do more work on that section of road unless of 
course we were to receive additional federal funding and then it 
would obviously have a reasonable chance of having additional 
work done on it. 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I hear 
you; I hear what you’re saying, that there are no plans to 
continue with the upgrading of that road. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have been informed by Kirsch Construction of 
Middle Lake that they have approximately 15 to 18 men on 
their payroll. They have 20 to 30 men waiting to work. These 
people are willing to work for less than minimum wage as long 
as they work. If it were not for labour legislation put in by your 
government, we could have a construction firm such as that 
complete that road. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that road really does provide for a lot of 
economic development in the area, as well as it enhances the 
economic development of all of Saskatchewan. And so I wish to 
say to you tonight that I hope that your department gives that 
road a priority as far as the continuation and completion of 368. 
I hope that you will understand and recognize the great amount 
of economic development and the spinoff to the area and the 
province that comes from those industries there and how 
necessary it is to have a very good road to provide for the 
transportation of goods to and from St. Brieux and Annaheim, 
and also to ensure the safe passage of employees that work at 
those industries. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give me some assurance today that 368 
will be completed and that we can have assurance that those 
industries are valued in your government’s eyes and you will 
take the necessary steps to put all the measures in place that will 
ensure those industries can continue on with their fabulous 
business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Unfortunately, to the member, we can’t 
give you that assurance tonight. The funds and the money just 
aren’t there, so we can’t give you that commitment unless, of 
course as I said earlier, we actually did receive substantial 
additional funding from the federal government. 
 
I do want to say though just in passing with respect to the 
private contractors. I’m aware that they can do a lot more work; 
as a matter of fact I was just meeting with most of the 
contractors just last week, I think it was last Thursday. And I 
know they have the capacity to do more, but we have increased 
the amount of work that private contractors do since, our $2.5 
billion commitment as an example, they have . . . their 
percentage has increased to 37 per cent from 30 per cent of our 
total Department of Highways’ budget. So there certainly has 
been an increase. I think if you talk to them, even they would 
acknowledge that. We know they have the capacity to do more 
but at least we’re heading in the right direction from their 
perspective. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I regrettably will have to 
relay that information to Kirsch Construction as well as to those 
people in my constituency that are really concerned and would 
like to see that highway finished. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to bring also to your attention some 
biggest complaints about constituents of mine regarding the 
process that they go through for accident claims. Now your 
government has stated that if in fact people were incurring 
damage to their vehicles due to road conditions in the province 
that they could make a claim through accident claims. 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

A number of my constituents are telling me that on Highway 27 
that goes from No. 2 towards Prud’homme and Vonda that there 
are approximately 73 potholes within an 8 mile distance. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, one of the areas in that highway is not a 
pothole, it’s a major crater. There are people from the Bruno 
area and so on who are going to university in Saskatoon via that 
highway, young students who are trying to save the expense of 
having to rent a place in Saskatoon. So what they’re doing is 
they’re driving back and forth everyday between Bruno and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Now one of these people is Blaine Weiman and he happened to 
hit one of these craters in the road there, on Highway 27. And 
he put in an accident claim and was told then that he would . . . 
he may very well likely have a hundred dollar surcharge on his 
next licence. So is it the policy of your government now, Mr. 
Minister, to charge a hundred dollar surcharge to anyone who 
puts in an accident claim due to bad road conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In the question the member is 
discussing is really an SGI or Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance issue. Our responsibility, from a department’s 
perspective, is to properly and adequately warn the public if 
there is road hazards ahead or whether there is, whether there’s 
a road damage that they need to worry about. In the cases where 
it is determined that we have not adequately or properly warned 
the public that there is a damage to the road ahead and it causes 
vehicle damage, those are the situations that we’ll examine and 
consider for damage payment. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Well in 
regard to your comments just now, Mr. Minister, I have another 
constituent who indicated to me that he was travelling between 
the junction of Highway 27 and Cudworth, and about 10 miles 
south of Cudworth he too hit a crater in the road. Well these are 
craters. I mean the pavement really is crumbling, and there is a 
major curvature, I guess, of the pavement where people are 
calling these holes craters. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, irregardless of the description of the 
highway, this gentleman was also told that he could put in a 
claim. He incurred damage — basically blew a hole in his oil 
pan and had some damage to the frame of his car — and he put 
in a claim and SGI said that they were waiting to hear from the 
supervisor in that area about that stretch of highway. 
 
And I guess the supervisor was to make a determination of 
whether or not the highway was properly flagged or whether it 
was in that bad a condition or not. So the supervisor then spoke 
to accident claims and said that he was there a week ago and 
there was no problem with the highway. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, these people that incurred damage to their 
vehicle showed the damage as well as the pothole in the 
highway to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). So 
there is verification of this. And still these people have no 
recourse because the supervisor said the highway was in good 
shape a week before that. Now, Mr. Minister, this is 
disrespectful of people’s claim. It’s disrespectful to be stating 
that there is nothing wrong with a highway when in fact a 
number of people have been reporting to my office, and I 
imagine to your claims department, that there are problems with 

those highways, that they are incurring damage. 
 
Getting back to Highway No. 7, Mr. Minister, within one week 
there were four people that reported to me that they had near 
accidents that could have cost them their lives because of the 
damage to those highways and because they had to hit the ditch 
in order to miss semis. There were all kinds of reports about 
those highways being in very dangerous condition. And still we 
get disclaimers from accident claims. They simply seem to 
chuck off people’s claims and find a reason not to honour those 
claims. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to know why your department 
has not responded to Mr. Weiman or to Mr. Newton who is the 
individual who reported damage to the frame of his car and his 
oil pan on this stretch of No. 2 Highway that is between 
Junction 27 and Cudworth. These people are waiting for some 
response from your government and they’re waiting for you to 
be honourable in your response. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you please comment and let these people 
know today, because I imagine that they are watching TV 
tonight and are very anxious to hear from you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m told that the two claims that you are 
referring to are currently being dealt with and they’re just 
following due process right now. So both of them should be 
hearing something before too long. 
 
Just as an aside, I would want to say to you as well, if you’re 
dealing with constituents you can let them know that there are 
two additional forms of appeal. First of all, if they’re not 
satisfied with the response, they can appeal directly to the 
deputy minister, or secondly they can chose binding mediation 
if they would like. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I hear what 
you’re saying about the appeal. But, Mr. Minister, these people 
have had verification of what happened to their vehicle by the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). Why should these 
people have to go through an appeal? It doesn’t seem to make 
sense; it doesn’t seem to be right. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to plead with your department to look at 
Highway No. 27. It certainly is a highway that is used a great 
deal by constituents. I think that we absolutely have to ensure 
that these highways are at least in somewhat of a safe condition. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve travelled on No. 20, between Highway No. 
11 back to Humboldt, every weekend when I leave this 
legislature. That highway is really in dangerous condition. We 
have signs . . . or you have signs, rather, placed on that 
highway. Every five miles it says . . . you know, says something 
like, you know, repairs going on for the next five kilometres. 
And then you go five kilometres and there’s another sign that 
states the same. People weave in and out of those potholes. And 
that highway too is used a great deal. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m asking that you speed up the repairs on 
these highways as quickly as possible. 
 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2000 

And I guess I will leave my comments with you tonight, and I 
thank you for your responses. And I thank you and your 
officials for being here tonight to answer our questions. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and Mr. 
Minister. Just a quick question as it relates to the Swift Current 
area and the decisions by the department in terms of the 
equipment that’s being used out of that particular area of the 
province. 
 
And the specific question I have this evening relates to graders 
that the department owns in Swift Current. My understanding, 
and I don’t know the exact number, but my understanding is 
that the department has them for sale; would like to sell these 
graders in favour of leasing equipment rather than these 
particular pieces of equipment, which I also understand — and 
correct me if any of this is wrong; this is sort of third-hand from 
folks involved there — but also people have a concern that 
these particular graders are fine. They’re not sure why they’re 
being sold. We hear different things of what people have been 
told from the department in Regina. But could you please 
explain the decision to sell these particular pieces of equipment, 
if indeed one has been made, and what would be the benefit 
then of leasing graders if these other ones that are apparently for 
sale are fine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, we’ll let you know 
specifically about that equipment. We’re not aware of that. But 
just in general terms, I’ll very quickly . . . any equipment that 
we have and that we are getting rid of, it’s simply replacement, 
so they would be I’m told at least 25 to 30 years old and it just 
doesn’t make sense to keep repairing them. 
 
So if there’s an example where some of the equipment is in 
good shape yet and we’re talking about replacing it, then I 
guess we’ll look into that. But we’re not aware of that. And 
generally we do it on a case-by-case basis, whatever is most 
cost-effective. If we can buy equipment and that’s the better 
buy for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that’s what we’ll do. If 
we can lease it and it’s more cost-effective for the province, 
that’s what we’ll do as well. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. One 
final question and it relates to equipment in that area as well. 
And if you don’t have the answers here, providing them later is 
fine as well. But I wonder if while you’re getting information 
on that first question, if you could also determine the number of 
trucks, pickup trucks that have been purchased for that 
particular region this year, and why they were purchased? What 
was the identified need? 
 
And like I said, if you would like to supply those at some later 
date, if you don’t have the information handy, that would be 
fine as well. Thank you, Minister, and officials. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, my question deals with Highway 22 from Junction 
640 to east to Junction 35. I notice that that Highway 22 is not 
on your gravel list, but yet in recent days there’s been . . . short 
sections of the highway have been . . . the asphalt has been 
removed, and it’s been replaced with gravel. 
 
And I wonder if you could give me your plans for that section 

of highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My understanding, I’m told by the 
department officials, this is a very recent occurrence, that this 
has just happened. We’re looking at it to see what we can do 
with that section right now. 
 
But you really . . . you make my point in what I’ve said many 
times in this legislature that in fact this gravel reversion is not 
planned. We deal with the circumstance when it occurs, and 
there will be short sections literally as I’m told, just literally 
completely fail, and I suspect that’s exactly what’s happened 
there. But we’re looking at it to see what we can do in that 
particular case. There’s been no decision made about that yet. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My second question 
deals with the same highway and that would be from Junction 
No. 6 west to Junction No. 20. There has been some repairs 
taken place of similar fashion on that section of highway, and I 
would ask the minister what the department’s plans are for that 
section of highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — On that section it’s just routine 
maintenance. We’ll do our best to try to maintain it as a thin 
membrane surface. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I just have 
one question for you and your officials. The 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency has probably a record number 
of terrible roads in . . . (inaudible) . . . Most of the MLAs on this 
side of the House should probably fight for that position but I 
believe that I probably hold them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have two pieces of roads that are converted back 
to the gravel situation. The one that is most upsetting to me and 
to people in my constituency is the area around Greenwater 
park. That’s the only provincial park in this constituency, and 
it’s nearly impossible . . . there’s not a road that you can get 
there on that’s a decent road. 
 
If I’m coming from Kelvington, there’s roads when there’s rain 
the road really is impassable — 349 over from Archerwill was 
being constructed until the ’95 election and then they stopped, 
they stopped the construction and there’s a whole piece that has 
never been finished. 
 
Then coming from the north, they re-paved one area but the 
Highway No. 23 coming from both directions has been turned 
back to gravel. This is one area . . . it’s a beautiful park area and 
you can’t get there. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there any plans to complete the road in any one 
of those directions so we can use the park in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are doing some work in that area. 
We acknowledge that again that more needs to be done there, 
but on Highway 23 there has been some amount of work done 
there. With respect to Highway 38, I know it’s on the north side 
of the park. There was almost 18 kilometres that is targeted for, 
that was done last year, I should say, at a total cost of $1.4 
million. But we would hope to be able to do some into the 
future, but generally it’s maintenance of thin membrane 
surfaces as best we can with the funds available. 



June 26, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:13 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


