





























































Hansard: May 01, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 935 
 May 1, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to all of the members of the Assembly a group of students who 
are seated in your gallery. They are from Miller High School in 
Regina. 
 
They’re grade 12 students — there’s about 19 of them. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Dale Flichel. They’re members 
of the social studies class. And they very much appreciated the 
opportunity I think, Mr. Speaker, to meet with you and myself 
prior to the arrival of the Governor General and to take part in 
the proceedings today. 
 
I would ask all the members to extend them a very warm 
welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the House two people from my constituency, two 
young ladies — I’ll ask them to stand — Adrienne Hepp and 
my daughter, Nancy. 
 
They’re both fairly interested in politics, and my daughter 
Nancy from time to time sends a missive to the Premier, which 
in most cases is not answered. 
 
So would you welcome them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
honour and pleasure today to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, seated in the west gallery, 25 
grade 7 students from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys Elementary 
School. St. Marguerite’s a school within the constituency that 
has a partnership with SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), and it’s just a pleasure to be with 
them today. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Jennifer 
Stewart-Mitchell. And we did have the opportunity to meet 
earlier and discuss the role . . . your role, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
sure the students appreciated the visit and learned a lot from the 
discussion that we had. They’ll be watching the proceedings, 
and we’ll meet with them later for tea. 
 
I ask all members to join in welcoming the 25 grade 7 students 
from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 

hon. members of this Assembly a group of students that are 
seated in the east gallery. 
 
We have 38 students from Robert Southey School. They make 
up the classes, grade 5 and grade 8 classes. They are here today 
to attend the special functions that are happening here today. 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Bernie Maksymiw 
and Ms. Donna McColl. And I’d ask all members of the 
Assembly to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all who are gathered here 
today the grade 6 and 7 class from the Lumsden Elementary 
School and their teacher, Doug Sthamann. And I would ask you 
to all join with me in giving them an enthusiastic welcome to 
this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
special guests today I’d like to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly. There’s seven students 
from my constituency who have been job shadowing me or 
following me around for a few days to see what their MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) does. 
 
We have Amanda Ingram and MaryAnn Jones from Quill Lake. 
We have Erin Breker and Ryan Mollembeck from Englefeld, 
Shirley Myhre and Jacquelynn Souter from Pleasantdale, and 
Shari Wielgosz from Rose Valley. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier, 
and I’d hope that the Premier would be answering on behalf of 
his government. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government is providing taxpayers’ dollars to 
screen pornographic movies and to bring porn actors and 
filmmakers to Regina to discuss their work. 
 
Do you think government should be spending taxpayers’ dollars 
on pornography? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Of Saskatchewan Property Management and this afternoon, 
acting on behalf of the Minister of Municipal Government. And 
I thank the member opposite for the question. 
 
These are indeed important discussions that must occur in 
today’s day and age when we talk about the amount of . . . 
sometimes we would call it erotic expression through movies 
and across the TV screens that not only ourselves are viewing, 
but our young people today. 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2000 

The panel that she is talking about was funded by the Arts 
Board, which is an independent agency, governed by the board, 
and operates in an independent way and is asked on a daily 
basis where that line is between the erotic, the sensual, and the 
visual that young people see today, and the pornographic. 
 
Those are indeed important discussions that need to occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But it is not just the 
Arts Board that’s sponsoring pornography; it’s also SaskTel. 
SaskTel is running a TV ad campaign that seems to be directed 
at getting children on the Internet but at the same time they’re 
providing corporate sponsorship of a film festival that includes 
pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you believe this is an appropriate role for 
SaskTel? Should SaskTel be sponsoring pornography. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I 
say to the member opposite and to those who are looking at the 
material that’s provided and the discussion that would occur, 
that these are important discussions that need to occur today. 
It’s up to the Arts Board and the agencies that are looking that 
through — an independent, and I would stress an independent, 
adjudication process to sponsor these events and to have the 
discussion. She’s taking into consideration a panel that occurred 
to talk about where the line should be drawn in today’s society. 
 
Particularly when you have arts, when you have filmmaking 
and video, you now have as she mentions the explosion of the 
Internet and what our children and future generations will be 
either entitled to view or should not be looking at and viewing 
through those medias, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I stress we are not the people who should making the 
censorship decisions. The Arts Board and this panel was trying 
to come to terms . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister and the 
government cannot keep hiding behind the Arts Board on the 
decision to fund pornography. First of all they’re talking about 
taxpayers’ dollars so they are ultimately responsible. The 
organizer of this film festival has now confirmed they’ll be 
screening porn movies. Porn filmmakers and actors are coming 
to discuss porn movies here in Saskatchewan and part of the 
funding is coming from the government. 
 
When is the Premier going to step in and take some 
responsibility? Will you step in and withdraw the support 
you’re giving for this event? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again 
answer the member’s question by stating that it’s the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board, governed by an independent body, 
that does have adjudication of what’s going to occur. There are 
other agencies they speak . . . asked for in sponsorship. 
 
It’s about $5,000 for the week-long dialogue and debate, and 
the panel session is one part of that only, and talking about 
where we’re going to go in the future, where these agencies 
should be looking to for advice, and the understanding of where 
that line is drawn. And it should not be us or other agencies 
who are not involved in those debates to be able to stand and 
censor what’s going to occur. We need some dialogue and 
debate on this very serious matter. And I know we have our 
committee also looking at the very serious issues surrounding 
the nature of these discussions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about taxpayers’ 
dollars and pornography. Mr. Speaker, there is a precedent for 
the government stepping in to reverse an Arts Board grant. 
 
In 1994, the Arts Board provided a $9,500 grant to a Saskatoon 
man who was using his so-called art to publicly identify the 
sexual orientation of prominent Saskatchewan citizens without 
their consent. The minister at that time was Carol Carson. She 
took responsibility, she apologized for the poor judgment of the 
Arts Board, and she forced them to withdraw the grant. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you tell your minister to do the same thing 
today? Will you stop spending taxpayers’ dollars to support 
pornography? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The film 
festival that we’re talking about has a number of sponsors who 
rely on the judgment of the independent agency and the 
independent adjudicators to decide what will and not be a part 
of that process. We leave that decision making to that body. It’s 
not up to us to determine in our minds whether or not the 
materials are pornographic. 
 
This instance we’re talking about is a panel discussion into a 
very serious topical issue of the day. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
spending taxpayers’ dollars having a committee go through this 
province to have just these kinds of debates and to certainly 
protect the interests of our children and next generation. 
 
When we talk about where is the line between the films 
American Beauty and Eyes Wide Shut, and the pornographic 
materials that are available today far too often to be viewed by 
the younger generations. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Economic Development Strategy 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development. 
Madam Minister, last week the government released its latest 
polling information, and it would appear it maybe couldn’t be 
much worse for you from that poll. According to that 
government poll, a whopping 63 per cent of Saskatchewan 



May 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

residents think the provincial economy is getting worse; just 20 
per cent of the economy is getting better. 
 
It’s hard to understand . . . it’s not hard to understand why 
people and jobs keep leaving our province. Your own polling is 
telling you that the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) economic 
development strategy is failing badly. 
 
Madam Minister, are 63 per cent of Saskatchewan people 
wrong? Or are you finally . . . will you finally admit that the 
NDP’s preference for big government, high taxes, and 
pork-barrelling politics is killing our economy? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 
thank the member opposite for the question. I’ve just returned 
from Saskatoon where I had a meeting with the North 
Saskatoon Business Association in which they reiterated the 
point they made when this province’s budget came down. 
 
They are incredibly supportive of the actions of this government 
in economic development, particularly the tax cuts — the 
income tax cuts — which they say will continue to grow our 
province. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, let’s put a few facts 
on the table. For the last three months Saskatchewan has led all 
of Western Canada in job growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The fastest growing economy in 
terms of jobs for people in all of Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
we on this side of the House are proud of Saskatchewan’s 
businesses and co-operatives and their contribution to this 
growth. I wish the other members would join us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have another question for the Minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development. 
 
Madam Minister, a few days ago you sent around a memo 
bragging about the inventory of new capital projects planned for 
this year, and your inventory says Saskatchewan will see a total 
of $6.5 billion in new capital project spending this year. So we 
did a little research on other provinces and here’s what we 
found. 
 
Madam Minister, both in Manitoba and Alberta there are lists of 
capital projects that compare. For instance, in Alberta the list of 
capital projects for this year totals $57 billion. That’s almost 
$10 in new capital investment in Alberta for every one dollar 
spent in Saskatchewan. And it’s . . . that’s a clear vote of 
non-confidence in the NDP when there’s a choice to be made. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you bragging about a vote of 
non-confidence in your NDP government by the Saskatchewan 
investment community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I will put the facts on the table for 

the members opposite. From 1992 to 1997, Saskatchewan led 
all of Canada — every single province — in growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Now as the members know, in 
1998-99 there have been some agricultural problems. But even 
in those years, starting into this year, for three months in a row 
we’ve led all of Western Canada in job growth. 
 
And do you know what else I’m really proud of? I’m proud of 
the balance of our record. Not only did our economy grow 
faster than any other economy in that time period, we were the 
only province in Canada — the only province — in which our 
poverty rates declined. 
 
We have no reason to be like them and to envy Alberta. We do 
not believe in what they believe in — two-tiered health care, 
two-tiered education. We believe in growth and social 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, it would appear that the tax 
cuts that the minister referred to and the percentage leading all 
provinces really leaves us wondering what these percentages 
really mean. I’m sure that these . . . the leading all provinces as 
a percentage of the number of people that are still remaining in 
the province. 
 
I have another question, Mr. Speaker, for the minister. The 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce released its own report 
on economic growth last week. And to nobody’s surprise, 
except maybe yours, Madam Minister, once again 
Saskatchewan is dead last in economic growth for this year. 
 
Madam Minister, Saskatchewan residents think your economic 
policy are terrible. Alberta’s attracting $10 of capital investment 
for every dollar here in Saskatchewan. And thanks to the NDP’s 
dismal leadership in this area, Saskatchewan is dead last in 
economic growth again. 
 
Madam Minister, what specific actions are you taking to reverse 
this disastrous economic trend here in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again, Mr. Speaker, what the 
members opposite love to do is cherry-pick. What they don’t 
say is virtually every forecasting agency said, ’98-99, this 
province did well in light of the challenges it was facing in 
agriculture. 2000, they say — and I quote this word — 
“impressive” record in job creation. 
 
It’s the same as Alberta. They like to cherry-pick. They’d like 
to have, oh yes, let’s have Alberta tax rates and no sales tax, but 
don’t give us two-tiered Alberta health care and two-tiered 
Alberta education. We have a balanced approach. We have an 
economy that’s growing. We have more jobs than ever before in 
our province’s history and we have a health care system and an 
education system open to everyone in this province. That’s the 
record we’re proud of. 
 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
the question earlier on was looking at economic development 
— not necessarily health, education; that has its own questions. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, two of the biggest stumbling blocks to 
rebuilding our economy here are the high NDP taxes and a web 
of bureaucratic red tape. Well the NDP obviously don’t care 
about the high taxes or you wouldn’t have increased them by 
160 million in this year’s budget, but there is still hope for 
trying to get rid of the red tape. 
 
Later today, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will be 
introducing The Regulatory Reform Act. This legislation would 
establish a review of all government regulations that affect 
business. Unnecessary regulations will be eliminated and others 
will be streamlined. 
 
Madam Minister will you support this legislation as a first step 
to rebuilding the confidence of the business community in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, again to the member 
opposite. We’re proud of this province. This province came 
from the depths of bankruptcy to balance its budget, and then in 
this budget to give to the people of this province the largest 
single income tax cut in the province’s history. And to give to 
the business community what they asked for — a huge income 
tax cut this year and for the next four years that will continue to 
grow this province’s economy. 
 
But, we believe as well, in a balanced approach. Income tax 
cuts so we can keep growing Saskatchewan, but also funding 
for health and education systems so that we can keep our 
single-tier health and education system open to everyone rather 
than the Alberta and Ontario alternatives of two-tier health care, 
two-tier education. We believe in quality health, education, and 
economic growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transportation Payments to Farmers 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, we’re 
getting a lot of phone calls from farming communities with 
questions about the transportation payment. Landowners, in 
particular, are having a concern when they are renting their land 
on a crop and cost-share basis. 
 
For example, a landowner who pays one-third of the input costs 
receives one-third of the crop and then pays freight on shipping 
that crop, but he does not receive any of the federal payment on 
his share of crop. Some landowners believe that the renter 
receives payments on his share; others seem to think that 
neither they nor the renter receives payment and the one-third 
payment does not get paid out at all. 
 
Mr. Minister, were you aware of this unfair policy and what 

might your department be able to do to help rectify it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
the Assembly that the program that was established by the 
federal government and provincial government to the benefit of 
farmers by paying out substantial amounts of money from other 
Canadians who pay taxes in this country, both federally and 
provincially, has actually been very, very well accepted by the 
farm community. In fact if you look at the projections of the 
amount of grain land to be seeded in this province, it will be 3 
per cent higher than the 10-year average. 
 
When the member says it’s an unfair program, she’s absolutely 
wrong, and not unlike the Leader of the Opposition party, the 
Leader of the Opposition party who came here last week with 
misinformation — which he did — and still hasn’t apologized 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would ask her to check with the department and she will find 
that the program is working extremely well for the farmers of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, my question 
is directed towards the Minister of Agriculture. I don’t believe 
that you answered the question and there are a lot of farmers 
that are phoning about this. 
 
What I’m suggesting is that the farmer who owns the land and 
is paying part of the input costs, he’s paying for part of the 
freight, and he’s taking a crop share on his crop. Why is he not 
entitled to part of this payment? Because he has also taken a 
reduction on the amount of money that he’s able to earn. 
 
Can you perhaps give these farmers who are landowners and 
renting on a crop-share basis, an answer today as to why they’re 
not entitled to their payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the program as it is 
designed, the payment — as I’m sure the member from Cypress 
Hills and other farm people including yourself would 
understand — is going to the people, the farmers, the men and 
women who actually do the farming, not to the landowners. 
 
For example on my farm — I use it as by way of example only 
— on the land that I own in the Regina area and rent out to a 
renter, the payment goes to the renter. And it seemed to be the 
best way and the most fair way. 
 
Now if the Leader of the Opposition from his seat is suggesting 
we take the money away from the operators and give it the 
landowner, then he should stand and say that. But he can’t have 
it both ways. He can’t say it’s going to the landowner and it’s 
going to the operator — it’s got to be one or the other. 
 
So I say to the Leader of the Opposition, who continues to yell 
from his seat instead of asking questions, if you want it shifted 
from the operator of the land to the owner of the land, get up in 
your place and make that suggestion. 
 



May 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again my question 
is for the Minister of Agriculture. By going by your answer, Mr. 
Minister, can I assume then that the person who is renting the 
land is entitled to the payment on the crop share that’s paid to 
the landowner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I will say again 
to the member opposite, that in general the program is weighted 
so that the people, the individuals, the farmers who do the 
farming, who buy the fertilizer, buy the chemical, buy the fuel, 
get the payment. And those who are owners of the land, if they 
have it rented out, do not get the payment. 
 
If she has specific details of more complicated rental 
arrangements, she will have to give me the detail and we will 
check into it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, again to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Another issue of confusion for farm 
families is in the area of crop insurance. Some farmers who are 
in arrears to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance are concerned that 
the amounts of their arrears will be deducted from any 
payments of this federal money that they might qualify for. 
 
Some people have been told that this will be deducted and 
others have been told that it won’t be deducted. If it will be 
deducted, will this apply to people who only are one year in 
arrears or for people who have been in arrears longer? 
 
Mr. Minister, can you clarify this for us and for the 
Saskatchewan farmers who are asking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to make 
it clear to the member opposite that every attempt is being made 
to ensure that farmers who are now out in the process of 
seeding, on average about 33 million acres, will get the major 
benefit of the programs that have been announced. 
 
I’m sure the member isn’t saying that people who are arrears in 
their crop insurance should be allowed not to pay it. So 
arrangements are being made to maximize the availability of 
money for seeding, and I think the mark has been hit and that 
we have got a program in place that’s meaningful with the cash 
advance interest-free, with the $160 million direct payment in 
the fact. 
 
And again the member . . . the Leader of the Opposition 
continually yells from his place. I don’t know what he’s saying, 
but if he’s got a question, he should rise in his place and ask it. 
But it’s very difficult to give a response when he continually 
yells from his desk. If you’ve got a question, ask me and I’ll try 
to answer it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Agriculture. I haven’t been knocking the programs; 

they just need clarifying. 
 
There is a lot of farm families out there who are having trouble 
getting the details about these programs. I’m sure your office 
must be getting the same phone calls that I am from farmers 
who can’t get details from either the AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) office or from the Crop Insurance 
office. 
 
There are families that might qualify for AIDA who have given 
up the process because of the bureaucracy involved. And now 
this whole idea of transportation payments which may or may 
not be clawed back, if not by Crop Insurance then by Revenue 
Canada, has them just shaking their head in disbelief of the 
system. 
 
Farmers are already in the field. The payments were supposed 
to be out before seeding, and there’s still some extreme 
confusion as to how these programs work. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department could clear up some of this 
confusion. Will you commit today to make complete and 
detailed information available to the Saskatchewan farm 
families in the most accessible way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to make 
it clear to the members opposite, especially the Leader of the 
Opposition, that the programs that have been announced, both 
the interest-free cash advance, which is offered up 100 per cent 
by the federal government, and the jointly funded program 
between Saskatchewan taxpayers and Canadian taxpayers to 
pay farmers about $160 million so they can get the seed in the 
ground and the AIDA program of $300 million and the $40 
million that our Finance minister announced for a total package 
of a billion dollars, is being well accepted by farmers. And I 
know that may be upsetting to the members opposite. But I 
want to tell you that the number of phone calls that we are 
getting on these programs is very, very much less than it was on 
the AIDA program last year. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean that there aren’t points of clarification. 
But the department staff are working diligently; all questions 
are being answered. If you would give me the detail, I will 
make an attempt to get it for you. But you’ve got to get me the 
detail of the individual because I am not getting a lot of calls on 
the program . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Next question. 
 

Children’s Advocate’s Report 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Social Services. Recently, Mr. 
Minister, the Child Advocate released a very negative report 
regarding Social Services in this province. In fact the Child 
Advocate asked your government, asked this Legislative 
Assembly to listen to children. 
 
Over the past number of weeks I’ve been dealing with 
situations where people have been calling. And, Mr. Minister, it 
seems to me that your department is not listening to children. 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2000 

Children are being moved from one home to the next. Many 
cases, they’re being moved to foster care — and I’m not saying 
there aren’t good foster care homes out there — but many 
children really don’t know where they stand. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your department doing to address the 
concerns that have been relayed to us by the Child Advocate 
report and even going back to the Karen Quill report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to thank the member for the question. The 
member will know, and the members of the Assembly will 
know, that my department asked for the report which was 
prepared for us by the Children’s Advocate into a more general 
review of the foster-care program, because we had our own 
concern about the system that we had and where it is that 
improvements should be made. And it is for those reasons that 
we asked for the review. 
 
The Children’s Advocate noted that there had been 
improvements in some areas within the department but 
obviously, as we all know, pointed out other shortcomings. And 
we are working hard, Mr. Speaker, to see what we can do to 
overcome those shortcomings and to provide a first-class 
system for care for children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:03 p.m. 
 



 Her Excellency the Right Honourable Adrienne Clarkson 1 
Governor General of Canada 

May 1, 2000 
 

The Speaker: — Please rise for the entrance of the Official Party. 
 
Would you please join in singing God Save the Queen. 
 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. You may be seated. Your Excellency, Your Honour, Mr. Premier, 
honourable members of the Assembly, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
Your Excellency, on behalf of all the members of the Assembly, we want to welcome you to the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Applause. 
 
The Speaker: — I would also like to extend a special welcome to the students, to the young ladies and 
gentlemen who are here for today’s ceremony as well: to Robert Southey Elementary School students 
who are seated in the east gallery; to St. Margeurite Bourgeoys and Lumsden Elementary School 
students who’s seated in the west gallery; and to Miller Comprehensive High School students who are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery as well. 
 
I also want to thank the Lions Band, under the direction of Michael Alstad, for their participation in 
today’s ceremony. 
 
I also would now at this point in time like to call on the Hon. Dr. Jim Melenchuk to bring greetings on 
behalf of the Liberal caucus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your Excellency, Your Honours, Mr. Speaker, 
ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, and fellow members of this Assembly, it is with a great 
sense of pride and humility that I rise on behalf of the Liberal caucus and welcome Her Excellency, 
Canada’s 26th Governor General, Adrienne Clarkson to this, our province’s Legislative Assembly. 
 
We are honoured by her presence, and her visit reminds us of how fortunate we are to belong to this 
federation which is Canada. 
 
She is our Sovereign’s representative, the Commander-in-Chief of our nation’s armed forces, and she 
stands as a symbol of who we are as Canadians. The role of Her Excellency is one founded within the 
very history and traditions of our great country. 
 
Over 130 years ago, The British North America Act gave birth to Canada, what was then the first 
self-governing Dominion within the British Empire and what is now our great nation state. 
 
The Act set out a constitution with executive authority vested within the Sovereign, carried on in her 
name by the Governor General and the Privy Council. The Act united Upper and Lower Canada, Nova 
Scotia, and New Brunswick; and in the years to follow six more provinces joined this great 
confederation to make our union what it is today. 
 
We, here in Saskatchewan, are fortunate because we share our constitutional monarchy, our 
parliamentary democracy, our freedoms, and our nation with our counterparts across Canada who are 
our partners in Confederation. And though at times we have our differences, we remain united under one 
flag, one nation, and one sovereign. 



2 Governor General of Canada May 1, 2000 

To Her Excellency, I wish to extend our sincere thanks for your continued work in promoting 
excellence, Canadian unity, and sovereignty both within Canada and abroad. I also wish to thank you for 
honouring us with your presence here today. Your visit will be proudly remembered by all of us, and it 
will serve as an inspiration to all of us in this Assembly as we continue our work in representing our 
constituents and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of the Liberal caucus, again, thank you very much for coming and welcome. 
 
Applause. 
 
The Speaker: — I would now like to call on Mr. Elwin Hermanson, the Hon. Leader of the Official 
Opposition to bring greetings. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your Excellency, Your Honours, Mr. Premier, colleagues 
of the legislature, distinguished guests, everyone: on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, it is my 
distinct honour to welcome Her Excellency, the Governor General to Saskatchewan and to the 
provincial legislature on this beautiful spring afternoon. 
 
As a member of the Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, I would also like to 
thank Her Excellency for visiting the community of Biggar over the weekend. I may be biased, but I 
believe Biggar lies in one of the most beautiful parts of this beautiful province, and I know the people — 
the friendliest in the province — were impressed and excited that you chose to honour them with a visit. 
 
Not enough positive words can be said about the Governor General’s decision to spend so much of her 
time away from Ottawa and instead be out visiting every region of this country. This week alone she’ll 
spend five days in Saskatchewan meeting many, many people and attending many events. And I believe 
this certainly will not be her last visit to this tremendous province. 
 
The Office of Governor General, like the Crown as a whole, is one that links our entire country with our 
history and heritage. I know that our new Governor General will offer ways to link the richness of our 
past with the promise of our future. Hers is a presence that has been with Canadians for many years, 
thanks to her work in journalism. 
 
And I should say at this point that the official opposition office does have something of a personal 
connection with Her Excellency. One of our staff members is the daughter of first generation Canadians 
who, when they immigrated to Canada watched CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) regularly 
and a program called Take Thirty in particular, which Her Excellency hosted at the time. They became 
such fans that they named their daughter Adrienne who now serves as a fine researcher for our caucus. 
 
I suppose we can only be thankful that her parents weren’t such big fans of The Beachcombers or 
Adrienne might have been named after someone like Bruno Gerussi. So on this side of the House we 
have our own reminder of Her Excellency’s obvious love for this country which can be truly inspiring. 
 
So once again on behalf our Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I thank Her Excellency for being here 
today and I wish her well on the remainder of her time in Saskatchewan and as she fulfils the upcoming 
years of her term of office with much grace and dignity. Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I now call upon the Hon. Roy Romanow, Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 



May 1, 2000 Governor General of Canada 3 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Your Excellency, Your Honours, Leader 
of the Opposition, Dr. Melenchuk, Members of the Legislative Assembly, and guests all. It’s pretty hard 
to follow two excellent speeches and add any new thoughts about this very distinguished visit by a very 
distinguished Canadian. A distinguished Canadian whose record of service to this country is now 
well-known and very well-documented. 
 
Receiving her early education in the Ottawa public school system and later Honours B.A. (Bachelor of 
Arts), and an M.A. (Master of Arts) in English literature from the University of Toronto, she did 
post-graduate work at the Sorbonne in France. 
 
Fluently bilingual, Her Excellency has long been a leading figure, as Leader of the Opposition has 
pointed out, in journalism, broadcasting, the arts, and public service, Take Thirty, Fifth Estate — which I 
liked sometimes and sometimes was a little bit worried about — and Adrienne Clarkson Presents. And 
one could on and on about her record, with McClelland & Stewart as president and publisher, the 
Ontario government’s first Agent General in Paris, and serving on the board of trustees of the Canadian 
Museum of Civilization in Hull. But this is just but a flavour of how accomplished . . . and how 
fortunate we are in Canada to have this person representing the monarchy here. 
 
The official visit with stops in Saskatoon, Regina, Biggar — they say, Your Excellency, that New York 
is big, but Biggar is bigger; you probably saw that sign — Gravelbourg, and Wanuskewin Heritage Park, 
is designed to celebrate the strength that Saskatchewan derives from our cultural diversity. 
 
This is a theme to which Her Excellency has dedicated herself in official visits since her installation last 
October. And that is why we are honoured that Her Excellency has noted Saskatchewan’s tolerance and 
diversity by saying, and I quote: “The province has occupied an important place in our collective 
identity as Canadians.” 
 
Excellency, we certainly believe in Saskatchewan and we’re very proud that we have built a tolerant, 
co-operative society. In many ways a model for Canada, if I may say so immodestly; but in many more 
ways, a mirror of a great and tolerant nation reflecting the core values of all Canadians from sea to sea to 
sea. 
 
In particular, we are proud that so many citizens from immigrant backgrounds, as has been noted, have 
been able to raise families and build their futures right here. As Her Excellency has seen during her visit, 
the province is a glorious mosaic of cultures. Throughout its history, Saskatchewan has built upon the 
triangular foundation, Aboriginal, francophone, and anglophone, rightly cited by His Excellency, John 
Ralston Saul, noted academic — we look forward to his visit again to Saskatchewan at an early time — 
rightly noted by John Ralston Saul as a strength of our nation. 
 
To that important and enduring foundation, immigrants have contributed additional strength by having, 
in Her Excellency’s words again, joined the social process — German, Irish, Scandinavian, and even the 
occasional Ukrainian. All have made countless contributions, great and small, to this magnificent 
ongoing social experiment in building communities, including the great community of Saskatchewan 
and the greater community of Canada. 
 
At her installation ceremony, Her Excellency identified that creative experience in these words, and 
again, one more quotation. She said, quote: “Immigrants dreamed their children into being as Canadians 
— dreamed their children into being as Canadians.” 
 
They dreamed of a nation where each of those children would feel included by neighbours who 



4 Governor General of Canada May 1, 2000 

welcomed their contributions and forgave their shortcomings. We all recognize that we have work to do 
in achieving that ideal completely, but we can be proud that so many, this great nation has indeed made 
that dream come true for them. And much of the credit must go to a succession of Governors General 
who have used the institution to encourage all that is best about our country and our citizens. 
 
Former Governor General Edward Schreyer at his installation described how Governors Generals and 
the office in his judgment should function. He said: 
 

They’ve symbolized for Canadians the stability and continuity of national life and institutions so 
necessary to any cohesive civilization. This need is all the greater in a society whose very essence is 
the diversity of its culture and the vastness of its geography in the society that is Canada. 
 

Well I know that Her Excellency has pledged to use her office to not only continue but to expand that 
important work to bring Canadians together. She also said to Canadians at her installation: 
 

We want to meet as many of you as we can, where you work and where you live. 
 

Her Excellency has certainly lived up to that pledge in a gruelling seven first months of her tenure with a 
touring schedule that would probably even exhaust the Rolling Stones. They have met Canadians where 
they live and work, and reminded Canadians of the many ideals that we share. 
 
So we’re proud and honoured, Your Excellency, that you have come to this noble experiment and effort 
called Saskatchewan. We wish you all the very best of luck, and Godspeed in the future. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Applause. 
 
The Speaker: — I would now like to introduce the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Her Honour, 
the Hon. Dr. Lynda Haverstock. 
 
Her Honour Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock: — Your Excellency, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, ministers of 
the Crown, Dr. Melenchuk, Mr. Hermanson, members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies and 
gentlemen, boys and girls. 
 
Each of us have days remarkable enough in their circumstance that they become forever etched in our 
memories. September 8, 1999 is now such a date for millions of Canadians. This was the moment we 
learned that for the first time in Canadian history a person of neither founding nation would assume the 
highest position in our land. An individual for whom northerners, westerners, Maritimers, and central 
Canadians alike have felt such deep affection that they long ago claimed her as one of their own. 
 
The appointment of Adrienne Clarkson as the nation’s 26th Governor General brought collective joy and 
pride to all of us, and with justification. She’s a profoundly distinct person of incomparable depth, 
intelligence, talent, and insight. I think that her record deserves repeating, so please indulge me. 
 
She attained the highest of academic excellence at the University of Toronto and the Sorbonne in 
France, and has distinguished herself in broadcasting, writing, and producing. An accomplished author, 
she has written three books and was even president and publisher of McClelland and Stewart. 
 
She devoted herself to public life as the Agent General for Ontario in Paris, has been chairwoman of the 
board of trustees of the Canadian Museum of Civilization, as well as president of the executive board of 



May 1, 2000 Governor General of Canada 5 

the international audio-visual association of music, dance and cultural programmers, which is based in 
Vienna. 
 
Her Excellency holds honorary doctorates from five Canadian universities, as well as three honorary 
academic distinctions, and was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1992. 
 
It is true that I’ve merely skimmed the surface of her extraordinary achievements. Perhaps more 
important than credentials, however, is to acknowledge her tremendous humanity and commitment to 
the dignity of all Canadians and to say how blessed we are to be the beneficiaries of her intense love for 
and understanding of our country. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Her Excellency the Rt. Hon. Adrienne Clarkson, our Governor General of 
Canada. 
 
Applause. 
 
Her Honour the Right Honourable Adrienne Clarkson, Governor General of Canada: — Your 
Honours, Premier, Speaker, Ministers, Members of the Legislature, Distinguished Guests, Girls and 
Boys, Mesdames et Messieurs: 
 
I am so pleased to be here in this historic Legislature today, one of the most beautiful in Canada, which 
proves really that “a pile of bones” can be a lovely thing. I remember the two statues of Sir John A. 
MacDonald and Sir Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine that you have here. They were both instrumental forces 
in the founding of our country and they showed the best that we could be – a Conservative and a Liberal 
— and after years of fighting, Sir John A. referred to Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine as that great and good 
statesman. And I remember those statues because I think they make a link between us. There are six 
statues by the same artist, Louis-Philippe Hébert, outside the Quebec National Assembly; and there is 
one at the Governor General’s residence at the Citadelle in Quebec, where, when I stay, I see all the time 
in my living room. It is of Sir Wilfrid Laurier. 
 
As many of my friends here know, I have been here often to Saskatchewan – last year as the James N. 
Minifie lecturer at the University of Regina, and the first time at the very beginning of my CBC TV 
career, some 400 years ago, when I tracked back and forth from the studio in Moose Jaw to Regina and 
was treated to a golden wheat sheaf pin by Mayor Henry Baker and a showing of Morris and Jacqui 
Shumiatcher’s collection of Inuit art. So you can see that right from the start, that first visit, I came to 
realize that Saskatchewan was a complicated place with a captivating and highly differentiated cast of 
characters playing their part in the unfolding story of this province and of our country. 
 
My husband John Ralston Saul has been here very frequently, speaking to many people, and is really 
very sorry that he couldn’t be with me for this, my official visit to Saskatchewan. He is, you could have 
guessed, writing. A year and a half ago though, we spent ten days on vacation here, driving to 
Diefenbaker country because we’d never seen it, to see that amazing little office in Wakaw, to Prince 
Albert and to the Diefenbaker Museum in Saskatoon. On the way there, we spent two days at Lake 
Manitou bobbing around the heated indoor bathing pool, enjoying conversations with the other bobbers, 
some of whom were German tourists who couldn’t believe their luck at finding this wonderful resort at 
such bargain prices! Friendliness and openness were so palpable in that place. 
 
And I was particularly anxious on that visit to see Maple Grove farm at Rosthern where spring wheat 
was first grown so successfully because I did an assignment in Grade Nine geography at Lisgar 
Collegiate in Ottawa on the contribution of Marquis wheat to the development of Canada and the 



6 Governor General of Canada May 1, 2000 

opening of the West. And I’d always been fascinated by the story of Seager Wheeler and how he, not a 
trained agricultural specialist, worked out what could grow and what could not in this climate. Stephen 
Leacock wrote, as you know “God said, ‘Let there be wheat’ – and there was Saskatchewan.” The fertile 
tranquility of that farm will always stay with me. 
 
And then we went on to Duck Lake and Batoche, walking through the movements of that last battle, 
which my husband described so well in his book, imagining Dumont and Riel and the government 
forces, fatally clashing. Tragically, the number of men killed then is almost the total number of people 
killed in civil conflict in the whole history of Canada. 
 
Your land here is rich in history, rich with visions, and with the mysterious. There is land here, as 
Sharon Butala has so poignantly stated in The Perfection of the Morning, her beautiful book about the 
Cypress Hills, that has never been plowed, which stays as it had been when the Aboriginal peoples 
roamed and hunted. And because of this, many of you are truly rural people, and this must make you 
proud. You are the kind of people that Butala describes as “born and raised on the land, outside of 
towns, and far from most other people . . . And it follows that such life experience must result in an 
intrinsic understanding of the world different from that of someone raised in the cement, asphalt, glass 
and crowds of the city. [A rural person’s] starting point is Nature”. 
 
And the Great Plains where the land is seemingly limitless has contributed to Canada’s collective 
psyche. It is the generous and spacious opening for all of our souls. As Butala says, “this landscape is so 
huge that our imaginations can’t contain or outstrip it – sky and land, that is all, and grass and what 
Nature leaves bare the human psyche fills.” I certainly felt that yesterday as we drove from Saskatoon to 
Biggar, across some of the most beautiful country I think you have here that is Plains. I know you have 
other that’s Precambrian but that is certainly one of the most beautiful, especially at this time of year 
with the sloughs and the ducks and the spring green coming out on the trees. 
 
Votre âme demeure enracinée dans la Nature et votre histoire est celle d’une société constituée de 
centaines de petites communautés. En fin de semaine, j’ai visité la communauté huttérienne de Baildon, 
qui est pour moi un exemple de ce qu’est la vie collective à son meilleur, fournissant à ses habitants une 
vie valable et remplie d’amour et un esprit de voisinage ouvert et bienveillant. Vous avez de la chance 
de bénéficier de la présence des Huttérites en Saskatchewan, parce que cela vous rappelle l’importance 
de cette tradition de laisser les gens libres de vivre à leur guise. 
 
Your soul is still rooted in Nature here and your background is a society built on hundreds of small 
communities. On the weekend I visited the Hutterite community of Baildon. The Hutterites are people 
for whom I’ve always had a great interest, curiosity. And it was an example to me after I had spent the 
day there, of collective living in a unique way providing a loving and purposeful life for its inhabitants, 
and an open and caring neighbourliness. You are fortunate to have the Hutterites among you in 
Saskatchewan, because it is a reminder for all of you of the value of tradition, on one hand, and of 
freedom to let everyone be what they are, on the other. 
 
In Gravelbourg, the intensity and passion of the Franco-Saskatchewan community for the survival of 
their language and culture is a moving tribute to their tenacity and to the history and role of the Catholic 
Church in the early days of education when this province was so young. The cathedral, the former 
convent, the library built of historic Claybank brick will stand as memorial to another kind of collective 
dream. 
 
Much of the population is on the move off the farms to larger communities. We are all aware that there 
is a farming crisis now. Three farmers from Saskatchewan came to see me recently in Ottawa at Rideau 



May 1, 2000 Governor General of Canada 7 

Hall and I heard about their problems first hand with great frankness. And life is not easy for the family 
farm. The reality is that rural change is huge. Yesterday in Biggar I spoke with a group of young 4-H 
people and was struck by how resigned they were to the fact that they would have to leave the place that 
they are from; with reluctance, they feel they’ll have to leave the family farm to which they are 
committed, which they love, where they’ve learned to do all the things that farm people do and likely 
go, not only off the farm, but to another province. All of us as Canadians must try to understand this 
disturbing change and the profound effect it will have on our young people and their futures. This has 
been a tremendous shift in the last fifty years, and one which provides all of you with a challenge, not 
just to passively adapt, but to seize the opportunity to re-create what you have, what is yours, Aboriginal 
and newcomer alike. 
 
As Gerry Friesen, the great historian of the West says in his book The West, “There is a shared past of 
economic and political co-operation between Aboriginal and Métis on one hand and European 
Canadians, that still, after a century of mistakes, carries significant purpose and lasting value.” If 
demographers are correct, roughly one-third of your population will be of Aboriginal descent in ten 
years, and this will inevitably be a social catalyst of the first order. It implies more initiatives, many 
more, like Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. It will give a strong sense of cultural energy. If 
significant purpose and lasting value mean something, this shift could be an energizing fact in your 
cooperative history. 
 
Not that Saskatchewan is lacking in all kinds of cultural power and diversity. Out of all proportion, your 
writers and artists have made their impact on the modern Canadian scene in unprecedented numbers. 
Guy Vanderhaege, David Carpenter, Sandra Birdsell, Maggie Siggins, Gail Bowen, Joe Fafard, to name 
only a few, have contributed to classical fiction and non-fiction, detective novels, painting and sculpture. 
They have taken the spirit of this place and transformed it into art that communicates and resonates with 
the rest of Canada. It’s not just that they win critical acclaim and prizes. It’s because they speak and 
construct out of a deep sense of place. A place part Prairie, part Precambrian Shield. 
 
I’ve certainly felt this for the last four days as I’ve driven around your province. It is a place where, as 
Wallace Stegner writes in his great Saskatchewan classic, Wolf Willow, “Roads run straight between 
parallel lines of fence until they intersect the circle of the horizon. It is a landscape of circles, 
perspective exercises -- a country of geometry . . . It is a long way from characterless; ‘overpowering’ 
would be a better word. For over the segmented circle of earth is domed the biggest sky anywhere, 
which on [certain] days sheds down on range, wheat and summer fallow a light to send a painter wild, a 
light pure, glareless and transparent. The horizon a dozen miles away is as clean a line as the nearest 
fence . . . Across the immense sky move clouds, their bottoms as even as if they had scraped themselves 
flat against the flat earth. 
 
You resonate with all the people who have had different relationships to the land, who are part of a 
transformation from rural to urban, who have inherited the result of Saskatchewan’s innovation in 
providing co-operative solutions to matters of the public good. 
 
You have always had a strong and open society here because as Stegner says, “The very scale, the 
hugeness of simple forms, emphasizes stability. It is not hills and mountains which we should call 
eternal. Nature abhors an elevation as much as it abhors a vacuum; a hill is no sooner elevated than the 
forces of erosion tear it down. These prairies are quiescent, close to static; looked at for any length of 
time, they begin to impose their awesome imperfection on the observer’s mind. Eternity is a plain. 
Saskatchewan by its seemingly immense horizon, psychological and physical, draws all our 
imaginations to a larger space and all your activities, cultural, social and democratic, enhance us all as 
Canadians, as part of the ever-enlarging circle that Aboriginal people have always offered to 



8 Governor General of Canada May 1, 2000 

newcomers. This is the real promise of being Canadian and this is what Saskatchewan helps to do for all 
of us. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Applause. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Excellency. I would now like to call on the Hon. Roy Romanow, our 
Premier, to make a presentation on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my great honour on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to invite Her Excellency to accept a gift 
from the province. And I might add, at the request of Her Excellency, this gift will turn out to be a 
donation on her behalf to the Chili for Children program. 
 
The Governor General’s support of a local charity is a very appropriate and generous gesture and I 
believe that all of us in this Assembly share her compassion and concern for children. And we’re all 
delighted that such an innovative charity can share the benefit of Her Excellency’s visit. 
 
Applause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Accepting the gift on behalf of Chili for Children and the organization is Ms. 
Shelley Lavallee, the president of Chili for Children. 
 
Applause. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to, at this point in time, sincerely thank 
all our guests for being here for this ceremony today. There are too many of you here to name 
individually, however there are a few acknowledgements that I would like to make and I believe are in 
order. 
 
Your Excellency, we are very, very proud of our Canadian Armed Forces reservists in Saskatchewan, 
and I want to thank the guard of honour made up of Saskatchewan reservists from the Canadian forces. 
The 21-gun salute was fired by 10 Field Regiment from the Royal Canadian Artillery, and I want to 
thank each and every one of you for participating in this momentous event and on this occasion. Thank 
you all. 
 
I also want to thank the Lions Band under the direction of Michael Alstad. I thank you very much on 
behalf of everyone that’s here. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, immediately after the singing of O Canada, please remain standing for the 
departure of the viceregal and official party. 
 
At the conclusion of the ceremony as well, there will be music in the rotunda provided by the Lions 
Band. I invite everyone here present today to join us for tea, which will be served in the rotunda and 
room 218 in the west corridor. 
 
And now, ladies and gentlemen, I would ask you to rise and join us in singing our national anthem. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


