





























































Hansard: May 08, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1059 
 May 8, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
signed by the people from Prud’homme, Vonda, and basically 
in that area of our province. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
petitions from citizens from the Bruno area as well as Peterson; 
and these petitioners are asking for reliable cellular coverage in 
their areas. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today for a cellular coverage for Watson and area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from Watson, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And this is signed, this petition is signed by people from Unity 
and Kerrobert area. Thank you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current concerned about their hospital. And the 
prayer could be summarized as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 

Current Regional Hospital. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents in the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signed by the good people from Melfort. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Davidson and Bladworth. I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and provincial 
governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes by 10 cents a 
litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
The petitioners are from St. Gregor, Humboldt, Bruno, and 
Englefeld. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Before proceeding to introduction of guests, 
hon. members, by other members of the House, with leave of 
your hon. members, the Chair would like to introduce to you a 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

large delegation who are currently seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. There are 22 teachers from across Saskatchewan — 22 
social sciences teachers plus people from the Department of 
Education who are here for the second annual Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. 
 
I am pleased to offer our teachers the opportunity to experience 
and appreciate our system of government. When they return to 
their classrooms, they will assist their students to understand 
and participate in the democratic process. The ultimate benefit 
will be to our future leaders, the students of today. 
 
Many of you here, hon. members, are scheduled to have direct 
contact with these teachers over the next couple of days as they 
meet with you face to face to discuss the practice of the 
institution and how you apply it. 
 
They have already met with the Lieutenant Governor, the 
Speaker, the Clerks, among others. They will be meeting with 
the House leaders, with the Chairs, the whips, the deputy 
ministers, and ministers in the next two and a half days. 
 
The teachers will be completing an assignment to develop new 
units of study and lesson plans based on their learning 
experiences here at the legislature. Saskatchewan Education is 
working with them and will post these lesson plans on their web 
site so that these resources are available to all teachers in the 
province. 
 
Hon. members of the House, ladies and gentlemen of the 
House, I ask you to show your appreciation for their efforts, for 
the efforts of our teachers who are teaching the future leaders of 
our province. Please extend a warm welcome from the members 
of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank you, hon. members. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition we’d like to welcome the 22 social science 
teachers here. 
 
We all appreciate the work that these teachers do for our 
students, work that always extends beyond the hours, the 
classroom hours; we know that. The institution here that you’re 
taking is going to be beneficial not only for your own personal 
development but also for the students, I’m sure. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we welcome you here. 
And we’ll look forward to meeting with you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with 
yourself and with the members opposite in welcoming the 
social science teachers here this afternoon. And they’ll be here 
tomorrow I understand. 
 
And just to add to what has been said by yourself, the teachers’ 
institute is the second annual, and has the support of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association; the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; the League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents; the 
Saskatchewan Council of Social Studies; and Saskatchewan 
Education. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me again in welcoming them to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure through you and the to the members of the 
House, to introduce three guests who are with us today. His 
Excellency Dirk Jan Van Houten, the ambassador from the 
Netherlands; the consul general of the Netherlands, Mr. 
Verdegaal; and the honorary consul of the Netherlands, Mr. De 
Lint. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, and as members will know, there’s 
a very strong relationship between Canada and the Netherlands 
going back to, not only the fight against tyranny in the last war, 
but also the fact that Queen Juliana was in Canada during most 
of that time. 
 
As a Member of Parliament, and my colleague the Leader of the 
Opposition will know this too, we saw the tulips come up in 
Ottawa at this time of year — a reminder of that very close 
relationship between our two countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador is here to visit a number of 
commercial activities with links to the Netherlands here in 
Saskatchewan. And I’d ask all members of the House to 
welcome them to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the members opposite to also welcome the 
ambassador and guests from the Netherlands. I think our 
countries have a number of things that we have in common, and 
the attributes that we saw just lately that the Netherlands has 
done towards our past-serving armed forces and others, I think 
draws our countries closer together. 
 
So we would also like to welcome them here today and hope 
their stay is very enjoyable in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
welcome the guests from the Netherlands, and if I may, direct a 
few words in Dutch. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women Entrepreneurs’ Week 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today in recognition of the great 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

advancements being made by women entrepreneurs in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is becoming more and more common for 
women to be CEOs (chief executive officer) of companies and 
of large corporations, and starting their own businesses in 
record numbers. 
 
I know from experience that an entrepreneur is someone who 
makes their own opportunities, someone who is willing to take 
risks, and someone who is prepared to say, I can, when others 
say, I can’t do that. 
 
Women are having great success in many non-traditional fields 
despite serious obstacles that they have had to face for a long 
time. Women are not only dedicated workers, they are also 
great risk takers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the members opposite the 
very best way to create opportunities in the workforce for 
women is to unshackle the Saskatchewan economy from the 
restrictive taxation and allow the real job creators to go to work. 
I think they’ll be pleasantly surprised to see how many of those 
people would be women. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
wish to rise and recognize Women Entrepreneurs’ Week. 
 
As the hon. member across the way has just stated that starting 
last Friday, this week of May 5 through 11 is Women 
Entrepreneurs’ Week in Saskatchewan. This week allows all of 
us the opportunity to acknowledge the impact that women 
entrepreneurs have on our economy, and to recognize that 
women are an increasingly driving force in our provincial 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women are making significant contributions to 
this province’s economy. Women are starting their businesses at 
approximately twice the rate of their male counterparts. In 
Saskatchewan, women own about one-quarter of all businesses 
and employ nearly 90,000 people, Mr. Speaker. More and more 
women are becoming involved in non-traditional fields such as 
manufacturing and wholesale trade. 
 
This week’s activities kicked off with the annual conference of 
Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. Over the 
past five years, Women Entrepreneurs have provided business 
information to more than 12,000 women and lent more than $3 
million to new and existing businesses. 
 
I wish to congratulate the organizers of the annual conference 
for encouraging women entrepreneurs and making it possible 
for women entrepreneurs to meet and discuss important, 
business-related issues. I also wish to congratulate the women 
entrepreneurs themselves who are becoming a dynamic force in 
Saskatchewan and helping to grow businesses right across our 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Aboriginal Recruits Graduate Today 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to congratulate 20 
Aboriginal recruits who are graduating from the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) academy today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these recruits have gone through months of 
strenuous and extensive training, and today they will be 
recognized for all of their hard work. These new constables 
should be commended for their dedication to upholding the law 
and promoting peace in our land, and they can be very proud 
that they will be representing their communities in a very 
honourable profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the recruits are from Saskatchewan and they 
will be posted to RCMP detachments across the province. And 
it is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate all of them on 
their tremendous accomplishment and wish them the best of 
luck in their new appointments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Development in Wynyard 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
inform the House today, especially the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, regarding some good news coming out 
of rural Saskatchewan. The town of Wynyard has an excess of 
jobs and big businesses booming in the community. The mayor 
of Wynyard recently stated that they have more jobs than 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is due to the expansion of the Lilydale Foods 
operation. Lilydale Foods is a poultry processing facility that 
supplies the community with nearly 500 jobs. In fact 83 new 
jobs were created last year alone. Anticipating continued 
growth, the town of Wynyard has long-term projects in the 
works such as a trailer court, apartment block, and water well 
development. 
 
Wynyard’s current boom and success is a result of successful 
planning and partnership by its citizens. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to congratulate the citizens of Wynyard and Lilydale Foods 
on another success story in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year I had the 
privilege of attending the fourth annual Youth Business 
Excellence Awards in North Battleford. The Northwest 
Community Futures Development Corporation sponsors the 
YBEX awards which were established in 1997 to encourage 
entrepreneurship education in regional high schools and to 
bring attention to the resourcefulness of young people in 
northwest Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time I would like to recognize this year’s winners.  
 
In business plan: individual — first place, Melody Hildebrandt 
from North Battleford; second, Brandi Tiringer from 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

Spiritwood High, and Jordan McQuaid from North Battleford. 
Group — first, Scott Maunulua and Jason Head from Alexander 
Junior High; second place, Mellin Morin, Nerrin Cameron, 
Marvin Chamakese, Brennon Thomas, and Curtis Bear from the 
Agency Chiefs Tribal Council Youth Group. 
 
Business venture: individual — first, Joe Desrosier from 
Spiritwood High School; second, Adam Baier from Macklin 
School. 
 
Special achievement: service innovation — Micky Allchurch 
from Spiritwood High School; creativity — Sarah Redman 
from Moosomin School; youth leadership — Miranda 
Onofriechuck; business plan development — Melody 
Hildebrandt from North Battleford; and product innovation — 
Brianne Baranieski from Hafford Central High. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the accomplishments of these 
creative young business people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chili for Children Annual FundRaising Dinner 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that we’ve 
made great strides in reducing child poverty, however child 
hunger is still an unfortunate problem in our society that 
everyone must strive to overcome. Feeding our children is 
unquestionably one of the most important responsibilities of our 
society. 
 
The individuals and organizations that attempt to alleviate child 
hunger should not go unnoticed. Chili for Children in Regina 
has been meeting this need by providing hot, nutritional meals 
three times a week at various schools and community centres in 
the city for over the past six years. It is an innovating and 
pioneering program that has attracted national and international 
attention because one, Theresa Stevenson, saw a need, Mr. 
Speaker, and did something about it. 
 
This past Friday night Chili for Children held its annual dinner 
to raise funds and to assist the effort in operating this hot lunch 
program. This event also honoured many volunteers and 
supporters who helped make the program a huge success. 
Without these people it would be difficult for the program to 
operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a direct link between the well-being of 
children and the prosperity of our nation. And by feeding 
children we are making our province, our community, a better 
place for all of us to live. That is why our government launched 
the successful Action Plan for Children in 1993, and has 
continued to add to that plan each and every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, programs like Chili for Children are helping to 
make Saskatchewan a better community and a better place for 
all of us to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oil and Gas Industry 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance 

and the member for Regina Dewdney were trying to get on 
Swift Current local radio last Friday, denying that the reversal 
the opposition got from this government last week regarding the 
PST (provincial sales tax) in the oil and gas industry was 
nothing new, that it had been decided prior to the budget. 
 
If this is true, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to ask who 
other than the minister and the member knew about this? Not 
the local Saskatchewan oil and gas businesses. They were busy 
getting conflicting daily answers from the minister’s toll-free 
PST line, 1-800-your-guess-is-as-good-as-mine. 
 
If they knew of this fact, as the minister claims they should 
have, why were so many of these companies charging the PST 
on their April invoices? How about the industry association? 
Did they know? Well, I’m holding a bulletin from the CAODC 
(Canadian Association of Oilwell Drilling Contractors) to its 
members dated April 27 advising their members to charge the 
PST on everything, based on a lack of information from this 
government. 
 
In point of fact, it seems that the only people in Saskatchewan 
that knew of this clarification was the Minister of Finance, 
perhaps a few psychics in the province, and the member for 
Regina Dewdney — that vortex of power and influence in the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus. 
 
But at least the Energy minister had the courage, the next day in 
estimates, to stand and apologize to the industry for this 
miscommunication. The Minister of Finance and the member 
for Regina Dewdney should do the very same thing. I am 
certain the industry will stifle their laughter at this government 
long enough to accept that apology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yeltsin Democracy Fellowship Program 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to inform the 
legislature about a fellowship program that since 1992 has 
benefited our world. 
 
The Yeltsin Democracy Fellowship Program was set up by 
government co-operation involving Canada, Italy, Germany, 
and Russia. The Canadian portion of funding came from the 
Canadian International Development Agency in the form of a 
trust fund from which the earned interest only is used to fund 
travel and participation expenses. 
 
The democracy fellowship program was set up to help Russia 
shift to a market economy. To accomplish this young, bright, 
well-educated business people come to Canada, Italy, and 
Germany from Russia. While the fellowship program helps shift 
Russia to a market economy, we all benefit in many ways. 
 
First, Saskatchewan businesses are taking their share of the 
world’s work. Secondly, Saskatchewan exporting companies 
earn a better understanding of how things work in Russia. 
Thirdly, Saskatchewan companies enjoy cultural benefits from 
the exchange. And finally, businesses like Supreme Office 
Products get completely fresh ideas and eyes looking at their 
companies. Congratulations to Supreme Office Products and to 
Ekaterina Pavlova who is sharing this week with Supreme 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

Office Products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Trade Unions in the Construction Industry 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. 
 
First the NDP tried to give us forced amalgamation; now they 
are giving us forced unionization. 
 
Madam Minister, the construction industry is calling your 
proposed labour legislation — that one to replace the Crown 
Corporation Tendering Agreement — repugnant. They say it’s 
worse than your union preference tendering policy. They say it 
will undermine the stability of an industry that has been strike 
free for 20 years. They say you are fixing a problem that simply 
doesn’t exist. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you bringing in this forced 
unionization policy that nobody wants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As much 
as I’d like to agree with the member that we are on the 
innovative front of labour law, I’d have to say that this law is 
the same as it is in every other province in Canada. And the fact 
of the matter is that very recently the Harris government did a 
three-month consultation on changing their labour Bill and have 
decided to leave it as it is, in keeping with the amendments 
we’re proposing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, under the proposed law, if the NDP’s hand-picked 
Labour Relations Board decides double breasting is occurring, 
the non-union employees will be immediately unionized. They 
will be forced to pay union dues. This will be with no vote and 
no signing of union cards. No one’s going to ask the employees 
if they want to join the union — just bang, you’re in the union 
whether you like it or not. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you bring in a law that will force 
workers into a union without even giving them a vote? How is 
that possibly democratic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all I should clarify to the member opposite why there is a 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act. And unlike the 
public sector or other employers where people tend to be 
employed for long periods of time, in the construction industry 
people come and go according to projects. So it’s not the 
employee that is unionized in that same sense, it’s the employer 
that becomes certified and then that employer is then a 
unionized employer. Now no employee is forced to join an 
employer that hasn’t become unionized through an appropriate 

certification process. 
 
And as to the members of the Labour Relations Board being 
hand-picked, I wish I had such powers; but the fact of the 
matter is they are nominated by the employer and then the 
employee organizations, and all we do is endorse their choices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know I 
think it’s pretty clear to everyone why the minister is doing this. 
There’s a real conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker, over on the 
other side of the House. Last year the NDP got nearly $300,000 
from the unions. Mr. Speaker, that’s a conflict of interest. 
That’s why they want a forced unionization policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a political payoff to the union leaders who 
funded their election campaign. Mr. Speaker, it has nothing to 
do with good policy, it has nothing to do with labour peace, it 
has everything to do — everything to do — with paying off the 
union leaders who gave big bucks to the NDP. 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t you just leave well enough alone 
and drop your forced unionization policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the questions are 
getting better and better. I enjoy this. In fact in the interests of 
accountability I’ll disclose even more than that. 
 
I’ve been supported by teachers, I’ve been supported by nurses, 
I’ve been supported by small business people, I’ve been 
supported by people in the arts. In fact I would be hard pressed 
to find a segment of my constituency where I haven’t at least 
received some portion of support. So the fact that there is some 
unions that also support me would suggest that they believe in 
democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yes, 
the NDP got about $300,000 last year from the unions and now 
they’re bringing in forced unionization. We believe that’s a 
conflict of interest. But furthermore, the Minister of Labour had 
about a quarter of her campaign funded by the unions, and now 
she’s the one that’s bringing in forced unionization. We believe 
that’s a conflict of interest. 
 
Madam Minister, the construction industry is telling you they 
do not want this Bill. Hundreds of workers — workers — have 
written you and told you that they don’t want this Bill either but 
you’re pushing it through anyway. Why are you doing this? As 
a political payoff to the people who funded your campaign? 
Madam Minister, will you drop this forced unionization Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that 
there are people in this legislature today that are embarrassed 
that Conrad Black would give a political donation to the party 
opposite, but I’m not going to probe too deeply into that 
because the problem with that kind of a donation is quite 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

self-evident. 
 
The other comment I might make is that only 20 per cent of the 
industry in this province is unionized, and these folks are 
representing this as some kind of an overwhelming situation. 
 
So I think I would just have to say that I don’t share the 
members opposite’s views. And if he has some problem with 
laws that are the same as every other province in Canada, then 
perhaps he should explain why he thinks our laws should be 
different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find the logic of 
the minister particularly confusing because everyone who 
supports the Saskatchewan Party does so of their own free will. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you want to know why the NDP is doing 
this, just follow the money. The unions, the unions take their 
money from their members — it’s called union dues — and 
then they give some of that money to the NDP, whether their 
members support the NDP or not. 
 
So forced unionization equals, equals more union members — 
the Deputy Premier likes this — more union dues, and that’s 
what this is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, there are a lot of people who are starting to . . . who 
are withdrawing their voluntary support of the NDP so the NDP 
has to start extracting more money from people who have no 
say whatsoever in the matter. 
 
Madam Minister, isn’t that the real motive behind your forced 
unionization Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe a 
small history lesson would be in order. 
 
We have had the same laws in this province since 1944. This is 
not something new and unusual. The right of people to be 
democratically represented if they choose by the representative 
body of their choice has been a fundamental part of the 
economic agreement for many years in this province and in 
every other province. 
 
If this member opposite is suggesting that they would like to 
change the rules, that’s certainly a legitimate public debate we 
can have. But democracy has been around for a long time, and 
it’s alive and well in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Contracts 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government’s 
idea of choice is about as free as a turkey’s choice at 
Thanksgiving. And I know a lot of those unions give about as 
readily as the turkey does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister responsible for 

SaskEnergy. Last week, Mr. Speaker, we accused the NDP of 
building a $114 million natural gas pipeline that this province 
didn’t need. But the minister said the pipeline was an excellent 
investment and was turning a profit for SaskEnergy. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you built your $114 million pipeline in 
1995 — more than two cold winters ago — but the 
SaskEnergy’s revenues in gas transmission volumes have both 
fallen every year since that pipeline was built, and yet you keep 
on insisting that that pipeline is turning a profit. 
 
Can you explain that, Mr. Minister? How is it possible that your 
$114 million pipeline is turning a profit when SaskEnergy’s 
revenues and transmission volumes have actually fallen every 
year since then? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said last week and I’ll 
say again, we’re very proud of this corporation that provides 
fair, reasonable, and lowest natural gas prices in Canada. They 
go into projects — as I said before — on the basis that they’ll 
provide a return over the length of the investment. This is a 
30-year investment. 
 
What we know is that the original plan was for a return of 
around 15 per cent. Right now the return is 11 per cent. We 
know that the return, as set out in Alberta, is 9.9 per cent. We’re 
ahead of that. And so I basically would say is that we will 
continue to work with this corporation to provide the lowest 
natural gas prices in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
could do a whole lot better for the people of Saskatchewan if he 
hadn’t built that pipeline and put that money toward the rates 
that the people of this particular province pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy 
again. You explained last week how SaskEnergy had what you 
described as solid commitments from natural gas suppliers to 
use your pipeline before you built it in 1995. 
 
But as it turns out, there were no new commitments. As it turns 
out, the new contract SaskEnergy negotiated with gas 
companies came with a back door bailout clause. So when the 
natural gas market took at dive in ’95 — that’s the year you 
built that pipeline — the gas companies used these gaping holes 
to bail out. 
 
No new gas for SaskEnergy; no new revenues for SaskEnergy. 
In fact just about the only new thing from SaskEnergy was this 
pipeline and its . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Kindly go to your question, hon. 
member. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, will you confirm that the 
demand transfer agreement in the contracts you signed in 1995 
allowed gas companies to walk away from their gas 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

commitments and left taxpayers holding that bag? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the natural gas 
transportation business, there are the contract non-renewal 
clauses. I have a press release in front of me dated May 4, 2000 
— TransCanada Pipeline announces that they received contract 
non-renewals of 1.1 billion cubic feet per day. 
 
Today’s paper this morning says the pipeline lobby group from 
Alberta has gone to the National Energy Board and said, we 
need some better rates of return because of the contract 
non-renewals. What we do know is that some of the major 
competitors of SaskEnergy are having some difficulty around 
the transportation rates that are allowed to them. 
 
What we know about our SaskEnergy corporation is that their 
rate of return of 11 per cent around this pipeline is very 
reasonable. And we’re very pleased that they’re working and 
doing things in a way that will provide our consumers with the 
lowest natural gas prices . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
if you hadn’t built that pipeline, your return on your investment 
would be between 25 to 30 per cent instead of your measly 11 
per cent. So it’s just a bad deal on your part. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s only one way to get to the bottom of this. 
Table those documents. We’d like you to table those contracts. 
Table your policy regarding the transfer of demand, and table 
the transmission log dating back to before this pipeline was 
built. Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we’re 
getting a very reasonable return on this pipeline. 
 
What I would say is that our export toll prices for our 
Saskatchewan producers are 25 per cent less than those prices 
in Alberta. This provides us with the lowest transportation costs 
. . . rates for our customers in all of Western Canada. We’re 
going to continue to provide that rate. Right now the rate in 
Alberta is 30 cents per million cubic feet; in Saskatchewan it’s 
24 cents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well now the 
minister is taking credit for low gas rates throughout the whole 
continent. Maybe that’s why our rates in Saskatchewan aren’t 
as low as they could be. Had you had better contracts, we would 
have done better on it. 
 
Mr. Minister, of course you don’t want to table those 
documents — because they will show that you blew $114 
million. The contracts will show you made a bad deal. The 
transmission logs will show the only way that you are meeting 
the new commitments on this new pipeline is by slashing the 
transmission on your other pipelines, the ones you had in 
existence that were adequate. These documents will show your 
incompetence, your mismanagement, the fact that you did really 

blow 114 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure Ron Clark is listening intently right now. 
Will you tell him to come right over here, bring those contracts, 
bring the transmission logs, and bring your transfer of demand 
policy so that you can table them in the House, and we can see 
what money you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to have 
confidence in our people at SaskEnergy. They have provided us 
with the lowest natural gas rates last year, and we’re very 
confident that they will continue to provide us with very, very 
good service. 
 
When this pipeline was built, the industry came and said we 
will not drill in that part of Saskatchewan unless we have some 
way of getting the natural gas to the market. And the net effect 
was that there was a lot of drilling in those years. As everybody 
knows, the North American energy market price for natural gas 
dropped in the years after that. But even with that drop there 
was a continued line of earnings for SaskEnergy. 
 
The net effect of actually having that pipeline was that many of 
our Saskatchewan producers were able to use Saskatchewan gas 
at very reasonable rates. We were very pleased that SaskEnergy 
continues to provide very low rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What an amazing 
bit of logic. Because now he tells us that the problems that exist 
that the transmission is down is because the price is down. Well 
I think the consumers of Saskatchewan just realized that their 
gas prices have gone up. So you need to put those two ideas 
together. But it hasn’t caught on over there that when the prices 
go down and then they go back up and your transmission is still 
down, something is drastically wrong — it’s drastically wrong. 
 
You were blackmailed, Mr. Minister, you were blackmailed by 
those producers telling you they wouldn’t ship down your 
pipeline unless you built a new 20-inch pipeline. Those old 
pipelines, Mr. Minister, are still below capacity — still below 
capacity. 
 
Will you table those documents that we need — the 
transmission logs, the agreements, and the transfer agreements 
— so that we know the amount that you really lost on that, the 
$114 million boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy continues to 
provide the lowest natural gas prices in Canada, and they will 
continue to do that for the foreseeable future. What we do know 
is that they continue to expand their pipeline system, including 
this pipeline that they built in ’95, so that they can get the gas 
from the natural gas fields in Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan 
consumers, also to transport that gas out of the province. 
 
All of these decisions are made within the overall industry. 
What we know today is that many of the people who are 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

competitors of theirs are looking for better rates of return 
because they can’t make their companies work at the rates of 
return they’re getting. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are making our company work, providing 
a return to the people, and providing lowest gas prices in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Funding of Film Festival 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the Queer City Film 
Festival begins today in Regina. The screenings of the 
pornographic films, as they are described by the festival 
organizers, are scheduled for this Friday evening. 
 
The film and video classification regulations raise many 
questions about whether or not these films can legally be shown 
in this province. Last week the minister admitted the films had 
not been classified for showing in Saskatchewan, but he said 
they’d be sent off for that purpose. 
 
Mr. Minister, when can we expect to hear the classifications 
given by these films by the BC (British Columbia) Film Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the member knows and as she says, the BC Film 
Classification Board assists Saskatchewan with classifying 
videos and movies. Those 11 questionable movies, Mr. 
Speaker, are before the BC Film Classification Board at the 
present time. 
 
The member can be absolutely assured — I give her my 
absolute commitment — there will not be any movies shown at 
the film festival that do not comply with our film classification 
board process or the Criminal Code. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we get the 
results from the BC Film Board classifying these films, there’s 
going to be a couple of outcomes. 
 
The worst will result, will designate a film as illegal for 
showing in Saskatchewan under our regulations. And the very 
best it can be is it’ll be classified as X-rated pornography. Even 
at its very best rating, the public is questioning why are we 
spending taxpayers’ dollars on pornography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I’ll be introducing a motion calling for 
this government to withdraw funding from this festival because 
of the pornographic contents of the film. And I would hope that 
the Premier will allow a free vote from all of his members, 
because we know that there are members on that side of the 
House getting calls from their constituents who are asking 
them, how can you support the spending of taxpayers’ dollars 
on pornography. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow your members to stand in this 
House tomorrow and freely vote on the motion I’m going to 
present? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not quite sure what it is the member doesn’t 
understand. There will be no films shown at this festival that 
don’t comply with the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the films that are not permissible under our 
process, Mr. Speaker, and under the Criminal Code, are 
pornographic films, Mr. Speaker. By definition these films will 
not be shown at this film festival. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Twinning of Trans-Canada Highway 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
about three weeks ago now that the proceedings of this House 
were interrupted by the news of a tragic accident on the No. 1 
Highway just east of the 121 junction in the west part of the 
province. And after that we had a joint resolution of this 
Assembly in which we appealed to the federal government to 
take its responsibility for funding that construction . . . need 
seriously. 
 
And I would like to address my question today to the Minister 
of Highways and Transportation and ask him, following the 
resolution that was passed unanimously in this House, what has 
happened, what have you accomplished, what have you heard, 
and what have you done in connection with our appeal to the 
federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 
thank the member for the question and also for the co-operation 
from himself and from members opposite on this important 
issue. 
 
First of all we of course as a legislature passed on all of the 
transcripts of the proceedings to the federal minister and 
certainly to the Prime Minister as well. We’ve been in contact 
with the federal minister, Minister Collenette, who is at this 
time suggesting that they will be reviewing it to see what in fact 
they can do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The response from the 
federal government often takes some time, but I would like to 
have a little more concrete action on their behalf, and I would 
like the Department of Highways and Transportation to initiate 
a more aggressive stance in that respect if possible. 
 
I would be prepared to discuss with the minister what I 
personally have done, what the members of our caucus have 
done, and what members of the public have brought to my 
attention. 
 
I would like to ask the minister if he has laid out an action plan 
for his department to pursue this issue very concretely and very 
specifically. And the other question I would like to ask is: have 
you dedicated any department officials to this specific project? 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well specifically in response to your 
last question, our deputy of Highways is tasked with this 
specific issue. 
 
But certainly let me lay out again for the member that the 
Department of Highways, in the absence of federal funding, 
which is at about 3 per cent right now, has laid out our 
long-term plan which we know needs to be improved. If we had 
the ability to generate more revenue, we certainly would be 
moving this along quicker, but we’ve committed to doing . . . 
completing the twinning over 15 years, beginning in 1997. And 
with respect to that one area that the member’s most concerned 
about, we’ll have that completed within the next eight years if 
we don’t get additional funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was reading through 
some old news clippings today, and the 15-year plan for 
twinning that stretch of the No. 1 Highway is now 20 years old. 
And at this rate, it’ll take 30 years to get it done. 
 
I understand the difficulty, Mr. Minister. I understand the 
limitation on funding. But in view of the crisis that the last 
accident we had there has provoked, in view of the 
overwhelming public response to proceeding with twinning it, 
would the provincial government consider realigning their 
funding to achieve this situation, this twinning project at an 
earlier timetable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the member also for the question. This is obviously a huge 
challenge as we’ve said many times. We have more roads here 
in Saskatchewan than any other province in the country. 
 
It is particularly challenging though when the . . . I’m not sure 
that the member specifically himself has asked this, but the 
opposition caucus is petitioning this government, our coalition 
government to reduce the gas tax on fuel by the equivalent of 
10 cents a litre, and at the same time increase spending on 
highways and dedicate that funding to highways. So it makes it 
extremely difficult for us to accomplish all of the things that the 
opposition and the public demand, while at the same time we’re 
supposed to be reducing the level of revenues from fuel and gas 
tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de 

l’état civil 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2000. The purpose of this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is to 
change the way we define stillbirths in the legislation. It’s 
important that our health system is able to record stillbirths 
when they happen. This allows comparisons with other 
provinces and provides vital data for research. 
 
The current definition of stillbirth in this province is based only 
on the criteria of birth weight. All other provinces and 
territories besides Saskatchewan and Quebec use not only birth 
weight but also gestational age. As a result Saskatchewan 
stillbirth data cannot be effectively compared and analysed on a 
national basis. 
 
The amendment, Mr. Speaker, changes the definition of 
stillbirth to include two criteria: a gestational age equal to or 
greater than 20 weeks, or a weight equal or greater than 500 
grams. The ability to define stillbirth using both gestational age 
and birth weight will ensure we have a common definition of 
stillbirth across Canada. 
 
Quebec recently announced that it would change its stillbirth 
definition to conform to this common definition. As a result 
we’ll be able to make comparisons between the various 
provinces across the country. In addition to ensuring national 
and international standards, Mr. Speaker, the proposed stillbirth 
definition will also permit the effective analysis of stillbirth data 
by provincial and federal health agencies across the country. 
 
This will help our government and other partners provide 
surveillance and interpret perinatal health data for 
Saskatchewan. This in turn will help us develop better health 
care services to prevent perinatal deaths. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30. Mr. 
Speaker, at first blush when you look at the Bill before the 
Assembly, one of the questions that really crops up in people’s 
minds and certainly I’ve had individuals already ask me about 
it. 
 
The minister is talking about stillbirth but I noticed one thing in 
this province. We’ve seen a number of abortions in the province 
actually increasing dramatically. And when you look at the 
definition that the minister is using regarding stillbirth and the 
reasons to change the Act to address some of the concerns that 
. . . and address statistics and the statistical value that is needed, 
the minister is indicating that we need to change dramatically 
the size and the gestation period in regards to an unborn child in 
order to address the concerns of whether or not this is a 
stillbirth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that from just my quick 
perusal of the piece of legislation, one has to ask exactly what 
the government is really hiding, or what is really behind, and 
the motivation behind this piece of legislation. 
 
And certainly there a number of questions that we would like to 
look at very closely and like to address, and get more 
clarification on before we would just move forward and ask or 
allow this piece of legislation to move forward. And having said 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
That pension plan, the municipal employees’ pension plan, 
provides retirement benefits to employees of school divisions, 
urban and rural municipalities, regional colleges, regional 
public libraries, and designated police officers and firefighters. 
The plan is governed by the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission. 
 
The municipal employees’ pension plan, Mr. Speaker, is on 
solid ground. It has nearly $870 million in assets and 
membership has grown steadily over the past few years. 
Membership now stands at more than 9,000 active and deferred 
members. More than half of the 7,900 active members work for 
school divisions. The number of retired members is steadily 
increasing. Nearly 2,700 pensioners and beneficiaries are now 
receiving benefits from the plan in the amount of $22.3 million 
per year. 
 
An actuarial evaluation for the period January 1, 1996 to 
December 31, 1998 disclosed the plan’s surplus of $173 
million. The Income Tax Act of the federal government sets a 
maximum surplus limit for pension plans. The municipal 
employees’ pension plan surplus exceeds this maximum by 
$108 million. The municipal employees’ pension plan’s surplus 
is primarily the result of higher than expected rates of return 
and lower than expected inflation rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a surplus of this nature occurs and it exceeds 
what is permitted by the federal government, steps must be 
taken to deal with that surplus or else the pension can lose its 
status as a pension plan under the federal Income Tax Act, 
which then jeopardizes the ability of the plan members to make 
tax-free contributions to their pension plan under the federal 
Income Tax Act. 
 
Over the past year, the plan’s commission has heard from many 
active and retired members. A survey of all plan members, 
pensioners, and participating employers gave the commission a 
clear message of how the surplus should be used and how other 
issues should be addressed. 
 
The most common suggestions for using the surplus were 
increased pensions, provide earlier retirement dates, and 
provide protection from inflation. This is sort of a good news 
Bill for these members of this pension plan, Mr. Speaker, 
because essentially what we need to do here is legislate how to 
take the surplus and get benefits out to the members and retired 
people. 
 
The Pension Commission is asking this legislature for 
amendments to the pension plan Act that will use the planned 
surplus to improve benefits under the plan and improve the 
administration of the plan. The proposals consider the concerns 

of members, share the surplus fairly among all members, and 
protect the long-term financial health of the plan. 
 
To use the accrued surplus of $108 million, the commission 
proposes to provide indexing of pensions with respect to service 
earned before 1999. Through this Bill, the commission proposes 
to improve the pension formula for the period January 1, 2001 
to December 31, 2005, and provide members with the earliest 
retirement dates allowed under the Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will allow members to retire 
sooner with larger pensions and with the added benefit of 
protection from inflation. So clearly, the plan is doing fairly 
well. 
 
These improvements accrue, Mr. Speaker, at no cost to 
members, employers, or Saskatchewan taxpayers because 
they’re paid for out of the accumulated surplus which is the 
problem — if you can see it as a problem, it’s really a benefit 
— but that’s the situation that we’re dealing with. 
 
This Act provides additional benefit improvements to the plan’s 
members. Members will now be able to increase their pensions 
through voluntary purchases of service. Members will also 
benefit from more options upon termination of employment. 
 
This Act also enables spouses of members to waive their rights 
to survivor benefits, providing plan members more flexibility 
for designating survivor benefits. 
 
A great number of the plan’s members work less than full-time 
hours, Mr. Speaker. This Bill provides non-permanent and 
part-time employees the opportunity to begin earning pension 
credits sooner by allowing these employees greater access to the 
plan. 
 
Furthermore, this Bill will allow employees of school divisions 
and regional colleges to earn one full year of early retirement 
eligibility service for each school year worked. Changing the 
method used to credit contributory and continuous service for 
employees working less than full-time hours and/or less than 12 
months per year makes it easier for these employees to take 
advantage of the plan’s early retirement opportunities. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, also provides members with more 
flexible termination options and affords them the opportunity to 
contribute to the plan for periods of approved leaves of absence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
responding to the Bill, Bill No. 32, first of all I would like to 
indicate that I think what the steps the government is doing 
certainly, as I understand from the minister, as a result of 
federal legislation, we have to change this legislation. And it 
seems to me this is an ongoing thing. And I think maybe what 
we need at the end of the day is maybe some dialogue with the 
federal government to adjust some changes that would allow 
plans like this to continue to grow. 
 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

Because if what the minister is saying — and I believe it to be 
correct — the municipal pension . . . employees’ pension 
amendment . . . or pension plan is working very well on behalf 
of its members. In fact it’s working so well that the surplus is 
continuing to grow, which, Mr. Speaker, for those of us, anyone 
who’s putting money aside for a pension, the idea is to see that 
fund grow so that you would be able to see a time and day when 
you’ll have a decent size of pension or a worthwhile pension in 
order to retire. 
 
(1430) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, given the motivation we see coming out of 
the federal government, certainly the federal Minister of 
Finance, one has to wonder whether or not we’re going to have 
the real benefits of the Canada Pension Plan in the future. And 
so I personally believe that it’s important that individuals take 
the time to start beginning to plan for their future. 
 
And so having said that, we can appreciate where the minister is 
coming from and the intent of the legislation, and we 
understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the fact that this legislation allows people 
even on part-time to begin planning for their future and to make 
contributions to a pension plan, that will work on their behalf. 
And it certainly sounds and it seems that the individuals who 
are managing this pension plan are doing a very good job on 
behalf of their members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well of note, I should just mention that 
individuals who have been in municipal pension plans, or these 
forms of pension plans, in the past and have moved into 
government employment positions, and I believe I’ve also 
contacted the minister’s office in regards to one case in 
particular . . . But certainly people in the past who have moved, 
and through circumstances may have missed the opportunity to 
transfer their funds — and the minister was talking about taking 
early retirement — I think it’s important as well to 
acknowledge the contributions made in the past, and when 
you’ve changed employment to a public sector, of allowing 
employees the opportunity to transfer what was contributed 
through the municipal plan and allow that, a fair transfer of that, 
even after the fact. 
 
Certainly we’ve seen it take place in the past where people have 
oversight or failure to receive required notice, have been able to 
move what was continuing to collect in the municipal 
employees’ plan into public sector plans. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say that because I know that we’ve . . . I 
think the minister is quite well aware of the fact that there have 
been requests coming to his office going back a number of 
years. 
 
But that aside, Mr. Speaker, we want to acknowledge that what 
is being done in this piece of legislation is to ensure that this 
plan continues to work on behalf of its members and indeed 
continues to use the contributed . . . contributory funds to build 
for the future well-being of the employees who are contributing 
to the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem that this is a quite a simple, 

straightforward piece of legislation but it would be appropriate 
for the opposition to indeed take the time to review it 
extensively before we move in detail through the Bill, and 
having said that I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
The Chair: — And before I call the first subvote I remind 
members that this department was last before the committee on 
April 19. Also before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll reintroduce 
officials who were here on April 19. To my left, deputy 
minister, Neil Yeates. Behind Mr. Yeates is Frances Bast, 
senior policy advisor, finance and operations branch. Beside her 
is assistant deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse. And seated back 
behind the bar are Brady Salloum, the executive director of 
student financial assistance, and Margaret Ball, associate 
director, facilities planning unit. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, on April 19 there were a couple of 
questions that the hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
asked for which I committed the answer, and I’d just like to 
send them over to . . . I guess it would be to the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, okay. 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister’s officials. It’s nice to see you. I’m looking forward to 
some of the discussion we’ll have today, and I’m going to be 
centring mostly on student loans today. There will be other 
questions, but that's the questions I’ll be, I’ll be asking you 
about. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that from speaking to the president of the 
universities that there is a huge challenge to recruiting students 
to universities nowadays, and there’s . . . because of the 
mobility of the students and their ability to access information 
and their love to travel, they . . . students will travel right across 
the province and out of the country to receive the education that 
they, that they want. And I also know that it’s a challenge to the 
university to retain the professors that will attract students as 
well. 
 
So my first question, Mr. Minister, is can you tell me what 
percentage of our high school students actually attend 
university here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. It’s 
approximately 24 per cent of our high school students here in 
Saskatchewan attend one of the two — University of 
Saskatchewan or University of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, can you also tell me 
what percentage of these students take out student loans then? 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it would be between 35 and 40 
per cent of these students in attendance at university would take 
out a student loan in a given year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Could 
you also give me the same information for the technical 
schools? What percentage of our high school students attend 
technical schools from grade 12, and what percentage of them 
take out student loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it’s a little more difficult 
question to ask because of the way that statistics are 
accumulated. There are some 5,000 students at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) in 
a given year. About a quarter of them would be older students, 
the non-traditional, out-of-high-school, into SIAST. 
 
It would be approximately 30 per cent — if we’re off, it’s 
probably a little bit less than 30 per cent — that would require 
student loans. The reason it’s just a little difficult to be precise 
is that Statistics Canada records based on programs which 
require a grade 12 entrance, and not all the SIAST programs 
require a grade 12 entrance. 
 
So it’s just a little bit difficult but as I say, 30 per cent would 
probably be a bit on the high side but not terribly far off. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you for your 
answer. And I just have one more question to ask you that’s 
more for my own information — and maybe it would have been 
more appropriately put to the university when I was there — but 
could you tell me what percentage of the university students are 
Saskatchewan residents? I know that we have a lot of students 
coming in from outside the province and from outside the 
country, but I was just wondering if you have an idea of how 
many that we can bank on from Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it would be at least 90 per cent 
of the Saskatchewan university students who are natives of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s 
very little doubt that access to post-secondary education is 
really of serious concern to many students. The high cost of 
tuition is something that is deterring away some of our students, 
which is sad. 
 
What steps has your department taken to ensure that the tuition 
fees will not rise again? I know that the millennium scholarship 
is something that we talked about earlier and if you would like 
to again discuss that, I would appreciate some more concise 
information on that. Just tell me exactly where it’s going to, and 
what else are you doing to make sure that the tuition rates stay 
within reach of most of the students in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think what the hon. member is 
referring to is really a phenomenon which occurred in the 
previous fiscal year, in the 1999-2000 fiscal year, where the 
budget before us is the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 
In the ’99-2000 fiscal year as we discussed in the previous time 
the department estimates were before the committee, there was, 
after the millennium scholarship resources were made clearly 

available, with the approval of the Millennium Scholarship 
Foundation, at that time an additional $7 million that was made 
available to the two Saskatchewan universities with the express 
objective of using the revenues to keep tuitions under 2 per 
cent, which in fact the universities did. 
 
In the fiscal year that’s before us, in the estimates, the 
committee that we’re reviewing at this moment, that additional 
funding to the universities has been continued, and then in 
addition to that there has been a 4 per cent increase in operating 
grants to all of our educational institutions including, of course, 
the universities. 
 
And I would think that related specifically to your question 
having to do with tuition, that that would be the budgetary 
matter that would be most directly related. 
 
(1445) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, our office hears very 
frequently from students who are concerned about the amount 
of student loans that they do get. Now we do understand we’re 
using the word loans; it’s not money that is often forgiven over 
. . . at least not very much of it is often forgiven. And yet the 
students are often forced to either work part time or sometimes 
even discontinue classes because they just can’t afford their 
education. 
 
Mr. Minister, being that this is actually a loan, not a grant, how 
is the amount actually determined that it takes . . . that students 
are supposed to be able to live on. We know, especially with 
rural students, that their travel from home, the fact that they 
have to buy all their food in the city, that everything costs them 
a whole lot of money. How do you determine how much money 
a student is going to get to take a class? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I think, judging by the tone 
of her question, the hon. member will be pleased with the 
information and the response to her question. 
 
First of all, just in direct response to her comment and the 
question that not much of the loan is forgiven. In fact I think the 
hon. member will be pleased to know that for students who are 
at most in need, the Saskatchewan student loan would certainly 
be among, some I think would say, the most student sensitive in 
the nation. 
 
Just by way of example, in the fiscal year that we’ve just 
completed and dealing with the student loan year that’s by and 
large just wrapping up now, there were some $60 million in 
Saskatchewan student loans. The hon. member will recognize 
that when a student applies for a loan, it’ll be both Canada and 
Saskatchewan broken down at approximately a 60/40 basis, 
where about 40 per cent of it is Saskatchewan student loan. 
 
And in the fiscal year just ended, the student loans granted were 
approximately $60 million of Saskatchewan student loan, and 
of that, some $25 million has in fact been forgiven. 
 
In the budget before us and the estimates that we’re dealing 
with now we are forecasting that the amount of Saskatchewan 
student loan to be forgiven through bursary and the like will 
probably be closer to $30 million. 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

So that is a pretty . . . a significant investment in access to 
post-secondary education through the student loans that is 
happening in the province of Saskatchewan. It happens as a 
result of . . . largely as a result of a formula introduced in 1998, 
the bursary in 1998, at which point students who are borrowing 
based on need — and I’ll just get into that in a moment — in 
excess of $180 per week find the amount that they are needing 
to borrow above and beyond that $180 per week figure become 
bursary and not required to be paid. 
 
It’s reflecting a philosophy that’s intended to ensure that public 
resources are best used to ensure that our citizens who are 
wanting to get involved in post-secondary education are not 
deterred from doing that on the basis of financial resources. 
And therefore, to state the obvious, the greatest safety net 
support, I guess you want to call it that way, would extend to 
those who are of the lowest income and greatest need. 
 
Student loans are calculated based on assessed need and there is 
a formula that’s used. It is applied to both of Canada and 
Saskatchewan student loans, which subtracts from the allowable 
education and living costs which will be specific to each 
individual, from that the students and/or the student’s family 
financial resources. 
 
So that as you correctly say, hon. member . . . if I may through 
you to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, as the hon. member 
correctly says, student loans are not grants; they are loans. 
Some of it does in fact turn into a grant for those who are the 
highest in need, but certainly everyone approaches it from the 
point of view that it is a loan. 
 
And so assessed need minus available resources then result in 
the student loan. In determining the needs, related to the student 
loan, things that are taken into account are income, assets, and 
expenses of students. And if applicable, the income, assets, and 
expenses of the student’s spouse or the income of the student’s 
parents, guardians, or sponsors. So depending on their 
individual circumstances those become the factors that come 
into play in determining precisely how much of a student loan is 
a student eligible to receive. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, I just have 
one specific question about the loans themselves. When they 
talk about vehicles, and I know students are allowed a vehicle, 
anything over a certain value of a vehicle is not considered 
allowable as far as I can remember. It seems to me it’s 
something like $5,000. If a vehicle is worth more than that, 
they’re supposed to sell this vehicle or they’re supposed to 
dispose of it and use the money towards their education. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when we have students from rural areas that 
have to make long trips in over the roads that we’ve got here in 
Saskatchewan, it’s usually a lot better if we have a vehicle that 
is dependable — something that we know when our students 
are going to leave home they’re going to get to the university. 
 
Now does it make any sense to you or is there an opportunity to 
actually change this level or this value of vehicle worth so that 
our students aren’t punished for having a different vehicle or 
having one that they don’t have to spend all their money on 
repairs for? 
 

I guess my specific question is, will you be looking at this part 
of the regulations to make it more flexible or allowable for a 
student to have a good vehicle while they’re at university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member is correct in 
referring to the trigger amount related to the value of the vehicle 
at $5,000. 
 
It’s a difficult item for the province to review in isolation 
because in fact it is a regulation with the Canada student loan as 
true across the country. It’s not specific to Saskatchewan. And 
on an ongoing basis, and that’s happening actively these days, 
we are asking the federal government to be reviewing a number 
of criteria. 
 
But I don’t think that there’s realistically any possibility of us 
being able to change this criteria in Saskatchewan without 
Canada agreeing to change the criteria Canada-wide. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, I am 
pleased to hear you say that this is one issue you’re bringing up 
with the federal government. I’m sure the federal Liberal 
government will look at rural Saskatchewan’s problems and say 
maybe this is something they should be looking at. 
 
Because it is one of the main things that students talk to me 
about. And I have found a number of students who are actually 
even given a vehicle from grandparents or whoever, and they 
find they have to sell this vehicle so that they can get their 
student loan. And I think it’s something that’s really quite 
unfair. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that when students find that the loan that 
they have been approved for isn’t enough, they have an 
opportunity to go through the appeal process. Could you give 
me an indication of what that appeal process . . . how long it 
takes and what it actually, what all the functions of that appeal 
process are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the appeal that a student will 
bring will be to the student financial assistance branch of the 
department, initially. And it would be really quite usual for that 
appeal to be resolved within two to three weeks. 
 
How long it takes will again have . . . will be influenced 
significantly by complications and whether there needs to be a 
verification of information, that sort of thing. If a student 
appeals to the student financial assistance branch and is not 
satisfied with the response there and wishes to appeal it further, 
then it can go to an appeals committee which would deal with it 
typically in no more than another two to three weeks. 
 
It’s recognized by the department that when students are 
making appeals, that these oftentimes have financial strain and 
stress related to them, and we make it a priority to deal with it 
as expeditiously as we possibly can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. If there is 
a . . . if a student does appeal, what percentage of the students 
that appeal actually have a different ruling when their case is 
heard by the appeal committee or the original appeal process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, of the appeals that are handled 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

by the branch, the student financial assistance branch, about 
three-quarters of them are satisfactorily resolved at that stage, 
I’m pleased to say. And then, as I said earlier, the student who 
wishes to appeal that can appeal to the appeals committee. 
 
You may be interested in knowing that that’s not a frequent 
occurrence, as a matter of fact; that in 1998-99 there were only 
57 appeals to the appeals committee which is down 
substantially from three years earlier when it was 223. So there 
do seem to be . . . there’s a definite trend in reductions of 
appeals to the appeals committee. Of those who did, 86 per cent 
appealed successfully to the appeals committee. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, a question that comes up quite often I believe for a 
number of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
and possibly even on the government side, is that to qualify for 
a student loan you’re in, it goes by income. And I mean you 
know as well as we do how it works but I’ve had a number of 
inquiries lately where we have both parents working — 
probably as we would describe them they would be 
middle-income families — but don’t qualify for student loans. 
 
And I think what we’re doing here is creating quite a hardship 
for a number of families now because maybe the cut-off is too 
low, remembering that this is student loans and it’s not a 
forgiven grant of any kind. 
 
And I think that the people that have contacted me, and I’m sure 
there’s many others all across the province that have this same 
problem, is that yes, they’re making a decent wage for what 
many people would say, but at the same time if they have one, 
two, maybe even sometimes three children that are in university 
at the same time, that I feel we should be maybe looking at this. 
 
Because it’s really causing hardship for a number of these 
families who are working very hard, both father and mother, to 
make a living and put these kids through school when it 
wouldn’t be all that hard, I don’t think, to change the 
regulations on how students qualify for student loans. And I 
don’t think it’s actually a cost to government the way that 
student loans are worked anyway. 
 
I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, have you had this concern 
brought to you and would it be something that we would look at 
in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the hon. member 
for Saltcoats, this would certainly be no surprise that you would 
raise this subject and it’s a subject that I had raised with me a 
number of times, particularly when I spent a good part of 
January travelling around the province of Saskatchewan with 15 
public meetings, and talking with students and family and 
others — educators and taxpayers. But among students, and 
particularly among families, the point that you raised was not 
uncommon. 
 
I would want the hon. member to know that this is a matter of 
significance to the minister. Again, many of the criteria related 
to student loans are not readily changeable because they don’t 
fall within the jurisdiction of Saskatchewan alone. 

And the criteria related to incomes and expenditures and the 
balance and the formula that would affect Saskatchewan 
students would be the same as it would affect students in other 
provinces across the country. And again, it would be one of 
those items that would be changed nationwide. 
 
Following the public hearings we have been dialoguing with the 
federal government on the matter of student loans and reporting 
to the federal government our concerns that we heard being 
raised here and encouraging revision — first of all reassessment 
and then revision — of the criteria to update them in order to do 
what we can to take those public resources and use them as 
prudently and effectively as we can in order to support access to 
post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to carry 
on a bit, Mr. Minister. I think some of the problems that this 
causes out there . . . as you know, in my past life before I came 
in politics, I was a farmer. And I had three children that went 
through university and we qualified for student loans for each 
one of them and we’re very grateful. 
 
But the minute you go into the urban centres where in most 
cases we have both members of the family are working, 
struggling hard — I know in some cases they have four 
children, one or two are getting into the university system — 
but are working very hard to make a living. 
 
And because I’m a farmer and, you know, a number of farmers 
out there may say, well I don’t know why he’s arguing this 
way. But we found it pretty well automatic by being a farmer 
that we qualified for a student loan, the way our income and 
income tax showed through. 
 
But these same people who probably were no better off than we 
were — in fact maybe working as hard or harder than we were, 
you know, in many cases — but had no extra dollars. And their 
kids come along, to get to the point where they want to go to 
university, the parents want them to go to university, but in 
some cases it’s impossible for these kids to go. Or if they are, 
you know, the parents find a way to get them there, it’s a real 
hardship on these families. 
 
And I think at some points there it even creates bad feelings 
between urban and rural people again because we feel that it’s 
accessible to us and we agree it should be accessible to them, 
but in many cases it isn’t because of the regulations we have in 
place. 
 
So I understand you have the concerns there and I would hope 
that we would follow this up very strenuously and maybe we 
could make changes down the road to even the field up for all 
of us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the hon. member’s 
points which I, I certainly see as being very credible. And 
maybe just to respond because I . . . There really wasn’t a 
question I think, more a statement of concern is what I heard 
you making. And I first of all want to acknowledge that and 
perhaps just respond to that. 
 
There will be a number of things that will come into play here 
and some of them . . . maybe just using your example that it 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

may be relevant to make note of because it would be my 
judgment that although it is always legitimate to say that the 
Canada student loan program should be under review — and is 
— it’s also I think important to acknowledge that there are 
some things that happen through the system about which I’m 
not at all critical, I think are operating for the intended and 
appropriate reasons. 
 
When looking at a circumstance . . . For example, if I may use 
the one you raised, I think you said yourself where there will be 
more than one son or daughter attending post-secondary 
education at the same time, it’s worthwhile noting that 
according to the student loan criteria and the amount of 
available resources to support the student in meeting expenses, 
that if there are two students, for example from the same family, 
that the expectation of the family is half of, half of one for each 
of them or if there were three, a third of one for each of them. 
So that there is an attempt to try and make the rules realistic to 
the realities faced by families, which is one of those things that 
gives me a sense of encouragement when we’re providing 
feedback to the federal government for review because it does 
. . . they do seem to operate with that as a, as a guideline. 
 
A couple of other things I may mention, or maybe two or three 
other things. It may as well be, for example, that someone who 
is living in rural Saskatchewan and is going to a campus in one 
of the, say the two or four largest cities, that in fact their 
expenses may be higher because of virtually . . . certainly built 
in there is the cost of living away from home, which will 
perhaps make it a little more likely that a rural application 
would get approved simply because expenses are higher. 
 
Balance that off with the important role that the regional 
colleges play in our system. And I was just releasing last week 
the review of the regional college system in my response to 
that. And I recognize the regional college system as an 
extremely important institution, or series of institutions in our 
province to bring the campus to the student in rural and 
northern Saskatchewan in order to, among other things, address 
the accessibility and affordability factor. So I would just want to 
acknowledge that. 
 
And finally, it would be one of those things that I would 
compliment the federal government for doing. In recent times, 
the hon. member will be aware I’m sure, of initiatives that the 
federal government has taken to provide the ability to shelter 
taxable incomes in order to set aside funds to be saved for 
students to be applying to post-secondary education in the 
future. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that that would, I think, would meet 
with the approval of most Canadian taxpayers, as support for 
families to plan ahead as much as they can, and to assist in the 
process of planning ahead, and therefore hopefully reduce 
significantly, and maybe even in some cases eliminate the need 
to be going into debt as a result of experiencing post-secondary 
education. 
 
So I recognize the hon. member didn’t have a specific question, 
but I think he raises a number of very relevant points, Mr. 
Chair, that are important to our province and many people in 
our province, and I quite acknowledge, both who live in rural 
and urban parts of the province. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate your 
concern. 
 
I should maybe clarify one thing, and the member for Arm 
River brought it to my attention and I probably wouldn’t want 
to go home if I don’t qualify this, is that there are a number of 
farm families that also don’t qualify. I was leaving the 
impression that all farmers qualified. It’s maybe just the poor 
farmers like me that qualified, and the good ones maybe don’t. 
So I thought I’d better clarify that, Mr. Speaker, and just 
showing you how much I really need this job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also was wondering on the student loans 
themselves, how many of these are in default, say for a given 
year, say this last year? And how many of them are not being 
collected at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, before I directly answer the 
hon. member’s question and commenting on his comment 
which I’m sure he’d be disappointed if I didn’t . . . which may 
of course stimulate him to comment on my comment and his. 
But willing to run that risk I have absolutely no doubt, Mr. 
Chair, that the hon. member is engaging in the practice of 
running his farm as effectively as possible. And I will simply 
leave . . . I will avoid making any comment on his job security 
or the relevance of this job to his personal income. 
 
But more seriously, Mr. Chair, coming to the question that the 
hon. member asks, the number of students in default is a little 
bit difficult to be precise but the most recent measurement of 
that would be in November of 1999, so just a few months ago, 
at which point in time there were 14.6 per cent of the students 
were in default. 
 
Now the reason I say it’s a little bit difficult to be precise, what 
I’m meaning by that is that there are 14.6 per cent of the 
students who are not making payments on their loans at that 
particular point in time. However it would be virtually certain 
that not all of those would be completely lost because there are 
efforts made to support and continue to recover that. And so 
therefore it is really a difficult question to be precise as . . . If 
you were asking the question as to how many will end up not 
paying, it’ll be a number substantially lower than that, but 
difficult to be precise with you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair. To the minister, thank you very 
much for your answers again. You indicated that there were 
further efforts to ensure that some of this 14.6 per cent of the 
student loans that are in arrears will be collected. By that I 
imagine part of that is your taking student loans to collection 
agencies. Could you tell me what percentage have been sent to a 
collection agency? And who is the collection agency that’s 
doing the work for the government at this time? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. At this 
point in time there are 31 cases per month of student loans that 
have been referred to the collection agency Equifax. A student 
loan gets referred to Equifax if there is no record of either 
payment or contact by the student with the student loan for a 
period of four months or more. 
 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what percentage of 
the money that Equifax collects do they get to keep for 
themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, Equifax will retain 
approximately 20 per cent of what they collect. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, again to the minister. So of these 31 
cases per month that are referred to Equifax, how many of them 
do they actually get to collect . . . how many cases a month 
approximately do they get to collect the money from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have that information 
available to me right at this point in time. If the hon. member 
would like, then I can make it available to her. 
 
It will also be, in terms of current lender financing, through the 
Royal Bank of Canada that loans would currently be held. And 
we don’t have statistics available on Royal Bank’s action which 
Royal Bank takes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, are students notified 
beforehand that their loans would be turned over to a collection 
agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, it may be helpful to the hon. 
member just to know the whole process that goes through when 
a student finds themselves in default of their student loans. 
 
When there is . . . a student loan payment is overdue by a 
month, then a letter is sent advising the student that a payment 
has been missed. If it’s overdue two months, then a second 
letter is sent advising that two payments have been missed. A 
final notice letter is sent when three payments have been 
missed. And then a default notice letter is sent when four 
payments have been missed. And then finally — and this would 
be in response to your question — they would be advised that it 
is being referred to a collection agency. 
 
When a demand for payment letter is sent after a borrower 
breaks a repayment arrangement previously agreed upon, there 
will be attempts to make telephone calls to make contact as well 
in the process, and also students may or may not be aware that 
the repayment of student loans can be put on hold for up to 18 
months in total of their Saskatchewan student loan. And so that 
would be something that the student would be advised of as 
well. The real objective is to make the contact with the student 
and work together with the student to find a way to assist the 
student in order to be able to ultimately keep his or her 
obligations for loan repayment. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. Once the 
matter has been referred to a collection agency, then does the 
minister have any control of that loan at any time after that? 
Meaning that we often as MLAs get phone calls saying, I’ve got 
this letter from a collection agency. I’d like to be able to deal 
with them but they tell me it’s now in the hands of a collection 
agency. I can’t talk to the minister any more. 
 
And from what I understand, dealing with the collection agency 
isn’t easy. I would imagine that talking to the minister is 
something . . . at least it would be a person that they would be 
responsible to. I’m wondering if this is something that you have 

dealt with and if it’s something you’re considering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think the member is really 
quite accurate in her assessment about the flexibility. The 
protocol that the department will have with the collection 
agency is such that once it is referred to the collection agency, 
then it becomes their matter and that’s largely why — as I just 
outlined to you in response to your previous question — the 
department really works hard to try and get ahead of that to 
make the contact with the student in order to prevent it reaching 
that point. And as I say, including with that ensuring that they 
are advised and encouraged to take advantage of all interest 
relief options available to them including, of course, the 18 
month interest deferral that’s available to them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, of course they don’t 
have the six months interest free period that they did have last 
year. I guess that was gone after this year’s budget, but we’ll 
discuss that at another time. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me how much money Equifax earned, 
if I can use that term loosely, from collection of student loans in 
the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, just a 
quick reminder to the hon. member that the six month interest 
relief period doesn’t come in — the shifting of that to become 
harmonized with the federal Canada student loan — doesn’t 
occur until the new student loan year which is in August. So it 
still is in place, as a matter of fact, for students who are 
graduating from our schools right now. 
 
On response to your specific question, we don’t have that 
available here with us today and I’ll get that information for 
you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. At the 
same time, if you don’t have the information available to you 
right now, could you also find out how much money the 
government had to basically write off because of delinquent 
student loans in the last fiscal year. Do you have that 
information available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I’ll provide that to the hon. member as 
well, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While you and your 
colleague, the Minister of Education, travelled around the 
province earlier this year, it was my understanding that your 
objective was to gain a better understanding of access to 
post-secondary education. Could you tell me what . . . there was 
one or two major findings that you had, that students indicated 
were a barrier to education. Could you give us an update on 
that, on your findings please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to 
the hon. member’s question, I would have commented on some 
of these . . . on a similar question in the previous time we were 
before estimates, so I’ll be brief. I won’t be quite as detailed as I 
was at that time. I know that that won’t upset the hon. member. 
But, Mr. Chair, it was an interesting and valuable experience to 
have spent some time talking to people who are concerned 
about access to post-secondary education from a very real and 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

pragmatic point of view. 
 
The message that was heard, more than I had anticipated 
actually, was that particularly when we got outside of the four 
largest cities, but really when we got outside of the two largest 
cities, Regina and Saskatoon, we heard repeatedly that the 
biggest barrier in terms of financial . . . biggest financial barrier 
in terms of access to post-secondary education is the cost of 
living away from home. And that came up in a number of kinds 
of ways and expressed very loudly. 
 
It was because of that that I came away from the hearings 
recognizing the very important role that regional colleges play 
in our post-secondary education system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It may be worthwhile noting for the interest of the hon. member 
and others who care about these things, that the regional college 
system is unique in the nation. When it was introduced back in 
the early ’70s, in excess of a quarter-century ago, it really was 
sort of a radical sort of notion that you would have educational, 
post-secondary educational institutions whose objective was not 
to build a significant campus that people would come to, but 
that the philosophy was that the, at that time called, community 
colleges would bring the campus to the student. 
 
And that’s a philosophy that’s alive and well in Saskatchewan 
still today in the regional colleges and still to this day continues 
to be unique in the nation: that our regional colleges are not 
credit-granting bodies, but they serve as brokers in many ways 
to determine what the post-secondary educational needs are at 
the local, in the rural and northern parts of Saskatchewan; and 
then to the best of their resources, as numbers will warrant, to 
find the best vehicles to bring that education, post-secondary 
offerings, supported through processes like Saskatchewan 
Communications Network, SCN, as well as of course professors 
or instructors coming and delivering directly. 
 
And when we looked at all of that, that’s what led this minister 
to feel one of the things that we need to start investing more in 
in our province and that’s before the . . . it’s included in the 
budgets before us now, is the area of technology-enhanced 
learning. So that as we are better able to use technology to more 
effectively and with a broader range to bring the campus to the 
student, so too we’re responding then in a direct way to the cost 
of, you know, the financial barrier, about the cost of living 
away from home. 
 
And so in the budget that we have before us, regional colleges’ 
operating grants are increased by 4 per cent, double the rate of 
inflation, and the technology-enhanced learning budget was 
bumped up from just a quarter of a million dollars to in excess 
of $1.6 million to give greater emphasis. 
 
And so a lot of that is really a response to the message we heard 
over and over, as I say, particularly outside the two larger cities, 
that the biggest barrier’s the cost of living away from home. 
 
There was of course reference to tuition. And we will be, in 
Western Canada, we will be very comfortably compared to 
other provinces in Western Canada in terms of the tuitions that 
we have in our province. But it’s with that in mind, going back 
to one of your earlier questions, that the funding to the 
university, but also SIAST and the regional colleges, was all 

increased by 4 per cent, double the rate of inflation, to address 
that barrier as well. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you for your 
brief answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I appreciate your indication that the regional 
colleges is something that has piqued your interest and I believe 
the interest of many of the students around the province. In my 
constituency I’m fortunate to have St. Peter’s College which is 
unique in itself, and one area that we’d like to discuss a little 
later. 
 
But at this time I just have one question before I turn it over to 
some of my colleagues. Could you indicate what the average 
debt load is for a student over a four-year period, or a course 
completion area if you’d rather in that terms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in direct response to the hon. 
member’s brief question, another brief answer, even shorter 
than the one before. 
 
At this point in time the average student debt load when they 
graduate is $12,700. That’s down from previous years. And we 
would forecast that with the millennium scholarship now in 
place, as well as the bursary enhancements that I referred to 
earlier being put in place two years ago here in Saskatchewan, 
that that will likely be reducing, I’m pleased to say. 
 
And so I think that will . . . oh, it should probably also be noted, 
because I know you were asking about Saskatchewan student 
loans, that when a student is looking at their debt that they 
graduate with, that approximately two-thirds of that debt will be 
owed to the Canada student loan. And approximately a third of 
that will be owed to the Saskatchewan student loan. 
 
So it would be fair to say that the average student graduating in 
Saskatchewan would have about $4,000 owing to the 
Saskatchewan student loan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 
question has to do with SIAST in Moose Jaw. It’s to do with a 
particular course there — your electrician course, electrical 
course. How many do you offer in that, and how many students 
are enrolled in that right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have that specific a 
detail on a program by program basis at each of the institutions, 
but if the hon. member would like, I can certainly get that for 
him. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I think you have 12 enrolled. I 
can give you that answer right now. 
 
I would like to know, how long is your waiting list? Can you 
answer me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again I don’t have that 
specificity of detail available to me but would be happy to get it 
for the hon. member. Also, it would be helpful in being able to 
respond, could you tell us which specifically — is it one of the 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

electrical programs specifically that you’re asking about? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, it’s an electrician’s 
course. Another would like to know is how long is your waiting 
list? I’ve had a constituent apply to it, and he . . . they just told 
him he would be on the waiting list, but they wouldn’t tell him 
what order. So it’s hard for students to make plans. Like if he’s 
14th he won’t . . . he may just go keep working out for a few 
months until next year, but he’s 4,014th, he better start looking 
somewhere else. And he was quite perturbed that they wouldn’t 
let him know so he could make plans. 
 
And if you could let me know is how many people right now 
are on the waiting list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as is more often than we wish 
the case, some questions are a little difficult to answer at the 
best of times. 
 
One of the reasons it may be in this particular course difficult to 
give your constituent a precise answer is that if this is an 
apprenticeable program, and it may very well be, then it 
operates on a continuous intake basis. And therefore the precise 
time at which there is an opening available will be . . . won’t be 
determined by a pre-determined set date, but will be determined 
by the progress of people who are registered within the 
program. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have a 
question surrounding the SIAST Woodland Campus in Prince 
Albert and the operations therein. 
 
One of my constituents went to Prince Albert to attend a course 
in carpentry. Now on February 25 last, Mr. Minister, 12 people 
wrote . . . 12 people in that carpentry class wrote an exam. 
Eleven of those people failed the exam. Only one person 
passed. 
 
And my constituent has brought some interesting things 
forward for me to ask you. And one of the things he pointed out 
was that the course was taught in metric; however, my 
constituent estimates that 60 per cent of the exam was based on 
the imperial system. The exam was new and my constituent’s 
class was the second class to write that exam. Now my 
constituent understood that in the past, students had a choice to 
write the exam using either the metric or the imperial system. 
 
And one of the other concerns that he brought forward was that 
the class were tested on information that they were never 
taught, okay. So after the class had finished their exam, they 
wrote a letter of complaint and they did get a reply. However 
there was nothing definite offered. 
 
He was told that he could put in an application to rewrite the 
exam again in June. Now a total of 7500 hours is required to 
write the exam and my constituent did have 8500 hours so he 
may apply again. However some of his classmates do not have 
that required time so they won’t be able to reapply. 
 
There is also the incidental, and to some people I guess that are 
struggling financially, there is . . . the other factor is that there is 
a cost of a hundred dollars to write the exam. And there is still 
outstanding the problem of metric and imperial and the 

information that was never taught. So my constituent would like 
you to comment on this. 
 
And I guess my question to you is, who monitors, who 
scrutinizes just what kind of exams are put across? And also 
just who is looking into whether or not the content of the exam 
is conducive to what has been taught or, in this instance, 
whether the exam content was in the imperial system rather 
than the metric or the metric rather than the imperial? 
 
And I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could look into this 
situation and possibly contact the campus to get some of these 
things straightened out? 
 
And I too would be very pleased if you would do something to 
assist these 12 people . . . or actually 11, I guess, who failed the 
exam through no fault of their own. I mean I think you would 
agree that when the rate of failure is that high, that there should 
be some extra consideration given to these people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the hon. member 
for the question and acknowledge that she’s also written me a 
letter on the same subject just recently. 
 
I think the . . . Just to come to the answer first and then I’ll just 
make a comment if I may. This is something I’ll want to look 
into. I’m not in a position to be able to give a precise answer 
here today but will look into it. In fact that was stimulated with 
your letter, and the process is underway and I’ll want to do that 
and we’ll get back to you. 
 
Just by way of possible explanation, it would appear that the 
program the hon. member is talking about, Mr. Chairman, is an 
apprenticeable trade. And in that case the exams would be 
drafted and subject to the approval of the Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification committee. And that is . . . those standards 
are driven by the industry. 
 
So it may be that in this particular case, and I certainly do 
acknowledge that 11 out of 12 not having successfully written 
the exam is a matter for concern, that it has to involve some 
collaboration and discussion and communication between both 
SIAST and the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission.  
 
So we’ll follow through on this and get back as quickly as we 
can. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
acknowledge, yes, that I did write you a letter on behalf of my 
constituent. However, these people are awaiting some answer 
and so I hear from them more than once and so this is why I 
brought it up today. 
 
The other reason I brought it up, Mr. Minister, was because 
there was a similar situation to this from a constituent about two 
years ago pertaining to a different course. However, it was 
again pointing out the problem of exam content not reflecting 
the content of the course. And so I think it’s really imperative 
on your part and your department to ensure that all of this is . . . 
all of this . . . the content as such is conducive with what’s in 
the exam. And it’s a matter of fairness to those people that are 
taking the course. 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

Mr. Minister, I’ve written you another letter that I also have had 
from more consultation with my constituent and they seem to 
be impatient with receiving the answers to some of their 
problems. So I’ve written a letter . . . rather received a letter 
from Ms. Colleen Schedlosky of Humboldt. She received a total 
of 293 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? Colleen 
Schedlosky. She had received a total of $293 in a provincial 
training allowance. And that was granted to her for the period 
of April 20, 1998 to July 3, 1998. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now after nearly two years she has been asked to repay this 
amount because she claims that they told her it was since 
determined she was not eligible. So her question is of course, if 
she wasn’t eligible, how come she was deemed eligible two 
years ago? And why, after two years, are they asking to reclaim 
this money? 
 
I know that there is another assessment done as far as the 
family’s income and the kind of monies they have coming in. 
One of the things that happened in that time period was Ms. 
Schedlosky’s husband had to take money from holiday pay at 
his job in order to buy their children eyeglasses I understand. So 
whoever was assessing for the provincial training allowance 
took that amount into account that he had received more money, 
but they did not take into account that that amount of money 
was used for glasses. 
 
Now regardless, this was after the fact. And it seems so unfair 
to me that people are granted an allowance, and especially an 
allowance of $293, which was helpful but nonetheless not a 
very great amount, and then are told two years later it’s . . . Like 
she’s wondering, what’s up. She’s wondering if the government 
is just trying to draw in more money at their expense or what is 
really going on here. 
 
So I really do take issue with this because I do see the logic and 
the concern of my constituent in this case. And I would really 
ask that whoever does the reassessment should be, you know, 
weighing both sides of the story here — what their costs are for 
their family as well as what their contributions . . . or the 
contributions they receive through their salaries or whatever. 
 
So if you could just comment on that, Mr. Minister, I would 
appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for 
raising the question which, as she correctly says, she did bring 
to my attention earlier. And then I responded on April 27 to you 
with a copy to your constituent. I don’t know if you have seen 
the response yet or not. 
 
But anyhow, the significance here is that the issue that you raise 
related to your constituent relates to the need to have income 
verification, and I understand that there was a fair lapse of time 
before the information was provided by your constituent which 
extended the amount of time in order to deal with this much 
more than would be usually the case. 
 
However, I would say to the hon. member and through her to 
her constituent, that if there is a medically-related extenuating 
circumstance that hasn’t already been known and been taken 

into consideration, we would be very happy to have that 
reconsidered. And I simply don’t know whether the information 
you’ve provided here is something that’s in addition to what 
was previously provided. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’ll keep 
on working on this together, and I will be in touch with you 
regarding the extra information should there be more 
forthcoming. 
 
The point that was made to me is there was evidence given of 
costs as well as income, and the costs were not taken into 
consideration when this assessment was made. So that’s the 
point I bring about and it’s a point of unfairness if in fact that is 
true, and I have no reason to believe it is not true. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not too sure whether or not it is your 
department that should be answering my next question, but in 
the provincial budget address it was stated that there was 
increased funding for the skills training benefit and a new 
forestry training strategy. So is that funding coming out of your 
department for the forestry training strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just one final comment related 
to your constituent, we’ll take another close look at that and I 
commit that to you. 
 
And the answer to your question you just asked is yes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I’m just very curious about this, and 
because I don’t have the details I’d like, I was wondering if you 
could just expound for me a bit on how the funding will be used 
for that skills training benefit and if you could tell me how the 
skills training benefit will actually work. What are the criteria 
for eligibility and who will be eligible? You could start with 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, maybe the 
second part of that first. Who does the skills training benefit 
apply to? It applies to Employment Insurance recipients. And 
this is something that’s relatively new here in terms of the 
provincial context as it comes about as the recently signed 
Labour Market Development Agreement that Saskatchewan 
signed with the federal government. 
 
And it brings to the provincial jurisdiction then, some of the 
services that you would have maybe traditionally referred to 
more as through the Canada Employment Centres and things of 
that nature. 
 
But what the skills training benefit provides is not the wage 
insurance benefit — that is paid through employment insurance. 
What it provides are benefits that are related to tuition and the 
costs of training, that sort of thing. And so I’ll wait until . . . I 
think you have some other questions that you’d like to ask. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, I’d like to ask if there is money from the 
province going into this training strategy or is it all federal 
money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The skills training benefit funds come to 
the province from the federal government. 
 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate 
if you could give me some clarification on the one-time tax 
credit for post-graduate students. Could you please give me 
some details on what kind of tax credit will be issued to 
post-graduate students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, I can’t refer 
you to the Act because it hasn’t been introduced yet but will be 
shortly. And that will get us to the detail. 
 
But in a nutshell, the post-secondary graduate tax credit will be 
available to post-secondary graduates in the year 2000 who 
have completed a course of studies of six consecutive months or 
more or its equivalent. And it will be claimed through the 
income tax system and will provide a benefit of $350 in reduced 
Saskatchewan tax payable for the graduate who’s claiming it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much. That’s a very precise 
answer, thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just wanted to ask also what the status is of the 
joint facility in Humboldt between the community college and 
Humboldt Collegiate. Now I know that there have been some 
classrooms added so that the regional college could offer more 
spaces, I guess, and more classes could be there for students. 
 
I’m wondering if there is any other funding that is yet to come 
to that facility as far as the construction project or any other 
funding that, that they may yet await from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the project the hon. member 
refers to is a project related to the basic education program and 
brings together Carlton Trail Regional College and Humboldt 
Collegiate Institute. The total expenditure funded providing . . . 
excuse me, the total funding provided for that is $958,000, and 
the project is completed. 
 
I was very happy to attend the official opening, and I know that 
for people in Humboldt it’s . . . well it was an exciting day. But 
more importantly they see it as an excellent facility which will 
provide a, a synergy I think is fair to say, between the collegiate 
and the, and the college. It’s becoming more characteristic of 
regional college relationships with high schools or institutes, 
you know, around the province. 
 
And so the direct answer to the hon. member’s question is that 
there is no more obligations related to that. The project is 
concluded. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 
thank you wholeheartedly for your responses and I also want to 
thank your officials. And I apologize for not welcoming them 
when I stood today but I want to thank them very much for 
coming and for providing assistance that you need. 
 
And there are other hon. members from this side of the House 
who at another date will be, I’m sure, putting forth more 
questions to you. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank the hon. 
member for Humboldt and several of her colleagues for their 
questions today. And I look forward to continuing the estimates 
unless, of course, they decided they’d like to vote them off now. 

But in the absence of that, I’ll defer to the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials, I have a question and it depends 
whether it’ll translate into two or three, depending on your 
answer. 
 
But the question I have is regarding student bursaries. And I’m 
not exactly sure how much input you have regarding bursaries 
or the bursary program; but one of the concerns that has been 
brought to my attention is the fact that if you get a bursary, say 
from the University of Regina or from the university of 
Saskatoon, in order to qualify for that bursary you must go 
directly to university. 
 
And I find that there are a lot of young people who find that, 
maybe they need a year to raise some funds so they can go to 
university, or just are not quite prepared, or find it challenging 
just to move right from Grade 12 and would like to have a 
break. And yet the bursaries are tied to immediately going into 
further education. 
 
(1600) 
 
What I’m suggesting, Mr. Minister, is that it would be 
appropriate, it would seem to me, to at least have a three-year 
lead way that a person . . . if you qualify for that bursary, you 
have within three years to take advantage of the bursary. And 
that gives you the chance to raise some funds for yourself, 
maybe work a year. 
 
Just this past year, for example, I’ve got a student who came to 
see me who has had two years under their belt now in 
education. But they find that they’re . . . financially they’re 
being strapped even with the bursary and were thinking of 
taking a year just to build up some funds to complete their 
education. However if they take the year, then they lose access 
to the rest of the bursary. 
 
And so I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your thoughts are on 
that? Whether it’s something that could be pursued in 
discussions with the universities, considering the fact that most 
of the money that they receive comes through public funding? 
So I’m wondering if you could give me a view or whether or 
not there’s been any discussion that has taken place to address 
this concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I guess we weren’t done and so 
I look forward to more conversation here. 
 
As the hon. member may be aware, it will often be the case that 
when the universities are providing bursaries, that they’re 
providing bursaries through funds that have been raised through 
donations that they seek for that purpose, and therefore would 
quite legitimately be entitled to determine what the criteria are. 
 
However, I have noted the hon. member’s recommendations 
and I’ve made a note of it and I will commit to the member that 
I will pass it along to both of the universities — the suggestion 
that it be something that be made available, if I remember your 
precise recommendation, for up to three years. 
 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would 
appreciate that. Because I think . . . it would seem to me the fact 
that the funds are there, and with some discussion, we should be 
able to find a rationale that assists students who are planning to 
further their education and have qualified for, but need that 
period of time to really establish themselves and kind of look 
ahead too. 
 
One of the problems they do face is, you’re finished grade 12 
and you’re still not exactly sure where you want to head. And 
you don’t want to really be using money in a program that may 
not be a real benefit to you. So I’m looking forward to response 
in the near future, or whenever possible, as to some of the 
challenges of what can be done in this regard. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I’m going to invite the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. First of all, seated 
immediately to my right is our deputy minister, Ron Styles. To 
my left is Barry Martin, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations. Seated directly behind me is Carl Neggers, the 
assistant deputy minister for policy; and just to my right and 
behind me is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy minister of 
corporate services. 
 
Subvote (H101) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like to 
thank the minister and his officials for attending the House 
again this afternoon. The last time we met it was under difficult 
circumstances and it was a much abbreviated visit, and we hope 
that we won’t have any recurrences. 
 
And in view of the fact that there are many questions pertaining 
to the Highways financial and budgetary areas, several of my 
colleagues have asked an opportunity to present questions. And 
I would like to turn the floor over now to one of my colleagues. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I also want to 
welcome the officials here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think I could probably shorten my questions up 
by just saying that every highway in my constituency is in 
terrible condition, and sit down and leave it at that. But I would 
like to individualize some of these highways, Mr. Minister. 
 
We have a little town of Bangor, village of Bangor out there, to 
No. 9 Highway, that was a highway that was previously 
oil-surface and has gone back to gravel. But the calls we are 
getting — that this is one of the highways that is full of holes 
and in very poor condition. 
 
Another one, Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about and I think 

deserves some time because of the traffic load on that highway 
and I think it would be a lot more traffic on that road if it was in 
better shape, but your department, I think it was two years ago, 
from Wroxton to Kamsack, resurfaced about half of that 
highway. And it was in dire need of that at the time and that 
was a great improvement; but kind of bewildering to me is why 
we left the other half of that highway and up to this point not 
gone back. 
 
And I was wondering, Mr. Minister, what the reason for leaving 
that part of the highway, the other half of that highway, and not 
going back; and when we are going back to fix that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: —To the hon. member, it’s just very 
simply a matter of funding. We recognize the concerns that he 
has obviously. But the reason that it wasn’t entirely finished 
was very simply a matter of funding, and our intent for the 
coming year is simply to maintain it as best we can. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But I guess 
it’s . . . Again I say it’s very puzzling to me, because the work 
you are doing from Kamsack towards Canora is on a highway 
that I would say is far superior in surface. I’ve been on that 
highway a number of times and that road didn’t seem to me to 
be nearly as bad as one from Kamsack south on the portion that 
hasn’t been done. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, I’d go as far as to say the highway south 
from Kamsack is actually dangerous. And I think I’ve said this 
before in the House here, that when we have a rain out there it’s 
just like your vehicle is hydroplaning on this water that’s in the 
tracks out there, that I would hazard to say that they’re at least 
four or five inches deep in some spots, along with the holes that 
have developed in that highway. That highway out there from 
Kamsack south is in terrible, terrible condition. 
 
And I think many of the taxpayers out there are wondering why. 
It’s like repairing half of a chain where half of the links are 
brand new, half of the links are wore out, and the whole chain 
really for that matter then is still useless because you don’t want 
to even drive down it. I believe that highway, the traffic flow 
would be far heavier if we fix that highway from . . . totally 
from one end to the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to mention a few other highways out in my 
area that we’ve had a number of complaints on, one being No. 
80 from Churchbridge to Esterhazy, especially to the K1 mine. 
It’s really just like the surface of that highway is wore out. It’s 
going to take a lot of work, and I think the longer we leave that 
highway to fix it, far more expensive to fix. 
 
Also No. 8, Langenburg south to the Junction of 22. From 22 to 
Spy Hill has been rebuilt in the last — oh, I don’t know what it 
was — four, five years ago, and is a fairly good section of 
highway. But from Langenburg out to Junction of 22 is in very 
poor condition. 
 
Another highway, Mr. Minister, and it was one I was over 
Sunday night and it’s actually becoming very dangerous, is No. 
15 Highway from No. 9 crossover to No. 16. And there’s been 
portions of this resurfaced and repaired and actually standing up 
far better than I thought they would this spring, but there’s 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

sections that have probably never been actually more than just 
the odd hole filled in it. And it wasn’t that many miles, Mr. 
Minister, and I don’t think it would, you know, be a big section 
that needs to be addressed. 
 
But I’ll tell you the situation I had Sunday night is that a vehicle 
passed me and there was actually pieces of pavement flying up, 
that I would — you know, I’m not exaggerating — I would 
guess that were within probably two inches in diameter. And 
there’s a safety issue out there as well, and I’m sure people will 
bring this to the Highway department, the crew out there to look 
at. But I would hope maybe you would mention it to them too, 
Mr. Minister, because sooner or later somebody is going to get 
hurt on that piece. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about and I’ve had a 
number of calls and you may as well, it deals with the issue of 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . of the Highway 16 travelling through 
Churchbridge. And as you know, Mr. Minister, I think you’re 
aware that the highway runs not directly through the centre of 
Churchbridge, but very close to that proximity. And a number 
of the school kids have to cross that highway every day — 
probably every day of the week for that matter — because the 
rinks are both on one side and a number of the facilities that 
they go to every day of the week are on the other side of the 
highway. 
 
The concerns that have been brought to me . . . and people 
realize there’s no quick solution here. I think the speed limit 
through there is 60 kilometres an hour. And I don’t want to 
stand here today and let you think that I know the answers of 
what could solve the problem because I don’t. And most of the 
calls I’ve got, I think most of the people calling can’t push a 
button and say, this is what you need out there. As we know in 
many cases people will call us and say, oh this would fix it. 
 
No one is really saying that. They’re saying, we have a real 
concern out here because, as you know, there’s been a number 
of accidents out there. There’s been the odd kid hit on a bike 
and that out here in the last year or two, and I’m not sure what 
the answer is. Some have suggested maybe we should try and 
improve the signage. Others have said that the traffic is actually 
not slowing down to the 60 kilometres an hour. 
 
And I’d just like your response to that, Mr. Minister, if there 
was some suggestions you had maybe, that we could do to deal 
with this problem because I know where these people are 
coming from. There’s been a number of accidents have 
happened at that intersection. It’s wide open. 
 
I go through there a number of times per year myself, and I’m 
not just sure what the answer is, but I think before we do have 
another very serious accident there, maybe you know whether 
. . . I think there’s even flashing lights at this point, so it’s not 
that there isn’t something there to warn the traffic. For some 
reason the number of the traffic vehicles going through are not 
heeding the signs that are there. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all I have to say that I’ve 
learned something here today. I actually . . . I was always of the 
view that the hon. member did have the answers for these 

things, so now I’m going to have to figure some of these things 
out on my own as well I guess. 
 
Let me say generally though that in the spring of the year, right 
now, is obviously the time of the year when you see the most 
damage. We’ve had the full winter with all of the breakup and 
very little time to have done the repairs that need to be done. So 
the most exaggerated time of the year when most of the damage 
is done is right now. 
 
I want to say with respect to the . . . I think it’s the highway you 
were talking about with respect to Kamsack and Canora, that is 
actually a structural pavement. And I know we often get 
questions about structural pavement. Why are you repairing 
roads that are obviously . . . look like they’re the best roads in 
the province? It’s largely because of the investment that we’ve 
made in those roads. We want to ensure that our investment in 
those roads is maintained. 
 
And quite often there will be cracks that are sub-surfaced that 
we can’t see but our engineering department has monitored that 
and has detected that it needs . . . that our value for . . . for the 
dollar invested it makes sense to do the repair right now even 
though there’s the . . . the surface may not look like it needs it. 
So for minimal amount of money invested it will maintain that 
investment for some number of years into the future. 
 
Also I appreciate the concern that you’ve raised with respect to 
the pavement broken up and at times causing a safety issue. 
Again this is the worst time of the year for that without a doubt 
and we do have crews to the best of their ability monitoring the 
roads on a regular basis to clean up any breakup that does 
occur. 
 
And lastly we . . . if the issue of the Churchbridge intersection 
has been brought to our attention, we apologize but we’re not 
aware of it. But what I am prepared to do is to ensure that a 
maybe . . . we do safety audits in areas sometime, and certainly 
we’re prepared to do that in that particular area if that would be 
of assistance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials just a couple of questions here related to 
Highways 48 and No. 8. Mr. Minister, you are probably aware 
of the fact that some construction has taken place on Highway 
No. 8, north of 48, up to the Pipestone Valley, and then just last 
year south of Moosomin to the valley. 
 
And there’s about a stretch I’m guessing right now, it could be 
about 7 to 10 kilometres, and just wondering, Mr. Minister, 
what the plans are and if there’s any . . . are there any plans in 
place to complete that section of road so that you’ve got a very 
good highway from No. 1 down to Highway No. 48, or whether 
that section through the valley there now is just going to be left 
for a while. It’s becoming very poor. As my colleague 
indicated, it’s getting beaten up and certainly it’s an issue, I 
think, should be addressed rather than just having a short 
section between two sections that have been upgraded and 
really have been a major improvement to Highway No. 8 south 
of Moosomin. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just kind of give 
me an idea of what Highways’ plans are for that section of 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, first of all the south end of the 
road that you refer to, the section of road that you refer to was 
actually done under CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan 
Agri-Infrastructure Program) funding. So that’s how we 
accomplished fixing that one. The north end, as I understand it, 
was just completed. 
 
Now both of those sections, and actually in my response to the 
previous member’s question as well, these are . . . both sections 
are what we define are called structural pavement. So with the 
six to eight kilometres in the middle which are still thin 
membrane or TMS, thin membrane surface, obviously our plan 
would not be to leave, in the middle of structural pavement, a 
section of road as TMS. Our plan is clearly, in the short term, 
while it’s not on this year’s planning to be done this year, our 
intent in the very short term is to ensure that that as well is 
upgraded to a structural pavement. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I can appreciate the fact that it’s probably not in this 
year’s budget, especially when we look at the capital 
construction being . . . actually losing another $3 million this 
year. And one begins to wonder when we’re ever going to get 
some of these roads addressed. 
 
But while we’re talking of No. 8 between No. 1 and Highway 
48, Highway 48 itself from Kipling east to the junction of No. 9 
and then certainly from the No. 9 right through to the Manitoba 
border, specifically from the area of Fairlight to Maryfield, and 
then Highway No. 8 just south of Fairlight, I’ve had a number 
of complaints in the past while, actually past two, three weeks. 
And my colleague the member from Saltcoats was talking about 
some of the problems of the highways in his area. 
 
Highway No. 8 south of Fairlight, individuals have been 
running into major car problems. One of the problems is flying 
pavement actually not just creating a crack on a windshield but 
actually breaking windshields. Individuals have also called who 
have had their fuel lines pulled apart as a result of the broken 
pavement there, Mr. Minister. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what plans the department has to address Highway 48 
and Highway 8 in that southeast corner of the province. 
 
I say that, Mr. Minister, because I believe when you . . . if you 
were to look very carefully at Highway 48 — and I know Mr. 
Martin would be aware of this as well, having served in that 
area — but Highway 48 when you come in from Manitoba 
you’ve got excellent highway right up to the Saskatchewan 
border. 
 
And I have had a number of people comment about the fact as 
you’re coming west from Virden on this beautiful highway in 
Manitoba and you hit the Saskatchewan boundary and we’ve 
got this big sign that says Saskatchewan Naturally, and the 
comments from people are yes, it looks like it’s natural all right, 
we’re going back to where we were about 50 years ago. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if you look very carefully, when you look at 
economic development, and your government has talked a fair 
bit about economic development, you look at economic 
development, we look at tourism, and Highway 48 and 

Highway No. 8 serve two purposes as well. Both Economic 
Development and departmental officials are quite well aware of 
the fact that we’ve got crossroads 8 and 48, the Pool high 
terminal there, and that’s one of the reasons that we’re going to 
have to work extensively to upgrade the highways in the very 
near future, because of the heavy traffic flow with grain flowing 
on it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I’d like to know is if your officials and if 
you can give us a commitment to some firm progress or work 
on both of these highways? And I know I could go at them in 
pieces and extensively address a number of the concerns there, 
but I’d just like to know exactly where we are and what plans 
are being put in place to upgrade those highways to address the 
fact that they can be a real benefit? A good highway system 
there, a real benefit in the areas of tourism and economic 
development in that part of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay. You raise a number of questions 
and issues and I want to try to respond. 
 
First of all, with respect to the amount of funding on the capital 
side. In actual fact the amount of funding reduction was 3.5 
million which you referred to, was directly related to the federal 
government’s reduction in the CAIP funding. That’s the 
Canadian agricultural infrastructure program. 
 
We actually partially backfilled that so in fact the province’s 
contribution to capital construction has actually gone up while 
at the same time the overall reduction . . . There is a reduction; 
you are absolutely correct, but it’s a direct reflection of a 
reduction in the CAIP funding from the federal government. 
 
With respect to . . . And we often get this raised with us with 
respect to how roads affect tourists coming to Saskatchewan. 
First of all, I would I think dispute that. While certainly it’s 
critical that we maintain the infrastructure, the numbers would 
not reflect that at all. In fact we have an increase in the tourism 
growth coming to Saskatchewan. It’s been exponential growth 
year over year in the last number of years. 
 
So while it’s critical, certainly the criticism that we receive 
sometimes from the public that says that tourists, once they’ve 
been here, won’t come back and we’re going to lose tourist 
numbers, doesn’t seem to be reflected in the tourist numbers 
that we see each year. 
 
With respect to the two roads that you have directly referred to, 
they are certainly of importance. We acknowledge that. We are 
right now working with the area transportation planning 
committees to determine what are their highest priorities within 
the area that you’ve described. And certainly we’ll wait to see 
what they recommend with respect to highways, which we 
anticipate, I would believe in the very short term we would 
know what their highest priorities are within the area that you 
described. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about tourism, I think you mentioned 
about the fact that tourism has been up. And that doesn’t 
necessarily reflect the fact of increasing majorly in our area. I 
think when you’re talking tourism, you’re talking all of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

And I’m not saying we’re losing a lot. But I’m saying we could 
certainly, by upgrading that access road, it would improve the 
amount of tourism into that area of the province. Because I 
know that a number of people find that in order to arrive at say 
the Moose Mountain area from Manitoba, it’s much more 
convenient to come in south to the Carlyle area, or No. 1 and 
then proceed north or south on No. 9 respectively. And so, Mr. 
Minister, certainly that’s an area that needs to be addressed. 
 
The heavy haul, I don’t think you can argue with the fact that 
when you’ve got high throughput terminals, you’ve got the 
United Grain Growers has established a high throughput 
elevator in the Redvers area. You’ve got 8 and 48 crossroads at 
the junctions of 48 and No. 8, and then the MTL (Moosomin 
Terminal Limited) on No. 1. So there’s a fair bit of heavy grain 
traffic and movement on that highway as well as the tourism 
area. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would certainly trust that we can sit down 
and arrive at a long-term plan. Because I’m not expecting that 
it’s going to be done overnight. We’ve got a fair number of 
kilometres that need to be addressed in there, and some of those 
. . . most of that would mean major construction, not just 
sealing off the top there, because that won’t address the concern 
there. You’ll just have ongoing breakup of the pavement. 
 
(1630) 
 
So I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to have your 
department look very closely and develop a strategy to address 
the construction of these roads in the near future with a plan. I 
believe the public would certainly say, well we’ve got a plan in 
place and it looks like we’re really going someplace. 
 
Like you talked about the . . . what is it — $250 million to 
upgrade the two major highways in this province, and, well we 
haven’t seen a lot as yet. But begin to move on it, and really set 
a stage out there — that’s what the public is looking for and 
they’re not expecting things overnight. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m asking if it’s at all possible to come up 
with a significant plan to address those two highway systems. 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well let me say in general, obviously 
we agree with the member on his remarks with respect to 
economic development and tourism. Anything that we can do to 
improve those roads will obviously improve the economy in 
that area and will assist in things like tourism. 
 
With respect to plans, we have laid out . . . and I agree as well 
that the public I think doesn’t expect us to accomplish 
everything in one year and I think they do prefer a plan to be 
laid out. And that is partly why in the absence, largely the 
absence of federal funding, we’ve laid out a plan over 10 years 
to spend $2.5 billion. 
 
Most recently out of the election we committed to spending a 
billion over four years. Starting this year, we’ve spent 
one-quarter of that. Based on the projections, it probably will 
actually exceed that. 
 
And in the discussions we’ve had most recently in this 

legislature with respect to the issue of twinning, as well — I 
know it’s not what the public would desire right now, but 
obviously, again in the absence of funding from any other areas, 
specifically the federal government — we have laid out a plan 
to twin the two major Trans-Canada Highways, 1 and 16, over 
the next 15 years. 
 
So I agree entirely that it’s important that we do lay out a plan 
for the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, officials, I have . . . 
well many questions about all the highways in my constituency. 
But right now I’ll start with the worst one, which is Highway 15 
from the town of Kenaston west to Outlook. 
 
It is basically destroyed in that area. There was a serious 
accident I believe last fall where two vehicles were going down 
there in broad daylight, and they met and one was thrown in the 
path of the other just from the roughness of the ruts. In that area 
we’ve had numerous, numerous complaints. Everyday there’s 
phone calls over this particular stretch of highway. 
 
I’m going to ask you, what are your plans in this particular 
stretch of highway for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think specifically, to the member, on 
the section that he is referring to, that is from Kenaston west to 
Highway No. 19, we are planning a resurfacing project there of 
almost $2 million this year. And the tender we believe will be 
going out in the fairly near future for that particular stretch of 
road. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, well thank you. My constituents will 
be happy that you’re going to do some work on that stretch 
because it is . . . it’s glad it’s being addressed because 
somebody is going to be killed on that stretch in the near future 
if it’s not being addressed. So I will pass that message on to you 
and probably save your office maybe a lot of phone calls 
coming up. 
 
One of the concerns I have on that highway because there have 
been various vehicles damage to them . . . I’ve had a constituent 
phone that he . . . a piece of pavement was broke off and his 
vehicle was damaged. And it was not flagged because he 
approached SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), went 
through that, and they’d said well if it’s flagged they don’t pay 
damage. 
 
Now in an instance like this where it wasn’t flagged — and he 
has proof that it wasn’t — and they’re still not paying, whose 
responsibility is this? Does it come back to the Highways 
department for a section of . . . Basically it was a piece of 
pavement about a foot by a foot that broke loose as he was 
driving through, come up and damaged his vehicle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say generally, in policy, this has 
been the practice in years past and continues to be. On a section 
of road, if it is unmarked and has shown to cause, with proof, 
vehicle damage, we are certainly prepared to — and it would 
not, and in that case usually SGI apparently does not, would not 
cover it if it’s been unmarked — we would be prepared to 
entertain a claim if the individual so chooses. 
 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair. Okay, I’ll basically I’ll forward you 
his claim here. I have all the information. I’ll either do it either 
later today or tomorrow morning. I’ll come to your office; we 
can discuss it. 
 
On . . . we did so far pretty good on Highway 15. Let’s talk 
about Highway 42. It’s basically between Eyebrow and Keeler. 
Are you planning any work this summer on that stretch of 
highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — On the stretch that the member refers to, 
we certainly recognize that it is severely distressed. And while 
there isn’t anything contemplated for complete rebuilding of 
that right now, we are doing what we would describe as above 
average maintenance so there will be deep structural patching. 
So there’ll be sections that’ll probably actually be dug up and 
with clay put in, to ensure that the places where there is repair 
done, it’s not just surface but it’s also subsurface. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister and his officials. Can’t let a chance to question the 
Transportation minister go by when you come from 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency, and when you drive on almost 
every highway in Saskatchewan. At least, I should say, try to 
drive on every highway in Saskatchewan. I hit a spot near 
Eyebrow the other day, at about 60 kilometres per hour, and 
wondered if I was going to be able to keep my CVA (Central 
Vehicle Agency), CVA vehicle on the road. It was just 
preposterous. And they’ve been trying to fix that hole which is 
about 100 feet long and gets ruts about a foot deep in it every 
week. And I see them losing the battle there at the community 
of Eyebrow. 
 
The highways are a huge concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It doesn’t matter whether you live in Regina or 
Saskatoon or if you live out in rural areas, you do use the 
highways of this province. And it doesn’t matter if it’s . . . 
whether it’s No. 1, the Trans-Canada or the Yellowhead or a 
secondary highway, the quality of our highways leave a lot to 
be desired. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple of years ago — and this was before you 
were the Minister of Highways, when your predecessor was the 
Minister of Highways — there was a road and rail meeting in 
my community of Beechy, Saskatchewan, and they were 
determining the possibility of short lining the CN (Canadian 
National) rail line from near Saskatoon, down through Beechy, 
and also west through Eston. 
 
And there was a member, a member from the Highways 
department speaking on behalf of the Department of Highways 
at that meeting, and he made a comment that I’ve never 
forgotten and it’s concerned me. He told me that secondary 
highways in Saskatchewan were not designed for truck traffic. 
And he’s talking about heavy truck traffic. He’s talking about 
B-trains. He’s talking about the, you know, the big loads. 
 
He said that they were not designed for this traffic and seemed 
to indicate to the public at that meeting — and there was, you 
know, 2 or 300 people at that meeting — that trucks really had 
no business being on those highways. They weren’t designed 
for them. 
 

And now, Mr. Minister, as you know, even if the rail line did 
stay in — and there is a good possibility that it may not if they 
can’t reach an agreement with CN rail — but even if the rail 
line continued to haul grain out of that area, there is still a need 
for heavy truck traffic. 
 
There is still a need to move machinery, to move fertilizer, to 
move livestock, to move specialty crops in a timely fashion on a 
highway that’s safe. The highway under consideration, I think 
at that time, was Highway 342 from Beechy to Kyle but it’s 
applicable to any secondary highway in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to know if the Government of Saskatchewan has 
changed its position. And when it’s designing, when it’s 
repairing, and when it’s constructing secondary highways in 
Saskatchewan, are you designing them now for truck traffic, 
realizing that truck traffic is a fact of life in Saskatchewan and 
in our economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all let me say to the member, as 
the former minister responsible for Sask Property Management 
and CVAs, I want you to be sure that you’re looking after our 
CVAs. And also, as the member from the constituency of 
Meadow Lake up in the northwest corner of the province, I too 
have the opportunity to travel a lot of the provincial highways 
and I know that many of the concerns that you raise are 
legitimate. 
 
I think specifically the short-line that you’re referring to is the 
West Coat Road and Rail. And I guess I would have to concur 
with what our department officials said, and that is that many of 
the roads that were constructed some years ago were in fact not 
designed for the traffic that they now are being asked to bear. 
 
And as an example, this number . . . You may have heard us use 
this before in the department, but we estimate right now just the 
transition from rail to road of goods, from road to rail in the last 
few years, is now costing our department and the province 
about $50 million a year additional by way of increased road 
costs. 
 
And on a budget of $250 million annually right now you can 
see that that’s a substantial amount. And we estimate in the very 
near future, if the continued abandonment continues at the rate 
it is, it probably will cost us about $80 million a year additional, 
above and beyond what we’re currently spending. 
 
Having said that however, we are working with the area 
transportation planning committees to ensure that in the future 
the roads that we are designing and building are in fact designed 
and built for the traffic that obviously will be travelling across 
those roads in the near future and well into the future. I 
shouldn’t say to the near future but into the long future. 
 
(1645) 
 
With respect, particularly in an area that you might be interested 
— that’s Highway No. 342 — we actually have a partnership 
between the department and the RM (rural municipality) to 
upgrade that road to a standard that does accommodate some of 
the heavy haul there. So we do understand that the roads have to 
be upgraded. We are certainly not telling the trucking 
companies, and farmers for that matter, that we don’t believe 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2000 

that they should be travelling on those roads. We have a huge 
challenge in trying to upgrade the roads to the standard that the 
public will need into the future. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you for that answer. And I would 
just point out to the Minister of Transportation that in the last 
election campaign in fact we suggested an extra $50 million 
was needed for the Department of Highways, above what was 
currently being spent by the government. I think you’ve 
collaborated the fact that we were right on the money in 
suggesting that. 
 
And the longer you wait to put forward those additional funds, 
and I recognize there are a few more dollars this year than last 
year, but we are still behind where we need to be in funding 
highways. And it makes the repair costs accelerate, and the 
potential of reaching the target budget required to actually 
improve our highways becomes more and more difficult the 
longer you wait to increase funding for highways. 
 
I also am aware of the arrangement on repairing Highway 342 
between the RM and the Department of Highways. But I would 
point out that the finish, the surface that the Department of 
Highways, your department, put on Highway 342 after the RM 
had built the grade, is already deteriorating, less than one year 
after the construction was completed. 
 
And that brings me to my second question, and I’m sure you’ve 
answered this in years previous, and your predecessors have 
probably also tried to answer the same question, but I want to 
hear myself from you as the minister. And that is, what is the 
rationale to keep filling these potholes year after year after year, 
to see them re-emerge year after year after year. And having, 
you know . . . maybe I’m recently an MLA, but I’m also a 
Member of Parliament and I’ve travelled Saskatchewan for 
years, and the same highways seem to get a little worse every 
year. And this filling the potholes is a losing battle. 
 
Do you, first of all, recognize that in your department, and if 
you do recognize it, what are you going to do to turn that 
around. Because it’s costing the taxpayers a lot of money and 
it’s causing the drivers of Saskatchewan a lot of grief to have to 
fight this pothole epidemic year after year. And it seems to be 
longer periods of time with more and more damage to their 
vehicles on more and more highways. It’s unacceptable. It’s a 
losing battle. It’s costing our economy, I would dare say, 
millions of dollars now in lost productivity and damage to 
vehicles. 
 
I talked to one of my constituents who lost an axle on his trailer 
hitting a pothole on a Saskatchewan highway. Now even if your 
department did reimburse him for that — and I don’t think you 
have — but even if you did, the expense of lost time, 
inconvenience, perhaps an accident that causes bodily harm, is 
serious enough that it warrants a new direction from your 
department. And I’d like to hear what new directions your 
department might be taking to solve this problem and these 
problems once and for all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say again, first of all, several 
things. We recognized the . . . I mean we recognized the 
concerns that you raise with respect to road damage. But it 
really is a matter of cost-effectiveness. If we had the dollars to 

reconstruct all of the roads certainly, probably that is what we 
would do if it made sense. 
 
But to maintain roads and to do the maintenance and repair is 
much more cost-effective. Although it might not be the thing to 
do for long term, it certainly is the only affordable thing that we 
can do short term. So that’s the explanation as to why we 
continue to do maintenance and repairs. 
 
Some of the things we have done — and recognizing that 
concern though — some of the things we’ve done obviously 
this year, you’ve acknowledged that there was an increase in 
our budget of fifteen and a half million dollars, which is 
actually a 6.6 per cent increase over last year, and well above 
the average departmental increase and well above the rate of 
inflation. 
 
As an example in the last . . . since 1996, recognizing that 
concern, we’ve increased the department’s budget by almost 48 
per cent. With respect to the area of road maintenance or 
preservation, I should say, there has been an increase this past 
year of almost 12 per cent — acknowledging the very concerns 
that you raise. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — You didn’t quite answer my question. Yes, 
I know you have to keep filling the potholes every year. But 
I’ve seen highway construction. 
 
I think of the highway north of Beechy to Dinsmore, Highway 
42 and Highway 342. I think of many other highways where 
you’ve actually done reconstruction. You’ve tore up the old 
coat, you’ve put on a new layer of asphalt, and yet within about 
two years the potholes are there just as bad as they were before 
the construction was done. That’s got to be hugely costly to the 
taxpayer and we’re not getting any benefit, because we’ve got 
the pothole filling crews back out there two years later. 
 
Why don’t you change your policy so those highways are fixed 
once and for all properly? Isn’t it far less cost to the taxpayer to 
do it once right than to do a half — better not use that word — a 
halfway job and have to repeat it two years later? Or put up 
with potholes for five or ten years, and then redo it again? And 
more potholes. Like there’s no winning this battle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member. First of all, 
unfortunately in Saskatchewan with the weather conditions that 
we have and the winters that we have, we have yet to design a 
road surface that is pothole free. It doesn’t matter . . . some 
roads obviously, the higher standard you’ll see potholes not 
nearly as soon, but you will eventually see potholes on roads in 
Saskatchewan, every single one. 
 
And with respect to your specific question about whether or not 
we should build roads to a very high standard to avoid the 
maintenance and repair and why don’t we do that, if we were to 
go to what we described as an AC surface which is an asphalt 
concrete surface, you can add on an additional $80,000 per 
kilometre, which is nowhere near the cost of what we spend in 
maintenance on an ordinary per kilometre of road in any 
number of years. 
 
So while it might be much more desirable to drive on a surface 
that has an asphalt concrete surface, it’s simply really a matter 



May 8, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

of cost-effectiveness of whether the people of Saskatchewan 
can afford a road like that. And until we get additional funding 
from somewhere, it just unfortunately isn’t an option. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you. That’s an answer, but I 
don’t think it’s a good enough answer. 
 
The people who drive those roads, who have to put up with the 
repair on their vehicles — and it costs them in some cases 
hundreds, perhaps thousands of dollars a year in extra 
maintenance costs — I believe, want you to re-look at some of 
your economics. And they are not convinced and neither am I 
convinced that filling potholes and crack filling year after year 
after year is more economical than doing it right the first time. 
 
Also you talk about the weather here, but the weather here isn’t 
a whole lot different than it is in Alberta or Manitoba. And I 
suggest to you as a minister — you drive some roads, 
particularly ask you to take the highway from Medicine Hat to 
Empress which basically goes through nowhere. All it does is 
bring shoppers from Saskatchewan into Medicine Hat to do 
their shopping. And this is secondary highway country — 
excellent highway — and far better than once you hit Empress. 
And I believe you go to Burstall, and if the member from 
Cypress Hills correct me on that, where suddenly you’re on a 
goat trail again. Same weather on both sides of the border, Mr. 
Minister. So that answer really is not acceptable. 
 
Last thing I want to mention is the first Highways minister in 
the NDP government was a former member for 
Rosetown-Biggar, Berny Wiens. And Mr. Wiens had this idea 
that he was going to return our secondary highways to gravel. 
And I think he was going to start with the highway from 
Rosetown to his own community of Herschel, and he got told in 
short order that that was unacceptable. 
 
But it seems like in a very quiet manner this government is 
trying to return secondary highways to gravel. It has happened 
from parts of Kenaston to Nokomis and Highway 15; parts of 
Highway 44 from Loreburn to Davidson, from Elrose to 
Dinsmore; from — and I can’t remember the number of the 
highway — from Riverhurst up to Birsay. Many highways that 
were dust-free are now gravel roads again. 
 
And I would ask the minister what percentage of roads does he 
anticipate, of paved roads, surfaced roads, will be returned to 
gravel over the next two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, just let me say if the 
member is comparing Saskatchewan’s roads to Alberta, I think 
he makes my point, that whether or not it’s cost effective, 
Alberta’s budget for highways is about a billion dollars a year 
for just a fraction of the number of roads that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So if the member is suggesting that we should spend that 
amount of money in Saskatchewan in that it would be cheaper 
than the maintenance, I guess I would have to respectfully 
disagree . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it would be 
desirable again to have very high quality roads everywhere in 
Saskatchewan. It’s simply a matter of affordability. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before we adjourn 
today I would move by leave of the Assembly and seconded by 
the member from Regina Victoria: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 11, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Act be discharged 
and the said Bill now be withdrawn. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 
 


