





























































Hansard: April 18, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 777 
 April 18, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan who would be so pleased to see the tax rate on 
gasoline lowered. And their prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, Saskatoon, Burr, Jansen, Herschel, and throughout 
the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today against forced amalgamation for municipalities. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Fosston. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the high level of fuel prices and tax. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Gronlid, Star City, and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to high price of fuel. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. And they’re from Saskatoon — signatures from 
Saskatoon. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
stand today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the forced municipal amalgamation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And the people that signed this are from Watson, Porcupine 
Plain, Melfort, and Weekes. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to rise 
again on behalf of people in Swift Current who are concerned 
about the Swift Current hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer references a desire on the part of people 
for the provincial government to assist in the regeneration plan 
to the Swift Current Regional Hospital of approximately $7.54 
million, thereby allowing the Swift Current Health Board the 
opportunity to provide improved health care services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
reduce fuel tax. The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Petitioners are from Bladworth, Davidson, Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
concerning the reduced fuel tax in this province. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from Melfort, Ridgedale, Star 
City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high cost of fuel, and the 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by citizens of Cupar, Markinch, and Southey. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition regarding the high cost of fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the petition is from the citizens of Meadow Lake and 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions for private Bills are presented 
and laid on the Table by members as follows: 
 

By Mr. Wartman, the petition for the Regina Golf Club in 
the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Ms. Lorje, a petition for the Mennonite Central 
Committee Saskatchewan Inc. in the province of 
Saskatchewan; and 
 
By Mr. Thomson, of the Archiepiscopal Corporation of 
Regina and the Episcopal Corporation of Saskatoon in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; and 
 
To cause the government to provide funding for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone, it’s truly a pleasure and an 
honour through you and to you to the members of the 
Assembly, to introduce 29 grade 11 and 12 students from 
Sedley, Saskatchewan. They are accompanied today by their 

teacher, Sandi Robertson, and chaperons, Debbie Unser and 
Eugene Deis. So we want to welcome them here. 
 
And I want to assure them, although the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone was unable to welcome you here, he assures 
me that he’ll be dropping by the school and providing you all 
with Dairy Queen treats at the appropriate time. 
 
So I wish all members would join me in welcoming you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 15 grade 8 students from the Herchmer School in my 
riding, Regina Elphinstone. They’re here with their teacher, 
Aaron Anderson, and I know all members will want to join with 
me in welcoming the students here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a young gentleman in your gallery. His name is 
Jacob Eliason. Jacob is an exchange student from Sweden. He’s 
under the Youth Rotary Exchange program. He’s been in the 
Lloydminster area for about eight months. 
 
He’s had the opportunity to come to Regina and tour the 
Assembly, and we’re very pleased that he’s able to come and 
spend a little time with us and really witness how hard we do 
work here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I was on my feet, 
I should have taken the opportunity to introduce through you 
and to you to members of this Assembly, one of the members of 
the city council of the city of Swift Current, and the 
implementation officer for southwest 911 — the first rural 911 
system in the province of Saskatchewan. I’d ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Doug Line to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canada Life Expansion 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Normally I save all 
the good news for Fridays, but this week I wanted to get a quick 
start. I want to bring to the attention of members a very good 
news story out of yesterday’s announcement that Canada Life 
would be locating another 75 positions . . . another 75 jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — These 75 positions will be located here in 
the western regional headquarters for Canada Life. One of the 
pieces of this story that was not picked up as much by the media 
yesterday. but it’s nevertheless very important, is the fact that 
they’re taking advantage of the JobStart and Future Skills 
program to help train these new people. 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

Yesterday’s announcement will bring the total number of 
full-time permanent positions at the Regina office to over 800. 
Mr. Speaker, this announcement is simply more proof that 
things are going very well for our economy and that jobs are 
being created here in Regina, here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Davidson Citizen Runs in Boston Marathon 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I informed this Assembly that a constituent of mine 
from Davidson, Mr. Bob Bender, was competing in the 2000 
Boston Marathon. I would like to give the members an update. 
 
I understand that race day was not much different from our 
typical Saskatchewan weather — cold and windy. The 
temperature hovered around 8 degrees Celsius; the winds at 10 
to 20 miles per hour. Not exactly ideal weather is it, Mr. 
Speaker? Only a dedicated and trained athlete would be able to 
complete a 26-mile marathon under these conditions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have such an athlete in my constituency. 
Having been raised on the Saskatchewan prairies, these weather 
conditions are not new to Mr. Bender. Bob can be seen running 
down the gravel roads in various types of weather conditions. 
And I am sure he’s run under worse conditions than those at 
yesterday’s Boston Marathon. 
 
Bob completed . . . Bob completed the 26-mile marathon in 2 
hours and 52 minutes. He finished 14th in his age division. As I 
mentioned yesterday, Bob recently celebrated his 50th birthday. 
Overall he placed 606 out of a field of over 17,000 runners. 
 
I’m sure the members would agree that this is quite an 
accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this Saturday, April 22 is Earth Day. It is a day for us 
to recommit to preserving and restoring our environment. 
 
All Canadians concerned about the environment will observe 
this day along with millions of people worldwide in 164 
countries. Earth Day is the largest environmental event 
celebrated on the planet. 
 
As we approach this day, I draw to the attention of all members 
of the Assembly the words written by 1,600 scientists from 71 
countries — including over half of all Nobel Prize winners — 
in a document entitled World Scientists’ Warning to Humanity.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the words of these 
scientists. They say, and I quote: 
 

Human beings and the natural (environment) are on a 
collision course . . . If not checked, many of our current 
practices put at serious risk the future that we wish for 
human society and the plant and animal kingdoms, and 
may so alter the living world that it will be unable to 

sustain life in the manner that we know . . . No more than 
one or a few decades remain before the chance to avert the 
threats we now confront will be lost and the prospects for 
humanity immeasurably diminished. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone to get involved with local Earth 
Day events and to make Earth Day a very successful event. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Election Results in Prince Edward Island and Yukon 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s been a tough few 
weeks for the NDP (New Democratic Party) in Canada. In 
Saskatchewan the NDP’s budget has fallen flat and all of 
Saskatchewan is opposing the NDP’s plans for forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Yesterday the NDP lost government in the Yukon, and also 
yesterday in Prince Edward Island the Tories under Pat Binns 
trounced the NDP and the Liberals winning every seat but one. 
There is a Saskatchewan connection to Prince Edward Island, 
Mr. Speaker. Premier Pat Binns is from Radville, a great part of 
the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy that I proudly 
represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, congratulations to Premier Pat Binns on his 
huge election win in Prince Edward Island. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberals Win in Yukon 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday was a great day for Liberals in Western 
Canada — a historic day. Liberals for the first time won the 
Yukon election. Liberals won 10 seats, six for the NDP and one 
for the Yukon Party — 16 out of 17 for the good guys. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And while Saskatchewan 
Conservatives are sleeping, thanks to their former leader, 
Conservatives in PEI (Prince Edward Island) are celebrating. 
Yukon Liberals won on the same issues that Liberals in 
Saskatchewan ran on — good management, less confrontation, 
and the ability to act as honest brokers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are important lessons to be learned from the 
Yukon election. Perhaps the first and most significant lesson is 
that naming your political party after where you live is no 
guarantee of success. In fact, the Yukon Party’s failure clearly 
shows that no matter how much you try to change your spots or 
bury your head in the sand in hopes that no one will see you, the 
public will always see through you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the failure of a party named after a 
province or territory. I wouldn’t be surprised if the 
Saskatchewan Party tried to change its spots once again by 
calling themselves the new green, progressive, Saskatchewan, 
liberal, social democratic, conservative, reform, alliance, 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

neighbourhood block party to avoid the fate of their Yukon 
cousins. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party’s Role in World History 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 
to shed some light on what has been cause for speculation in 
this House concerning the significant role of the Saskatchewan 
Party in world history. 
 
Yesterday the Premier alleged that a certain SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) report 
written in 1992 was in fact a Saskatchewan Party publication. 
The fact that this report was published five years prior to the 
formation of our party did nothing to distract the Premier from 
his delusional state. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the face of these allegations, we’ve decided 
now it is time to come clean regarding the Saskatchewan 
Party’s role in history. 
 
I would like to confirm for all of the members of this House and 
the voters of Saskatchewan that our party has indeed played a 
role in history over the years. It is true that the hon. member for 
Lloydminster had a hand in drafting the Magna Carta, Mr. 
Speaker. The member for Cannington’s signature may not 
appear on the Bill of Rights, but it was his quote that said . . . 
that gave the right of the people to keep and bear arms and shall 
not be infringed. It’s also indeed true that the member for 
Rosthern penned Kenny Roger’s greatest hit, The Gambler, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that is not all. We also had a hand, of course, 
in writing the Maastricht Treaty, The Israel-Jordan Peace Treaty 
of 1994, and the World War II Instruments of Surrender. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been deeply 
involved in the drafting of most of the significant documents in 
the history of our civilization, save for two, The Regina 
Manifesto and the Liberal-NDP Coalition Agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increased Number of Physicians in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Universal health care is 
part of the Canadian identity. In just 38 years it has gone from 
being an ambitious experiment by a progressive provincial 
government to the one clear badge of pride for Canadians. And 
I am proud that this government has always been and will 
continue to be committed to universal accessibility to health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to announce to the House that 
the number of physicians in Saskatchewan has remained steady 
and has even seen an increase. This assures that the people of 
Saskatchewan will continue to be able to access a physician 
when needed. According to the Department of Health, the 
number of physicians and specialists working in this province 
has increased during the period of March ’96 through March 
2000. 
 

The numbers suggest that we will see continued increases. As 
well, the retention rate for family medicine graduates from the 
University of Saskatchewan is over 70 per cent for the second 
year in a row. 
 
I want to commend the Saskatchewan Medical Association and 
the government for working together to make sure that more 
physicians make Saskatchewan their permanent residence. We 
hope that our good relationship with the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) will continue so that we can build on this 
momentum. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bank of Nova Scotia Branch in Choiceland 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish I was rising in 
this Assembly to tell my colleagues about more good news for 
Saskatchewan, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is not the 
case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have learned that yet another Saskatchewan 
business is closing its doors. And no, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
moving to the supposedly greener pastures of Alberta; it is 
closing for good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bank of Nova Scotia in the town of 
Choiceland, which is in my constituency of Saskatchewan 
Rivers, is closing its branch after serving customers there since 
1949. The bank is shutting down for good. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are under a constant attack by an 
arrogant NDP government, Mr. Speaker, which has ruled the 
province a better or should I say the worst part of 40 years. This 
socialist regime has built an environment that is business 
unfriendly and tax happy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how long will these attacks on the people of 
Saskatchewan continue? The members opposite got a wake-up 
call September 16. But what was their reaction? They waved 
dollars in front of their Liberal friends in a sad attempt to retain 
their death grip on Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Choiceland who went to the Bank of 
Nova Scotia will now have to drive to Nipawin for such a 
service. That means a drive on unsafe NDP highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that this government wakes up and 
smells the coffee — which I think costs 6 per cent more after 
the budget. People are leaving, businesses are leaving, and this 
government is doing nothing to change it. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, I see 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

you’re using the same brilliant negotiating tactics you used with 
the nurses last year. You obviously didn’t learn anything 
because now you’re using those same strong-arm tactics with 
local governments. 
 
Mr. Premier, delegates at yesterday’s SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) emergency convention are 
rejecting your May 15 deadline and they are rejecting your plan 
for forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you remove these two conditions before you 
sit down with SUMA and SARM? Will you drop the May 15 
deadline and will assure municipal leaders that you will not 
proceed with forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 
member for the question and report to him and to the House that 
I have not received any formal communication from Mr. 
Harrison of SARM respecting their convention of yesterday, 
although I do understand that efforts are being made to arrange 
a meeting with members of the government sometime 
tomorrow involving the leadership of SARM and the leadership 
of SUMA. 
 
I will want to see what resolutions, if any, were passed. I 
understand three were passed at SARM. I’ve not seen those. I 
would like to see what the outcome of the SUMA debate is 
today before obviously making any further comment on that, 
and if a meeting is arranged tomorrow and I’m a party to it, I’ll 
be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these people have learned nothing. This same Premier that 
called an election in the middle of harvest now wants to 
amalgamate local government in the middle of seeding. You 
just don’t get it, Mr. Premier. 
 
You say you owe it to the people working in municipal 
government to move in a timely fashion. But those same people 
are telling you: back off. 
 
Mr. Premier, both SUMA and SARM are saying this deadline is 
too tight. SUMA says the issues involved are too complex. 
SARM says your government has shattered the trust of local 
governments, and it will take more than just a few weeks to 
rebuild. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you listening? Will you remove the club above 
their heads and back off on your May 15 deadline? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I told I believe both Mr. 
Badham but for sure Mr. Harrison — Badham and Harrison — 
but for sure Mr. Harrison when we reviewed the letter on the 
two occasions in my office that May 15 was a target date that 
the government would like to have set out with respect to the 
proposals being set up and developed and discussed. 
 

I indicated that it would be tough. I also said — my exact words 
— to Mr. Harrison were that this date is not written in stone. 
And that we’re flexible with respect to this. I repeat that in the 
legislature today. And that is known to the president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the RM 
(rural municipality). 
 
But I do want to draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, the 
following. This process started back in 1996 with a 
memorandum of agreement — in 1996. Regional meetings of 
SUMA and SARM in ’97-98 and from there the task force 
report of Garcea and the recommendations of Garcea which the 
hon. members misrepresent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, I realize this started in 1996, the memorandum of 
understanding, but you neglected in the last election campaign 
to mention that you were going to force municipalities in this 
province to amalgamate. Another one of your unclaimed 
promises. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s no wonder municipal leaders don’t trust you. 
There’s a letter in the editor . . . in today’s StarPhoenix. It 
called SARM short-sighted, dishonest and blinded by partisan 
politics. And who is that letter from, Mr. Premier? Your former 
minister of Municipal Government, Carol Carson; your 1999 
NDP election candidate, Carol Carson. The one that got 
thumped by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support the statements made by your NDP 
candidate? Do you agree that SARM is short-sighted, dishonest, 
and blinded by self-interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, so far as I know there is 
no department in this side of the House responsible for the 
statements made by former statements either on this side or . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the House. 
 
And I want to make one point with respect to the hon. member 
opposite. If they want me to start answering questions 
pertaining to letters written by private citizens who once were 
in public life, then they’d better be ready to start answering 
questions and statements made by people in private life who sat 
on the treasury side of the benches, namely, the former premier, 
Grant Devine, and how they administered the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But they are doing everything that they can do to escape any 
kind of attachment during that period from 1982-1991. In fact, 
the statement made by the member from Swift Current today 
did everything to run away from their history. 
 
Well they can run as far as they want, but everybody knows 
who they really are. They don’t answer for their administration; 
I don’t answer for the private views of private people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, all I 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

ask you is do you agree with her comments? I didn’t ask for a 
tirade — just yes or no. Do you agree? 
 
Mr. Premier, there is absolutely no evidence that forced 
amalgamation saves money and improves services. In fact, all 
the evidence is to the contrary. I’d like to read a quote: 
 

Amalgamation was supposed to ensure lower taxes and 
better services. It has achieved neither . . . 
 
Poorer services. Higher taxes. Soaring debt. (and) Lost 
jobs. All . . . from the . . . amalgamation plan - and don’t 
forget the erosion of local identity too.  

 
Do you know who said that, Mr. Premier? Nova Scotia NDP 
Leader Robert Chisholm in regards to that province’s 
experience with forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Premier, there’s no evidence that forced amalgamation 
saves money or improves services. SUMA says that, SARM 
says that, even the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member kindly go 
directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, are 
you listening? Will you drop you dictatorial attitude and back 
off forced amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say 
that none of us were offered a tirade by the hon. member from 
Saltcoats in this presumed last question. 
 
But let me say that this side’s position has been very clear and 
straightforward right from day one — right from 1996 when we 
signed the MOU (memorandum of understanding), when we 
had SARM and SUMA and the Government of Saskatchewan 
as signatories to not having a forced amalgamation. Forced 
amalgamation are the words of the Saskatchewan Party. Forced 
amalgamation is the misrepresentation of this issue by them and 
the false statements by . . . 
 
We believe that the consensual way to approach this matter is 
the best way. It’s the co-operative fashion to do it. That’s the 
policy of this government and we wish that they would join in 
this cause to build a stronger rural Saskatchewan, a stronger 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister of 
Education and I really hope the Premier lets him answer. People 
are starting to wonder, since he isn’t allowed to speak in here, is 
he allowed to speak at the cabinet table? Or are you even 
allowed to sit at the cabinet table or do you have a little kid’s 
table over somewhere in the corner? 
 
Mr. Minister, school divisions throughout this province have 
had the opportunity to analyze the devastating budget that was 

presented. And I’m wondering what they’re telling you. 
 
Specifically, how many school boards are going to be forced to 
cut services? How many are going to be forced to cut teaching 
positions? And how many will be forced to raise taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the budget that we tabled is of record now. And I want to point 
out to the members opposite that the increases to the Education 
budget on the base were the highest of the big three departments 
between Health, Education, and Social Services; that we are 
increasing the budget $28.5 million — 18.5 million in increased 
funding to the foundation operating grant, an additional 5 
million in capital, an additional 14 million for special education, 
an additional 2 million for learning technology, and then a 
doubling of the northern communities fund. 
 
That is our budget, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very proud of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education seems 
very pleased with his budget. But you know what? The people 
out there are not pleased with the budget. 
 
I’m going to give you some answers of questions that I asked 
every school division out in this province. I sent out a survey. 
And out of those that have responded to date, 80 per cent of 
them said they’re going to have to cut services, 85 per cent say 
they’re going to have to cut teachers, and 71 per cent say 
they’re not going to be able to go ahead with capital 
improvements. And that’s because of your failure to deliver an 
adequate Education budget for the children of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you support a budget that’s going to 
devastate education in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
we’ve commented on the increases to our budget, and they are 
substantial. But we also recognize that the contributions of the 
provincial government is on an equalization basis — that school 
divisions have the autonomy, they are the ones that determine 
service delivery within their area, and we provide that on an 
equalization basis. 
 
And not only that, but when you listen to the comments from 
some of the school divisions — and I wouldn’t trust a survey 
from the Saskatchewan Party — the fact is that financial 
officers in the major school divisions in Saskatoon indicated 
that without the substantial increase by this provincial 
government, they would have had to increase their mill rate 
higher than the rate of inflation. And it is in fact lower than the 
rate of inflation, where the . . . these people across the floor — 
zero, freeze, frozen, unzero, not one cent, not one cent for 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier only 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

allows the minister to comment on one area of this government, 
and that area he has failed. 
 
We also asked whether school boards plan to raise the mill rate 
as a result of this budget — 76 per cent of those people said yes. 
In fact the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
are telling us they expect the mill rate to go up by at least 
one-half a mill on average across the entire province. That’s a 
$20 million tax increase, Mr. Minister. That brings the total 
hidden tax increase in this budget to over $85 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, you campaigned on a promise to cut education 
tax. How can you possibly support a budget that shows a 20 per 
. . . $20 million increase in taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly when we talk about our budget we’re very proud. 
 
And I haven’t even mentioned the $25 million to . . . in 
agriculture rebate on agricultural land. And when you, when 
you start adding it up — 28.5 million, 18.5 million on the 
foundation operating grant, an additional $1.9 million in grants 
in lieu, the additional $14 million for special education projects, 
the additional 5 million for capital to cover 115 capital projects 
in communities throughout Saskatchewan — the numbers add 
up to more than $50 million. 
 
And because it’s given on an equalization formula, there will 
be, there will be school divisions that have to look within their 
own divisions and make difficult decisions. But the fact of the 
matter is it was a substantial increase — two to three to four 
times the rate of inflation — and what we would have got from 
the members opposite is the rate of inflation — zero. Not 1 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister just 
doesn’t get it. School boards say you have to increase taxes, and 
there’s property tax revolts all around this province. They’re 
saying they cannot afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people used to say that children should be seen 
and not heard, and I’ll bet you right now that’s what the Premier 
is thinking about his Education minister. Many school boards in 
this province have amalgamated, Mr. Minister, voluntarily. And 
it’s worked very, very well that’s because they did it on their 
own. Yet the other day you said you would vote for forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 
 
As Education minister you know school boards have had a very 
positive experience with voluntary amalgamation — no 
government imposed deadlines, no threats from the provincial 
government. Given that experience, why on earth would you 
vote for a program of forced amalgamation for municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the policy on voluntary 
amalgamation whether we’re talking about school divisions or 
whether we’re talking about rural municipalities, our position is 
clear: we favour voluntary amalgamation. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
seen voluntary amalgamations of school divisions where we 
have seen 30 school divisions amalgamate to 10, a drop from 
120 several years ago to 100 school divisions today. And we are 
proud of the relationship that the government has had with the 
stakeholders in the education system. It has worked very well. 
And I would like to see that relationship develop between the 
government and rural municipalities. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser Self-Generation Project 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know you’re aware of the valuable contribution 
Weyerhaeuser makes to the city of Prince Albert. Weyerhaeuser 
is Prince Albert’s largest private sector employer. The company 
contributes millions of dollars in property and education taxes 
and Weyerhaeuser is a valuable and active member of the 
Prince Albert community. Weyerhaeuser’s latest initiative, a 
self-generation project that will lower operating costs and 
reduce greenhouse emissions, is meeting significant opposition 
from the Prince Albert city council. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you support Weyerhaeuser’s plan to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by generating some of its power 
through self-generation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that this government, and certainly the work that’s 
been done with the greenhouse gases and with the work on the 
energy side, we’re very, very pleased with in terms of what 
Weyerhaeuser has done. 
 
What I want to say to the member opposite is that the 
government officials on our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
have reviewed the Prince Albert bylaw and the current 
legislation does not appear to provide the legal basis. And 
what’s happening today is that that discussion between the city 
of Prince Albert and Weyerhaeuser is continuing, and it’s my 
view that we’ll get a resolve here as it relates to the two bodies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was hoping I could 
direct my question to the Minister of Energy and Mines. Now 
the Prince Albert city council has currently passed a bylaw that 
will slap a multi-million dollar tax on Weyerhaeuser’s 
self-generation project. Weyerhaeuser has stated that if the city 
taxes the electrical power from this self-generation project, the 
company will be forced to significantly reduce its voluntary 
contributions to further enhance, to beautify the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Now Mr. Cody, the mayor of Prince Albert, is asking the NDP 
to sponsor provincial legislation that will tax not only 
Weyerhaeuser’s self-generation project but all generation 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

projects in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the NDP government support Prince Albert 
Mayor Cody’s plan to reduce Weyerhaeuser’s ability to enhance 
any further upgrading or even expansion in Saskatchewan? And 
does the NDP support Mayor Cody’s plan to slap big taxes on 
all self-generation projects in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to highlight one 
more time for the member opposite because, as I’ve said, we’ve 
not had a formal request from the city of Prince Albert to 
change the legislation. 
 
I want to say this to the member, that this is about a discussion 
that is going on between Weyerhaeuser and the city of Prince 
Albert. And on this side of the House, it’s our view that that 
kind of participatory involvement is important. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that currently what’s 
happening is that the current legislation that we have does not 
provide for the legal basis for what you’re talking about to 
occur. So, therefore, what we’re encouraging the city of Prince 
Albert and the corporation of Weyerhaeuser is try to resolve 
that issue on their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to try once 
more here for the Minister of Energy and Mines. This is an 
Energy and Mines issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly the city of Prince Albert would like to 
carry on negotiations with Weyerhaeuser over the issue of 
self-generation. Unfortunately the city in their wisdom decided 
to pass a bylaw first, using the . . . rather the method of this 
government, carry a big stick and then walk softly. So instead, 
Weyerhaeuser has decided not to participate in negotiations 
until this bylaw is withdrawn. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the mayor has sent a letter to the Premier. 
The letter lays out the Mayor Cody’s tax . . . the case for taxing 
Weyerhaeuser’s self-generation project. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you state the position of the NDP 
government? And I want the position of the NDP government 
on Mayor Cody’s plan to slap a multi-million dollar tax on 
Weyerhaeuser’s self-generation project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker. I am going to try one more 
time for the member opposite, so that he understands exactly 
the process that we’ve been using to date. What I’ve said to the 
member opposite is that the city of Prince Albert and 
Weyerhaeuser are meeting and are discussing how they’re 
going to deal with this particular issue. 
 
Now, I can understand that the member opposite . . . that there 
has been a request, a request by the city of Prince Albert 
through its bylaw. But I want to say to the member opposite that 
the city of Prince Albert has not formally approached the 

government for a request to provide the city with legislative 
authority to pass the proposed bylaw. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that the city of Prince Alberta 
today, and Weyerhaeuser, are working to resolve this issue on 
their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to have to direct this question to the Premier; obviously 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs didn’t understand it. 
 
Now the mayor has written a letter . . . Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, the mayor has approached this government; he wrote a 
letter asking NDP government for support of his self-generation 
tax plan. Mr. Speaker, I’m tabling that letter today. 
 
The mayor of Prince Albert wants the province to pass 
legislation that will slap a heavy tax on every self-generation 
project in Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, the Kyoto Agreement 
requires the province to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
Weyerhaeuser is attempting to do its part by developing it’s 
own self-generation project. Now the company’s being told that 
they will be heavily taxed if they go ahead with the project. 
 
Mr. Premier, does the NDP government support Prince Albert 
Mayor Don Cody’s plan to slap a multi-million dollar tax on 
Weyerhaeuser’s self-generation project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d like to say one more time, Mr. Speaker, 
to the member opposite, that throughout the discussion process 
with Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert . . . And we recognize two 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first of all, that Weyerhaeuser is a good corporate citizen in 
this province and contributes tremendously to the economy of 
this province, in the same way that the city of Prince Albert 
recognizes the value of that corporation to their community. 
And I say to the member opposite and to this House, that the 
mayor of Prince Albert and the senior executive of 
Weyerhaeuser are working through this issue together on their 
own. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, we don’t need to bring it 
in here and we don’t need to play politics with it in the way in 
which you like to do on this side of the House. Instead of trying 
to conquer and divide the business of Prince Albert and the city 
of Prince Albert, let them have their discussions. Let them 
continue to try to work that out on their own. 
 
And if it makes its way to this House or makes its way to my 
table, then we’ll have an opportunity to deal with it. But don’t 
get in the way of good progress to date, Mr. Speaker, when 
communities and corporations are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess I’ll have to 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

continue directing my questions to the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs because he’s the only one who’s not stuck to his seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert is 
running newspaper advertisements on the self-generation tax. 
The city is supporting . . . is searching for an NDP MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) to sponsor Mayor 
Cody’s plan to oppose a multi-million dollar self-generation tax 
on Weyerhaeuser. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower and SaskEnergy are 
co-sponsoring a $50 million project to educate the public on 
greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Minister, maybe you should be 
encouraging the Prince Albert city council to sign up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is very simple. It’s the only one they 
can understand. Does the government support a tax on 
greenhouse gas reductions and the Kyoto Agreement as 
proposed by Prince Albert Mayor Don Cody? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a prime 
example of the way in which this opposition party approaches a 
number of issues. Because rather than talking about the fact that 
you have a municipal council today that’s working with the 
corporation to try to find a solution, he singles out only the 
mayor. And then he says that the mayor is a New Democrat in 
the same way in which you singled out . . . in the same way in 
which you single out Joe Garcea. What’d you say about Joe 
Garcea? 
 
You don’t talk about all the members on the task force, you talk 
about one man — Joe Garcea. And what you do is you try and 
divide the work of the people — dividing and rule. And I say to 
the member opposite, today in Prince Albert, you have the city 
of Prince Albert that’s working, collectively with 
Weyerhaeuser, to try to find a solution on the surcharge. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to let the community and the 
corporation work it out, and we’re not going to call on you to 
get into the middle of that and play the politics that you like to 
do with two sides. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 28, The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you kindly state your point of order. 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on several occasions in question period yesterday, the Premier 
quoted from a document entitled: “A Call to Action — 
Reforming and Revitalizing Urban Government in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
In doing so, the Premier seriously misrepresented this 
document. On three separate occasions, on pages 754 and 756 
of Hansard, the Premier said the document was written by the 
Saskatchewan Party. On one more occasion, on page 756, the 
Premier said the document is “. . . the word of the official 
opposition . . .” 
 
In fact this paper is a SUMA document prepared in 1992 
following the SUMA fall symposium on urban government 
reform. This symposium was attended by over 200 municipal 
leaders from 98 Saskatchewan communities. Representatives of 
SUMA and SARM also attended this, along with 
representatives . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is absolutely not a point of 
order — he’s reading a document. And I just say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and ask if you will rule on the issue of whether this in 
fact is a point of order? 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, this appears to be a dispute 
between two members with respect to certain facts. I will, 
however, on the basis of what the House Leader has raised, I 
will review the contents of the documents that you’ve referred 
to and come back with a ruling . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 
you would just kindly, briefly, outline your point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this occurred approximately four and a half years ago, in 1993, 
before the Saskatchewan Party was formed. Yet on every 
occasion yesterday the Premier referred to it as a Saskatchewan 
Party document. He never once referred to it as a SUMA 
document. 
 
Again to quote the Premier, at one point on page 755 of 
Hansard, he actually fabricated a quote by injecting the words 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. That’s bordering close to 
unparliamentary. Would you complete your point, please? 
Make it succinctly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said, and I 
quote from page 755 of Hansard: 
 

Your conditions are that, quote: “these conditions for 
amalgamation will never exist; the perfect moment to act is 
now.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that quote does not appear anywhere in that 
SUMA document. In fact the word amalgamation does not 
appear in the SUMA document. 
 
The Premier interjected the words “for amalgamation” into the 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

quote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday you admonished all members for 
behaviour unbecoming the traditions and practices of this 
Assembly. I would ask that you further consider the serious 
matter of misrepresenting and misquoting documents, and have 
the Premier apologize — acknowledge that — and apologize 
for this misrepresentation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will review the comments in the outline of 
the point of order the hon. member has raised and report back to 
the House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to present the 
answer to the question. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Municipal Reserves and Assets 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
be moving a motion later in my talk this afternoon to deal with 
the freezing of municipal reserves and assets of municipalities 
— whether it be urban or rural — out there in Saskatchewan. 
But before I move that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk to it for a 
few minutes. 
 
As we know . . . and maybe the Minister of Municipal 
Government doesn’t seem to understand this because a couple 
of days when asked whose money this is, Mr. Speaker, that 
minister made the comment that actually it was part local 
municipalities and partly the government’s money. Well, I may 
and like to inform that member, Mr. Speaker, that surpluses and 
reserves out there are in no way, shape, or form any part of this 
government or any other provincial government’s funding or 
money. They belong to the local taxpayer and that’s where they 
should stay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These people have kept their house in order through good 
management, through the downloading of this government, 
since 1991. Some municipalities, as much as two-thirds of their 
funding has been cut, and through all of this have amounted up 
a number of surpluses, reserves, capital funds; have looked after 
their house, kept everything in order even though all the things 
that happen from that government. And now we have a rumour 
going around that those funds may be frozen by this 
government. 
 
So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that this is only rumour even 
though the minister wouldn’t deny it. I hope it’s only rumour 
and that we never see this come . . . to come true. Most 
municipalities that I’ve talked to out there are scared to death of 
this government and what they may do. And forgive them if 
they’re somewhat cautious of some of the things that have 
happened in the past. Forgive them if they’re cautious what may 

happen to their reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that one of the past ministers of 
Municipal Government, Carol Carson, the former member for 
Melfort I believe, calls SARM or the members of SARM, 
short-sighted, dishonest, blinded by partisan politics. That 
attitude, Mr. Speaker, got her where she is today — thumped 
twice by our member from Melfort, a member of the 
Saskatchewan Party. It’s no wonder she’s out there, not a 
member in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That arrogant attitude, Mr. Speaker, is running rampant on that 
side of the House. It happened in the Blakeney days and it’s 
happening all over again. We see this every day now with the 
way that this government is treating municipal governments at 
all levels. Whether it’s city, town, rural, hamlet, village, 
whatever it is, Mr. Speaker, that arrogant attitude is carrying 
through. 
 
How a few MLAs on that side, Mr. Speaker, and the 
bureaucracy that they built up, know better what is better for 
people, especially in rural Saskatchewan but even the cities, 
than the people do out there when you see the backlash that’s 
going on there today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see at meetings like there was in Yorkton the other day 
where there’s 800 people, lack . . . missing one person, Mr. 
Speaker — the Minister of Municipal Government — which I 
found amazing considering he represents that constituency and 
didn’t seem to have the intestinal fortitude to go out and listen 
to what his people have to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these meetings had, as I said, 800 in Yorkton 
against forced amalgamation; 350 at Kipling, Mr. Speaker, 
against forced amalgamation; 500 in Melfort against forced 
amalgamation; Prince Albert, 550 against forced amalgamation. 
The message was clear everywhere Mr. Garcea and his task 
force went — we don’t want any part of forced amalgamation. 
We didn’t ask for it; we don’t need it; we don’t want it. 
 
And I wonder what part of that message this government can’t 
get, Mr. Speaker. It was loud and clear. And why these select 
few people in here — mostly from the city, I may comment on, 
Mr. Speaker — are telling rural people, we know what’s best 
for you. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s time they started listening to the 
people of this province. Listen to what they have to say. Let’s 
let them be a government for the people, not a government for 
themselves, a government that’s only worried about survival of 
that NDP regime over there, worried about the survival of that 
NDP coalition, Mr. Speaker — not one bit worried about people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment too . . . you know, it goes 
back — and you’ve heard this before, Mr. Speaker — why I as 
a politician am here today. And it goes back to that same 
minister, that same arrogant attitude, Carol Carson, when she 
was the minister of Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from ’91 to ’95, I was reeve of an RM and we had 
downloading and funding cuts left and right, so that we as 
municipal governments out there could balance the budget 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

because these people had no idea how to go about cutting costs 
and trying to balance it themselves. They let for a good example 
or a big amount of that money local municipal governments do 
their dirty work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in about 1994, we set up a meeting in 
Yorkton when I was reeve, and we invited this same Carol 
Carson, at that time minister of Municipal Government, to come 
out and explain to us how we could handle these funding cuts, 
where were we going to pass them on other than to the local 
taxpayer. We wanted to explain to her that yes, we were trying 
to cut services, we were trying to make every end of our local 
government more efficient, but there was a limit, Mr. Speaker, 
to how far we could go. 
 
Now remembering, Mr. Speaker, this was 1994, do you know 
what happened, Mr. Speaker? Carol Carson never had the 
decency, as minister of Municipal Government, to come out to 
our meeting, explain to these same local people, Mr. Speaker, 
why she saw it was necessary to download to the level that this 
government was doing. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in hindsight she did me a big favour. 
Because when she wouldn’t show up, I decided to get involved 
in politics and, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason I’m here today. 
Local people out there supported me because they didn’t like 
what this government was doing to them then and they don’t 
like what this government is doing to them now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — They’ve got a big club, Mr. Speaker, being 
held over their heads with forced amalgamation and once again 
today, the Premier will not deny it. The Minister of Municipal 
Government will not deny it. Mr. Speaker, the Premier says we 
aren’t talking about forced amalgamation. 
 
Well then it’s easy. All he has to do is either in this House, 
outside in a scrum, is say we will never force amalgamation on 
local municipalities; and you know what, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
back off. Because that’s what we’re asking and that’s what the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking. No forced amalgamation, 
Mr. Premier. Please come out and say it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone a step further. We’d like the Leader of 
the Liberal Party to stand up. It was because of the actions of 
that leader that we have a coalition government, Mr. Speaker. 
Otherwise we would have a minority government that also the 
people of Saskatchewan elected on September 16 and we 
wouldn’t have to be dealing with forced amalgamation cause 
that government wouldn’t dare bring it forward if it wasn’t for 
the Liberals in this province making this coalition government. 
People of this province were looking forward to a minority 
government because they thought that government would be 
responsive to the wishes of Saskatchewan people. 
 
What do we have, Mr. Speaker, we have the same old, same old 
arrogant attitude between that coalition government that’s 
looking more and more every day than nothing more than an 
NDP regime that’s lost in time, back in the ages, out of touch 
with people, Mr. Speaker. It just goes on and on over there. 

That government does not for a minute listen to what people say 
out there. 
 
In fact, the Minister of Municipal Government did a double take 
in a scrum the other day. You know what happened, Mr. 
Speaker? The minister actually started to make sense. He said, 
you know, and if I can . . . I’m not quoting him, Mr. Speaker, 
but the feeling I got he was saying, is maybe we could back off. 
Maybe we could slow it down. And he said that out in the 
media, Mr. Speaker, at least that’s my take of what he was 
saying. 
 
I followed in a scrum, Mr. Speaker, and I said, you know that’s 
the first positive feeling I’ve had from that minister over 
municipal amalgamation. In fact, in the first part of that scrum, 
I commended that minister, Mr. Speaker, because I liked what I 
was hearing. I finally heard that minister say, maybe we can 
slow it down. Maybe we’ll take our time. Maybe we’ll talk to 
the municipality. I was really optimistic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what happened? Out comes the bureaucrats and said 
to the media, hold on. We’ve got to explain our position. Well 
we did a double take, Mr. Speaker because then the minister did 
another scrum. And my goodness, Mr. Speaker, we went from 
here to here in a matter of 30 seconds. Because then after 
checking with his bureaucrats, the minister is saying, oh, I’m 
keeping my options open. The same rhetoric we’ve been 
hearing for the last two, three weeks on forced amalgamation. 
 
I mean, who is running the show, Mr. Speaker? The minister, 
the Premier, or the bureaucrats? When it takes bureaucrats to 
have to come out and we do a double take, Mr. Speaker, it was 
very disappointing for me to see that happen. As critic for rural 
municipal government, can you imagine how disappointing that 
was when the people out especially in rural Saskatchewan heard 
that now we have a minister maybe starting to listen and 30 
seconds later throwing that page away and saying, no, I’m 
going to listen to my bureaucrats. They always tell me what to 
say; I better say what they’re telling me. 
 
Amazing, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have a minister that can 
think for himself, think on his feet, speak for himself. He 
doesn’t need his bureaucrats to come out with a paper and say, 
oh no, Mr. Minister, this is where you’ll really stand. It may be 
not what you believe in, but this is exactly what you’re going to 
say. Amazing, Mr. Speaker, when we have a weak minister like 
that that can’t stand up for himself. And you know who’s 
paying the price, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan. 
Because once forced amalgamation . . . should it ever be 
brought in and pushed through, we can’t turn back. 
 
Health reform is a perfect example. When I was a reeve, Mr. 
Speaker, I was part of what we thought under the Louise 
Simard regime and Health reform meetings out there, we 
thought we had input. We had nothing because about halfway 
through our negotiations and talks, that minister at that time, 
Health minister, came out and did what she wanted. 
 
Health reform has been a disaster, Mr. Speaker. We know that, 
that government knows that, and the people of Saskatchewan 
know that, but guess what we’re going to do now? We’re going 
to force amalgamation, create these same kind of monster 
bureaucratic nightmares, as Health has done because we haven’t 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

learned that health care was a disaster. We’re going to do it all 
over again, and again against the wishes of the Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Again I say, Mr. Speaker, how on earth does a small number of 
members on that side of the House and a large bureaucratic 
machine know better what’s good for Saskatchewan people 
than actually Saskatchewan people know what’s good for 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you hear speakers over here today talking on 
this issue, you’re going to know that we’re talking from the 
heart. And do you know why that is? Is because we represent 
those same rural . . . town and rural people. We represent them. 
We’re bringing their views forward. That’s why we honestly 
know what we’re talking about and believe in what we’re 
talking about and we don’t need our bureaucrats to tell us what 
we think and what we will say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on but we have 25 members, 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, and I’m sure are very 
serious about what’s happening in this province with forced 
amalgamation and freezing of the reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move my motion now to let others 
have their say on this issue. But, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that 
the members opposite — whether you are backbenchers, 
cabinet ministers — listen on this issue and listen to what we’re 
saying. We represent people in rural Saskatchewan. We’re not 
criticizing you; we’re asking you to listen. 
 
Please listen to what our people are saying. We don’t want 
forced amalgamation. Get the club away from above our heads 
and we’ll sit down and talk, but we will not have you force your 
way upon us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I’d like to move the motion, and I will 
read it: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to abandon any 
plans to freeze or otherwise take control of municipal 
reserves and assets. 
 

Seconded by the member for Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
stand behind my colleague here in regards to amalgamation — 
forced amalgamation. And I would like to bring forth some 
concerns of the people from my constituency in regards to 
forced amalgamation. They are running around trying to figure 
out what they should do, especially when it comes out that this 
Assembly urges the government to abandon and freeze the 
plans of all the assets of the municipalities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what would you do if you were a councillor 
or a reeve — what would you do? You can’t stand there 
because you have an obligation to the people that you represent. 
They put you in power; you have to represent them. And our 
government is not listening. Our members opposite, like our 

health districts, are not listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, I’ve had many reeves phone 
me and tell me: what should we do? Shall we sell off our 
assets? It’s no use keeping them if they’re going to be frozen. 
And I said to the members or to the members of the RMs: well 
take it in stride, but as this government is moving very quickly, 
maybe you should too. 
 
I stand with my member who put forth the motion in stating 
that, why May 15? Why can’t this be held off? Joe Garcea got 
up and did task force meetings all over this province. And to my 
recollection, not one member . . . not one member from the 
members opposite got up enough courage to come over and 
listen to one of those meetings — not one. 
 
But I guarantee you, I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, we all took 
our turns over this side listening because we represent the RMs. 
We represent the people in the RMs. We stand up and say that 
this is wrong, and if the members opposite would have got up 
and gone to these meetings they would have known that this is 
wrong. Every meeting that we went to, and I attended the one in 
Prince Albert, there was lots of members that spoke there 
regarding the amalgamation. And they said, we don’t want 
forced amalgamation. In other words, to the government: what 
part of no don’t you understand? 
 
It’s just like in the election that was held here not that long ago. 
When 60 per cent of the vote . . . popular vote went to our party. 
When that happened, when that happened, sir, it showed that we 
were in . . . with dealing with the people of this province. The 
people know where we come from. We are in touch with the 
rural people in the towns and the villages. 
 
And it’s amazing that after winning the most popular votes 
there, we are still the opposition. But we as the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to do our utmost to hold this government 
accountable. 
 
And this is one step . . . this is one step, sir, that we are going to 
hold them to it. Because the RMs, the people from the RMs 
want us to be accountable to this government. We have to be 
because this is so wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SARM president, Sinclair Harrison, has spoke 
many, many times from SARM in regards to this forced 
amalgamation. He and SARM members have said to this 
government many, many times to back off. We don’t need it 
now. We are in favour of voluntary amalgamation. But I don’t 
believe this government opposite understands the word 
voluntary amalgamation because voluntary doesn’t fall in their 
word vocabulary. It’s one way or no way. 
 
As one member from the Prince Albert meeting mentioned to 
me, he said, you know, I thought this province of 
Saskatchewan, under legislation in a democratic way, was for 
the people, by the people. Maybe the members opposite should 
read that and understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday there was a group of people from the 
RM . . . all RMs ventured their way to Regina to a meeting with 
the SARM delegates. My brother, Robert, who represents the 
RM of Meeting Lake was also on that bus that came down here. 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

They came down here with a forceful attack to stop the 
government in what they were doing. 
 
There was 295 RMs represented in the meeting yesterday. Mr. 
Speaker when that comes out of 297 present RMs that could 
have been there, that’s two RMs that weren’t there. Now that 
should tell the government opposite that the people with the 
RMs are concerned — very concerned. The people that talked 
about tax revolts were mad. And these same people are bringing 
forth their concerns regarding the forced amalgamation. 
 
We don’t need the amalgamation, they said. There was 
representatives from all of my constituency there. Most and all 
of the reeves, some of the councillors ventured from 
Shellbrook, Big River, from Canwood, Parkside, all them 
centres, to show their frustration in that meeting yesterday 
towards the members opposite and the government. 
 
Today we have a group of people in Regina called SUMA 
delegates that are also meeting. And as a present mayor who — 
I resigned as of March 31 — as a present mayor I would have 
been there to voice my concern and frustration toward this 
government in their forced amalgamation. 
 
But delegates out today are meeting there to tell the government 
also that they side in with the RMs, that we do not need forced 
amalgamation. As I stand here, my former colleagues said, and 
I quote: “Make no apologies for whipping up opposition on this 
issue because the province has been ignorant to rural concerns.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that has never been more true and prevalent. 
They do not understand rural Saskatchewan. In fact, 99.9 per 
cent of them don’t understand rural Saskatchewan. We have to 
get out of the cities of Saskatoon and Regina in order to find out 
there’s more to Saskatchewan than the two big cities. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the heart of Saskatchewan comes from 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s how this province got going. That’s 
how this province diversed and keeping the life of 
Saskatchewan going. And it’s rural Saskatchewan that does 
that. And maybe they should look at where the backbone, where 
the backbone of this province comes from. And the backbone of 
this province comes from farmers, small-businessmen. 
 
And in that backbone of the province, there is a local 
government called RM government or municipal government. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that municipal government runs the most 
efficient government you could ever wish for. If our present 
government could think about doing some of that, it would 
make this government a lot better and this province a lot better. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, our RMs and council run an accountable 
government, something that this present government opposite 
doesn’t understand either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the concerns of my constituents 
— and there are many, many concerns — I realize that they’re 
speaking from the heart. They are a group of people that have 
worked with their own to make sure that the roads are kept up; 
they have worked with the people to make sure that there’s 
culverts in these roads. And that is all part of municipal 

government. 
 
When we look at that, Mr. Speaker, and look at what our 
government may be doing in freezing the reserves or assets, 
where do these RM officials go to? What do they do? We need, 
we need RM governments. We need them because they run a 
good system. Mr. Speaker, not only do they look after the roads 
that’s in their area, they look at tax collections, and everything 
else. And, Mr. Speaker, they do a great job of it. 
 
Now as my member before me said that there are lots of people 
here on this side that want to speak to this; they all have 
concerns. Well I would like to present more concerns, but I 
think everybody else should have a say. And therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be seconding the motion put forth by the 
member of Saltcoats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said it 
many times before outside this Assembly and now I’ll say it 
inside. There is not now and never has been any plan to 
confiscate municipal reserves. That is and always has been the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan. This resolution, 
Mr. Speaker, is an example of the big lie — say it often enough 
and someone might end up believing it. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that during the recent election 
campaign the Liberal Party took the following position on 
municipal amalgamation. And if I may, I wish to read a brief 
excerpt from a letter from our provincial leader: 
 

Saskatchewan Liberals are absolutely committed to 
ensuring that any changes to municipal structure be driven 
from the grassroots level. At no time will a Liberal 
Government force municipalities or school divisions to 
amalgamate, or apply undue pressure on local 
governments. We will foster an atmosphere of dialogue, 
but emphasize that any changes must be approved at the 
municipal level.  

 
That was our position before the September election; that 
continues to be our position. I happen to believe there is a need 
for reform of the municipal structure. But those reforms must be 
worked out with the people and not forced down their throats. 
 
I am distressed though, Mr. Speaker, with the wording of this 
resolution. It assumes, in the total absence of any evidence, that 
there is some plan to confiscate municipal reserves. This is the 
big lie, and it’s being repeated and repeated and repeated and 
spreading hysteria in our province with no basis whatsoever. 
 
The past two weeks, the past two weeks I have spent 
considerable of my time as the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood has said he has spent his time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I wasn’t sure if the member had 
made a comment with a word that may perhaps not be 
acceptable in the House. If that was so, kindly withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly didn’t accuse 
any hon. member of lying. However may I just say that this 
resolution is based on a premise which is a considerable 
variance with the facts . . . and I believe in it. 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

There is no evidence, there is no evidence, and there could be 
no evidence of a plan to confiscate municipal reserves because 
no such plan existed. And by voting for this resolution, 
members would be giving credibility to something which is 
incredible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Now as I said, I’ve spent considerable 
time in the past two weeks talking to RM councils; telling them 
no, your municipal reserves are not going to be confiscated so 
please do not listen to hysteria and fearmongering and dissipate 
your reserves because that would be most unfair to the councils, 
the municipalities, and the taxpayers. 
 
I take it that members opposite are encouraging their councils to 
do just that. I think this is terrible and I have been telling them 
— do not dissipate your reserves, do not believe those who tell 
you your reserves are going to be robbed — that is simply not 
so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — You know the bizarreness of this 
situation is demonstrated by the fact that when I say this 
resolution is based on fiction, on ether, on thin air, the members 
opposite get worried that I’m impugning something. Yet they 
are the ones who had spread across this province a story that the 
government plans to confiscate reserves when no such plan did 
or ever did exist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Well I want to tell the people of this 
province today, and I implore councillors of municipal . . . rural 
municipalities, do not dissipate your reserves. And if any 
councils takes the advice of members opposite and do that, they 
are going to feel terribly ripped off when they realize they have 
been burned, they have been had by — I won’t use the word, 
Mr. Speaker — by a fiction, an invention, a fabrication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now is the time for the people of Saskatchewan, 
both rural and urban, to pull together. No good can come of 
dividing us further by spreading false rumour. This government 
is committed to working together for the good of the entire 
province. We cannot afford to put up walls where none exist or 
should exist. Our strength is in working together. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Party says they’re working for rural 
Saskatchewan. But they seem to want to divide and conquer, 
putting one group against the other. Once their strategy of 
demolition is completed, then they’ll probably be off for what 
they are continually telling us is the greener pastures of Alberta. 
 
They are forever throwing up to us that, you know, there’s 
nothing in Saskatchewan worthwhile. Our history, our tradition, 
our character, our uniqueness, all to be thrown in the ashcan, 
and what we should try and do is become Albertans. Well 
ironically, Alberta did away with rural municipalities over 50 
years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make my position clear. I do favour 
municipal reform. We have more municipal government per 

capita than almost anywhere else. We have 160 villages with a 
population of less than a hundred. Do we need close to 900 
municipalities today? Few think that is the case. 
 
Certainly the member for Battleford-Cut Knife thinks there is a 
need for municipal reform. During debate in this Assembly last 
week, the hon. member for Battleford-Cut Knife said that he 
favours municipal amalgamation. The member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife, with the Saskatchewan Party, said he 
believed there should be municipal amalgamation. But he went 
on to say that that amalgamation ought to be voluntary. I agree 
with him, and I congratulate him for having the courage to say 
so, particularly following on his flattering remarks about the 
government’s budget when he was speaking in North Battleford 
recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the coalition government has no plans to freeze or 
take control of municipal reserves or assets in any way, shape, 
or form. That money belongs to the municipalities. For the 
Saskatchewan Party to suggest that this government is going to 
steal municipal reserves is preposterous and borders on the 
slanderous. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, hon. members. Some of the words, 
kindly choose them judiciously if you would, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Then I will say that the assumption 
which lies behind this resolution is a considerable variance with 
the facts. And to vote for this resolution adds credence, adds 
credence to what is being peddled here — spreading fear and 
hysteria in the province when there is no basis in fact for the 
fears they are attempting to spread. 
 
Well, this spreading fear and hysteria is not my way of doing 
business. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been 
fearmongering. They have been encouraging municipal councils 
to dissipate their reserves out of fear that they will be stolen by 
the province if they do not. 
 
This is loose rhetoric which is harmful and damaging to our 
province. And I must say when they find out that they have 
burned, they will realize they were led down the garden path 
when they were told that their reserves were going to be stolen. 
 
Well the member for Saltcoats brags about, as he calls it, 
whipping up opposition — an opposition based on fear and 
emotion and not on facts. He says he doesn’t apologize for this. 
He says there’s anger. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if I thought, as a citizen of North Battleford, 
that the provincial government was going to steal our $15 
million in reserves, I would be angry. I’d be extremely angry as 
a North Battleford resident and taxpayer. But the fact is that 
anger, that emotion would be based on hysteria being spread 
with no basis in fact whatsoever. And to whip up that sort of 
emotion or to whip up that sort of emotion with no facts behind 
it, to whip it up out of thin air, I think is deplorable politics. 
 
Well I would certainly never suggest that any member of this 
Assembly would purposely mislead the public, but I certainly 
hope that members opposite would make some small effort to 
inform themselves on this issue before they speak further on 
government plans to confiscate reserves when it’s simply not 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policy position of the Saskatchewan Party 
seems to be gauged on whichever way the wind is blowing at 
the moment. Well, Mr. Speaker, Lincoln was right — you can 
fool some of the people all the time, and all the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all the people all the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of repeating 
myself, may I say again this government has no plans to freeze 
or otherwise take control of municipal reserves or assets. May I 
say again, the Liberal Party campaigned in the last election 
against forced amalgamation, and that continues to be the 
position of our party. 
 
And in that vein, I would like to move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Prince Albert Carlton, an amendment to the motion 
brought by the member for Saltcoats, which will bring this 
motion in sync with the facts of the situation, as opposed to 
invention based on thin air and rumour mongering. 
 
And my amendment reads as follows: 
 

By deleting all words after the word Assembly and 
substituting the following therefor: 
 
understands that the provincial government has clearly 
stated it has no intention of claiming municipal reserves, 
and has also stated that by law these reserves fall within 
the jurisdiction of municipalities to be used as they 
determine in accordance with their legislative mandates 
and the needs of our common taxpayers. 
 

This is seconded by the member for Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to second the amendment proposed by the member 
from North Battleford because I think this amendment, Mr. 
Speaker, puts the whole debate into its proper and truthful 
context. 
 
And what it does, Mr. Speaker, is it puts the lie to a couple of 
lines in the motion originally sponsored by the member from 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . Saltcoats. Mr. Speaker, the original 
amendment, the original amendment . . . the original 
amendment to which the member from Saltcoats uses these 
words, abandon any plans to freeze — abandon any plans — 
making the assumption that there are some type of plans on the 
part of somebody to freeze or take control of municipal reserves 
and assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, Mr. Speaker, by 
law — by law as stated in the amendment of the member from 

the Battlefords — by law, the money that is in the hands and in 
the coffers and in the reserves and the bank accounts of the 
municipalities, belongs to the municipalities. It’s quite 
straightforward, Mr. Speaker, quite straightforward. 
 
And the members opposite use the word devious. And I agree. 
That was a very devious thing for them to do to try to put it into 
this original motion, and saying and implying that there were 
some type of plan to freeze or otherwise control municipal 
assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has been happening is over the last month, 
the opposition members have actually trivialized this debate by 
going up and, quote, their own quotes: “whipping up the 
opposition to amalgamation or to any change,” — period. 
 
And how have they done it, Mr. Speaker? Three ways. They’ve 
whipped opposition using basically three words. Number one, 
using the word forced. It’s their word, nobody else’s. It’s their 
word, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t come from any place else that I 
know of. Their word, forced. 
 
Number two, number two, using the word confiscation, Mr. 
Speaker. Nobody else’s word; their word. Confiscation — 
that’s their word. They’ve gone from meeting to meeting to 
meeting whipping up the opposition, using the words forced, 
using the words confiscation; and in doing so have trivialized 
the debate; have trivialized the debate. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, at this stage they’ve put themselves into 
a situation where they’ve trivialized . . . they’ve put them there 
in a situation where they cannot even put forward one positive 
idea, not one positive idea of how the workings between 
provincial government and municipalities can be improved. 
 
How the working between municipalities and school boards can 
be improved. How the workings between the municipalities and 
the ratepayers and the municipalities can improve. Not one 
word are they putting forward, Mr. Speaker — not one word. 
Instead their words are forced and confiscation. That’s what 
they’re using. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, there’s a third, there is a third 
concept that they have been promoting which is totally and . . . 
totally and patently untrue. And that third one is that they area 
saying there is no provision now for voluntary amalgamation. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I just want to draw the 
attention of all members of the House and to the member for 
Prince Albert Carlton, that . . . I just urge you to choose other 
words to describe the circumstance and not to suggest truth or 
untruth around the remarks of any hon. member. So if you 
could just seek other words, I think all members of the House 
would appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. About the concept 
of whether or not there can be voluntary . . . any kind of 
voluntary amalgamation or movement between municipalities 
at this stage, Mr. Speaker. I ask the members and I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, is it possible now for any two municipalities, or three 
or four, should they want to get together and make some kind of 
arrangement for a different legal status. Let’s use the word 
amalgamation. Should they choose to voluntarily amalgamate, 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

is it possible? Is it possible right now under existing law, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I ask the members opposite to consider it. Is it possible? Is 
it possible? And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you if you have two 
municipalities or more who’ve passed motions at their own 
ridings, at their own municipalities, and they come to the 
minister’s office with a letter stating that and they write a note 
to the minister, Mr. Speaker, it can be done. It can be done, Mr. 
Speaker. It can be done. 
 
Now you can make legislation to make this whole thing . . . 
give it a process of some sort. You can identify the process but, 
Mr. Speaker, it can be done. And to say that it can’t be done 
under the current circumstances is wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some experience about the coming together 
of units and of boards. And this government has some 
experience with that. And the most prominent experience, of 
course, is with the reform and the reorganization of our health 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
And everybody is aware we used to have something like several 
hundred health boards — boards of one hospital, boards of 
another hospital, boards of a home care district, boards 
responsible for a seniors’ high-rise . . . senior residences, Mr. 
Speaker. There were several hundred of them. What we did as 
. . . this government put forward legislation which provided for 
areas within the province to get together and draw their maps. 
 
And then they also came up with a system of setting up a 
government structure within each one of these, Mr. Speaker. 
And it was a very necessary step. And before that was even 
started, there was overall approval. There was overall request 
on the part of people in the health system. 
 
This government has a record, Mr. Speaker, of putting forward 
and . . . putting forward suggestions and working with people in 
Saskatchewan — rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan, 
large centres, smaller centres — with the most successful 
reform project ever in Canada in health, right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it can be done on the municipal level. But it cannot be 
done when we have people over there, the Tories on the other 
side, quote, “whipping up the opposition,” using the words 
forced and using the words confiscation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember going to some of those meetings 
on health. And there were people — at that stage, they were 
members of the opposition — who would get up, and they 
would try to weasel something in this way or put in a wedge 
into what was going on in another way. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, overall, overall, it worked. People kept their 
eye on the ball. They kept their eye on the needs that were 
identified, and they said — and they voted it — and they said 
that they were going to have just the system that we have 
evolved with. And I’m very proud of the fact that they were 
able to do it. And I’m very proud of the fact that they ignored a 
lot of the distracters that were going on at the time. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, over the long haul, the same thing’s 

going to happen here with municipalities. It will happen, Mr. 
Speaker. The people in the municipalities are going to tell the 
opposition to butt out eventually. They will eventually tell them 
to butt out. 
 
They will tell them that, Mr. Speaker. They will say, they will 
say, cool the rhetoric. They will say, cool the rhetoric, cool the 
rhetoric, because we have problems we want to solve. That’s 
what they’re going to say. That’s what they’re going to say, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another example of an amalgamation that 
was successful, and was run successfully right in my own 
community. And that is the amalgamations that was referred 
today by the Minister of Education. 
 
The Minister of Education indicated to this House that there 
were 30 school units that have combined now to 10 school units 
in Saskatchewan. They’ve done so quietly and voluntarily, 
without the interference of the opposition members, thank you 
very much. 
 
And what have they done, Mr. Speaker? As a result of this 
combination, the students in these areas have got better services 
and more services, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very proud of being 
part of a government that has fostered that kind of a 
relationship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my own area, Prince Albert — the unit, the Prince Albert 
rural unit, the Kinistino unit, the Prince Albert public school 
district, and the Prince Albert Comprehensive High School 
Board worked on this issue for several years. It took them a 
while and they had to overcome some difficulties. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, whenever you’re integrating one 
staff with another staff from another unit, there are always 
differences because they had different agreements to begin 
with. There have got to be some compromises put into place. 
There may be differences in mill rates. You got to make 
adjustments for differences in mill rates. You’ve got to take 
people’s feelings into account. You got to try, you got to take 
this into one step at a time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what has happened in Prince Albert? They’ve ended up 
with one school board called the Saskatchewan Rivers school 
district, Mr. Speaker. As a result — and this you can verify by 
asking the division head, Mr. Speaker, the director of education, 
or asking any board members — were there any benefits to 
this? Was it worthwhile? And the resounding answer that you 
will get from any board member there or from the director of 
education . . . and yes, I think now, Mr. Speaker, also from the 
staff members in general, the teaching staff, and the custodial 
staff will be a resounding yes, it was worth it. It was worth it. 
Why? Because they know what they’re there for. They were 
there for the students. 
 
And as a result of all the work that was done in the 
Saskatchewan Rivers school district, there are now 26 more 
teachers than would have been there, than would have been 
there under the old circumstances. And the services offered to 
these students are now equally available to everybody in the 
area, not just to the people directly in the city of Prince Albert, 
but equally all over. 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

Mr. Speaker, I say that’s a good model. I say that’s a model that 
other school districts can follow. I say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
a model that municipalities might want to look at. They might 
want to look at and from that establish what are the needs, what 
are the things that we should be doing together? Where are the 
areas that maybe we should be combining and where are the 
areas that we shouldn’t be? And they will do that with any kind 
of encouragement. 
 
I predict they will do it even despite what the members opposite 
are doing at this stage, Mr. Speaker, using the words forced and 
using the words confiscation, Mr. Speaker. Using the words 
forced . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . See and here he goes again. 
He says, that’s what you’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what you’re going to do, he says. That’s what the member says 
here in this House; that’s, I suspect, that that’s what the member 
says at all the meetings that he’s gone to. I suspect that that’s 
what he says — crying wolf. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say you can cry now and you can raise . . . 
you can cry wolf now, but in the end, Mr. Speaker, in the end 
they are going to tell you to butt out, Mr. Speaker. They are 
going to tell him to butt out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind, in anybody’s mind 
at this stage, about what is happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker. The circumstances driven by 
economics, driven largely by what’s happened to our wheat 
trade, driven by the transportation system, the changes in the 
transportation system, there is decay of infrastructure; there is 
decay of roads, Mr. Speaker. There is decay of railroads. There 
is decay of services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And what is happening, Mr. Speaker? This decay points to a 
need. To me it points to a need. It points to a need to say, hey, 
open up. We’ve got to look at this. We’ve got to look at this and 
we’ve got to come up with a solution. 
 
The opposition has now put themselves in a situation where it’s 
impossible — impossible — for them to ever come up with a 
solution. It’s impossible. Why? Because they are focused on the 
words forced and they’re focused on the words . . . What’s the 
other word? Confiscation. Confiscation. That’s what they’re 
focused on. Confiscation and forced. 
 
I sometimes wonder where that comes from. It didn’t come 
from the inside of this government, Mr. Speaker. It has to come 
from the interior. It must come from the . . . somehow from the 
interior, from the ideas that they have in their own minds. 
Maybe some kind of suppressed ideas, Mr. Speaker. Rather a 
strange situation. 
 
I’m advised by one of our members, I’m advised by the 
member from Cumberland, who says that the soundings that are 
coming from there are very much like the cheerleading that 
used to come from Grant Devine and his mentality. What 
you’ve got to do is, quote, “whip up the opposition.” Well 
they’ve whipped it up all right. 
 
They’ve whipped it up to the situation they’ve got on the tiger. I 
wonder now how the members opposite are going to get off of 

this tiger. Very interesting situation. How are they going to get 
off the tiger? They’ve cried wolf so many times; how are they 
going to get off it? Well we’ll see. We’ll see. I suspect they 
won’t know how to get off of it, Mr. Speaker, until they are 
advised to butt out by the people in their rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today . . . I was talking about the rural 
infrastructure and what was happening to it. Today we had one 
of the members opposite talking about a bank closing down in 
Choiceland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while the banks are closing down in rural Saskatchewan, I 
want to compliment somebody else at the same time, and that is 
the credit unions that are opening up in rural Saskatchewan. The 
credit unions are opening up. The banks looking at this and 
they’re saying this is small business; we don’t want to have 
anything to do with you. But the credit unions owned and 
operated by the people of Saskatchewan are moving in to fill 
the void. 
 
And I’m very, very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see new branches 
opening up in places like La Ronge fairly recently. And taking 
over the branches that the Bank of Montreal had — 16 branches 
that the Bank of Montreal had around rural Saskatchewan. And 
in doing so are actually doing something about helping rural 
Saskatchewan become a sustainable, vigorous — vigorous — 
area where people want to move into. 
 
And I tell you the longer any changes are put off, the worse it 
gets, and people just don’t want to come in if all they hear is 
doom and gloom in an area. They don’t want to come in. What 
they want to hear is they want to hear optimism. They want to 
move into an area that’s progressive; an area that says, hey, 
we’re up here and we’re ready to change. And we have 
identified and we want a change. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s where the opposition is making a big 
mistake, and there’s where they are being harmful to rural 
Saskatchewan. Fortunately we have no members elected to the 
opposition from any of the larger centres, because I’m sure that 
attitude they would try to bring right into rural — into urban 
Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. Can I get a copy of that . . . 
of that amendment? 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this debate one of the things that’s 
happened is — that I regret very much — is the personal attacks 
that have been laid on Mr. Garcea. I actually believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s been a shameful thing of some of the things 
that happened. 
 
Here we have a person, a respected person from the University 
of Saskatchewan, aided by other people on his committee: Mr. 
Wright, who has served honourably the citizens of Saskatoon, 
and this province and many other areas; Mr. Val Kononoff, who 
has served honourably, has excellent intentions; Ms. Maria 
Lynn Freeland has served on a city council, an honourable 
person. And what has happened, is these people have been 
vilified. Why? For political gain, Mr. Speaker; for nothing but 
cheap political gain. Particularly Mr. Garcea. They have singled 
him out and at these meetings have chosen not to ask questions 
and not to say okay, what is it that you see? What is the advice 
that you might present? But instead, of vilifying him. 
 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I wish I wouldn’t . . . I wouldn’t want to wish that 
kind of treatment on anybody. Even if somebody had deserved 
it, I wouldn’t wish that kind of treatment. But least of all people 
like these four people that I mentioned. 
 
Mr. Garcea had been commissioned by the government to do a 
survey across the province, try to get the information out, put it 
down on paper, and bring it back. And do it in civilized fashion 
and in a civilized forum. But instead what happens? They get to 
these meetings, Mr. Speaker, and whipped up by the opposition, 
they get abused. They get abused. Mr. Speaker, I say that’s 
shameful. I say that is very shameful. 
 
And eventually, Mr. Speaker, the worm is going to turn. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition will be told by their very people 
that they think they’re supporting now, they will be told to butt 
out — by them, by them, Mr. Speaker. That is my prediction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention that for years we’ve been 
hearing that voluntary restructuring is a good idea. This 
government supports voluntary restructuring if the idea comes 
from SARM and SUMA and the people involved. And as I said 
it’s possible now — shouldn’t be denied that it’s not possible 
now, might not be under the best circumstances, the processes 
aren’t laid out clearly — but it’s possible, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
possible now. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, we ought to await the report of the 
Garcea . We ought to take a look at what things have been 
identified that are possible and that are desirable, and then upon 
the advice from the RMs we should co-operatively work 
towards a solution. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, therefore it is with great pleasure that I 
second this motion, this amendment moved by the member 
from The Battlefords; and the amendment reads: 
 

That we delete all the words after the word Assembly and 
substituting the following: therefor, that the motion would 
read: 
 
That this Assembly understands the provincial government 
has clearly stated it has no intention of claiming municipal 
reserves and it’s also stated that by law — by law — these 
reserves fall within the jurisdiction of municipalities to be 
used as they determine in accordance with their legislative 
mandates and the needs of our common taxpayers. 

 
And that motion . . . that amendment is to replace, Mr. Speaker, 
is to replace the words to abandon any plans existing, because 
those words tend to mislead and misrepresent the current 
situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak 
against the amendment in favour of the motion. The words from 
the members opposite are interesting to say the least. They 
speak of confiscation and force. And they say that’s the 
members opposite’s words. But unfortunately it’s not our words 
— it’s the words of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is the fear that the government has brought on to the 

people of Saskatchewan and if they had attended any of the task 
force meetings, they would have heard those words for 
themselves. 
 
I attended the afternoon meeting in Saskatoon and there was a 
100 per cent vote against forced amalgamation. And if the 
members were there they would have heard that for themselves. 
The people at these meetings are fearful of forced 
amalgamation and they’re forced to . . . and they’re scared of 
their money being confiscated. 
 
And the government is . . . talks in riddles a little bit when they 
talk about seizing this money. The money would be seized. It 
would be taken from the smaller municipalities and put into the 
larger municipalities that’s predetermined by the government. 
And that money would be taken away from the smaller 
municipalities. 
 
These RMs and villages and hamlets have been good managers 
in the past. They’re responsible people. They’re people that are 
looking out for the communities and they know what’s best for 
their residents. 
 
The people on the RMs and town and hamlets have not . . . As 
the member from North Battleford has said, he has been telling 
them what he thinks. 
 
Well on this side of the House, the people of the RMs and the 
towns and hamlets have been telling us what they think the 
government’s going to do and what the fears of this . . . fear 
from this government. And it’s the fear that they will . . . the 
forced amalgamation will take place and that their funds and 
assets will be frozen. 
 
Now we only have to look into the history of what the 
government’s done in the past, and you look at the health 
boards. The same thing has been said there. They have set up, 
set up the boundaries, they’ve frozen the funds, and it’s been 
done without anyone’s vote or . . . 
 
Now RMs, RMs have coming to members on this side on a 
regular basis. And we’re listening to them. And what they’re 
telling us and asking us is what should they do, how to protect 
their assets and funds. And there’s a number of things that RMs 
are thinking about doing — anywhere from setting up trust 
funds to hide the money from the government, or just giving it 
back to the taxpayers and then taking out loans and running 
their operations that way so that this money cannot be taken 
away from them when the government comes in and has a 
forced amalgamation. 
 
The member from North Battleford brought up a number of 
things. He says what he tells the RMs. Well he . . . the 
government is not listening. And the member is not listening to 
what the RMs and the people are saying to him. The people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust this government. That’s the point. 
They don’t trust the government; they don’t have any 
confidence in this government or what they say and what they 
will be doing. 
 
And not only you talk about the health boards and what’s 
happened in the past, just look at the election campaign. Did the 
government, did the NDP government during the election 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

campaign talk about amalgamation, forced amalgamation, 
seizing of funds, or any of these things? No. It was never 
brought up. The election . . . The people of Saskatchewan 
wanted lower taxes; they wanted something to be done about 
the farm crisis; fix the health care, roads, and highways. 
 
And on election day, the people of Saskatchewan spoke. They 
spoke loud and clear. And the Premier says, oh he says he’s 
always got the message; he’s always heard what the people 
have said. Well he’s been saying that for two years, and again 
he has not heard what the people of Saskatchewan have said. 
And he has not listened to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you can go on to other things. The people of Saskatchewan 
just does not trust the government because in one month’s time, 
forced amalgamation will be forced on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Garcea report has created very much controversy. And 
again, the people of Saskatchewan have gone to these meetings 
and said again and again and again that they are against the 
forced amalgamation and against Garcea’s report. And again 
and again they have said that this report and this committee is 
wasting their time. 
 
Even a member of the Garcea committee has come to me and 
asked me . . . has told me that they have a feeling that they’re 
just a front for the government to take the fall for this forced 
amalgamation. And also the waste of $750,000 for a 
committee’s report which is going to be directed by the 
government — top, down. 
 
(1530) 
 
The Garcea report talks about economic development. Well, 
there’s no basis in the report in forced amalgamation that 
reflects that there would be a greater opportunity for economic 
development in these larger government areas. The biggest 
problem that we . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No savings 
whatsoever. The biggest problem for rural Saskatchewan is 
raising capital for projects, and which is intertwined with 
raising capital as the higher taxes. But not only those two areas. 
 
Any business that is wanting to set up anywhere in rural 
Saskatchewan would have to look at some of the fundamentals 
— conditions of the roads and highways, the health care system 
in the town, the education system, and the taxes of course. Now 
this is all within the provincial government’s area of 
responsibility. And if they keep underfunding in all these areas, 
well naturally the rural areas are going to dwindle and not be a 
place that businesses are willing to set up in. 
 
I’d like to just explain a situation that took place in Blaine Lake 
a few years ago. The citizens and residents of Blaine Lake, the 
town of Blaine Lake and the RM of Blaine Lake, started 
working on a plan to build a beef packing plant. And they 
jumped through all the hoops in front of them set out by the 
government, and they were in a position of going to the 
community to raise money. All they had to do was get the 
government’s permission. 
 
And everything was in place except government permission. 
And that fell through, and the packing plant concept fell 

through and has gone to another area. 
 
Now voluntary amalgamation can take place but the 
government has to get the obstacles to those out of the way. 
They need to look after a number of areas that come up in 
discussions when they’re talking about amalgamation of 
hamlets or villages with RMs. And that’s two or three important 
areas are the liabilities that the RM would take on concerning 
their village’s leaking sewer lagoons or underground tanks that 
may exist in these towns. 
 
And right now if a hamlet went into an RM, the RM would 
have to take on this liability and responsibility and that’s just 
not fair. That’s where the government should step in and help in 
those circumstances to overcome those liabilities. And not only 
to get the environmental problems out of the way, but to help 
voluntary amalgamation; also increased power rates that the 
village or town would have if they went into an RM. 
 
I’d like to read some parts of some of the submissions put 
forward by a number of RMs to the Garcea report, and when we 
talk about economic development in the rural areas, this is an 
example that RMs have to come over. I’d just like to quote this. 
This is from the rural municipality of Redberry. It says: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 
Your December 1990 rural road classification report was 
reviewed at our regular council meeting which led to the 
following resolution: 
 
That we appeal to Saskatchewan Highways that we retain 
No. 40 Highway as our number one road classification due 
to increased traffic to elevator closures. Trusting that the 
status of this highway will not be changed from its present 
number one classification. 
 

I’ve had a number of complaints from this area, the people 
living on No. 40 Highway — and the highway is deteriorating 
rapidly. It’s a danger zone. There’s been a number of accidents 
on this highway. Fortunately no loss of life. There’s been much 
damage done to equipment and people are very hesitant to even 
drive down that highway in many areas. 
 
Well when we talk about rural economic development, this 
situation with Highway No. 40 is of great concern. It’s an 
obstacle that is there that any business would have to take into 
account when it’s talking about setting up a business. It has to 
get its products and raw materials to and from market. 
 
I’d like to read a bit from the submission by the rural 
municipality of Vanscoy which is in the constituency of 
Redberry Lake: 
 
It says: 
 

This municipality would like to express their views on the 
recommendations as outlined in the interim report of the 
task force on municipal legislated renewal. 

 
Number one, municipal purpose. The report indicates that 
the fundamental purpose of the municipal government 
should be to provide good governance, foster sustainable 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

development, ensure a good quality of life for the 
communities. 

 
This is precisely what our current municipal system is 
providing. The decisions made by council are based on the 
best interests of the ratepayers who are also their friends, 
neighbours, and relatives. 

 
Who better to determine the future of rural municipalities 
than the residents themselves. This municipality, referring 
to Vanscoy, contains a potash mine, four seed processing 
plants, an organic pharmaceutical operation, a chemical 
plant, a livestock sales facility, a feedlot, a large chicken 
operation, and 12 other smaller industries. We have four 
hamlets, two country residential subdivisions, and 
numerous farm and rural residential holdings. 

 
Is this not fostering development? 

 
Municipal status, number two. We agree that the status of 
the rural municipal government as an order of government 
should be formerly recognized. 

 
Number three (and it goes on to say) under municipal 
legislation, as previously discussed The Rural Municipality 
Act, 1989, has been amended from time to time when 
changes have been required to . . . We believe the retention 
of this Act is essential for managing the issues we are 
facing today and into the future. 

 
Municipal finances. We are in agreement that the province 
and the municipalities should negotiate ways to reduce the 
pressures on the property tax base in regards to education. 
SARM has continuously lobbied the provincial 
government to provide tax relief for the education portion 
of property taxes. 

 
At a recent tax revolt meeting held in a municipality, 
ratepayers indicated their opposition to the increased cost 
of education on their property tax. The ratepayers were not 
in disagreement with the municipal portion of the tax bill. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The number and size of municipalities — we strongly 
disagree with the recommendation of major consolidation 
of municipalities. Voluntary amalgamation will occur 
where it is necessitated. Should we just consolidate? That 
is what the majority of other provinces have done. Have 
we not always told our children not to follow because that 
is what everyone else is doing, but to be unique, and do 
what is best for themselves? 

 
With larger units, we believe there will be a loss of 
volunteerism in a community sense. We are already 
sharing services with our neighbours where it makes sense. 
We have a joint fire department involving two rural 
municipalities, two urban municipalities. We provide 
assistance to the recreation associations in the area. We 
have a small municipal police department. Every 
municipality is aware of their own needs requirements. We 
have a diverse needs and successfully strive to achieve 
these objectives. 

And that’s from the RM of Vanscoy. 
 
I’d just like to take a few minutes to give a bit of the 
presentation put forward by the mayor and council of Blaine 
Lake. The report from Blaine Lake goes on to repeat: 
 

The report uses questionable (referring to the Garcea 
report) . . . The report uses questionable research 
methodology, improper research tests, hypotheses. It does 
not merely set out to argue through a pre-determined point 
of view. Research that does so is called pre-judged 
research and is second rate. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

The report has a very narrow economic focus. It presumes 
the integrity of the economic model into which it proposes 
to cram the circumstances of rural Saskatchewan. History 
is ripe with failed attempts to manipulate populations in 
this way. Collectivization in the Soviet Bloc forced 
resettlement programs in various Third World countries — 
Mozambique, Tanzania, and closer to home the movement 
of people from out-ports and Newfoundland. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Take a brief look at some of the variables that fell outside 
of this task force. Losses incurred by displaced people; the 
cost to the society of displacing people; the cost to the 
society of doing away with large numbers of small 
businesses; lack of operating cost comparisons between 
present and the proposed models of administration; and the 
report does not assess increased costs resulting from the 
increased response times to emergencies resulting from 
centralization. Increased operating costs resulting from 
bureaucratic inefficiencies. No value given to reduced 
social costs of people living in a small community and 
taking care of their own needs. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

Other problems the report does not address: 
out-of-province migration, loss of tax revenue. 

 
I’d just like to read the conclusion from this submission by 
Blaine Lake: 
 

Our conclusion is that we see nothing in this report that 
would make us better off than we now are. Centralization 
will not benefit us economically. Rather, we in rural 
Saskatchewan will lose significantly in terms of real estate 
values, medical services, infrastructure, delivery of goods 
and services, and social fabric. Since your report is so 
fundamentally flawed in the scope of its inquiry, about the 
best you can say to us is that we think or we believe this or 
that will work. While we believe it won’t make that . . . 
(while we believe it won’t) . . . and that makes us about 
even. We seem to have brought about as much relevant 
data to the table as have you. 
 
It is our view that the writers of this report have a low 
opinion of those who choose to live in rural Saskatchewan. 
You condescend to us by making vague promises of 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

consultation, yet in the report you urge the government to 
force centralization on us. You theorized from the ivory 
tower of academia and now centralization is going to be 
good for us but it is us who will lose billions of equity in 
our homes. 
 
We have no doubt whatsoever that we are expressing a 
significantly majority view. What you have proposed does 
not have our best interests at heart. The proponents of these 
views do not have as their motive the greatest good of the 
greater number, rather they want the play economic 
checkers with their money and our lives. Thanks, but no 
thanks. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m very pleased today to be 
able to stand and to support the motion put forward by the 
member from Saltcoats which is stated: 
 

That this Assembly urges the government to abandon any 
plans to freeze or otherwise take control of municipal 
reserves and assets. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, the member from North Battleford 
stood a while ago in this House and he was alluding to the fact 
that basically we were using scare tactics, that there was no 
evidence to support this motion put forward by the member 
from Saltcoats. He says that there was no evidence to support 
that this government has indicated in any way or form that they 
will freeze municipal reserves. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, unfortunately this government has 
never been up front with anything it’s done and all the people in 
rural Saskatchewan are very clear about that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, what are people in the province to think after 
the evidence that they’ve have that this NDP government has 
shown them of the destruction meted out to rural Saskatchewan 
by this NDP government? When the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs indicates to the media that his decision would be 
reflected in the final Garcea report, what are the people of this 
province to think? When May 15, a May 15 deadline is imposed 
on SARM and all RMs in this province to come up with a plan, 
what are the people of this province to think? 
 
When health districts, under health district formation under 
Louise Simard and under the NDP came into play, there was 
clearly included in those measures of forming those health 
districts, a plan that confiscated reserves from the hospitals. So 
what are the people of this province to think? 
 
Naturally the people of this province are brighter than the NDP 
government would give them credit for. Naturally the people of 
this province know what’s going on. Naturally they know that 
this government’s hidden agenda is no longer hidden. The 
people of this province are standing up and they are putting up 
arms and they are intent to stop this destruction of all of 
Saskatchewan, not only rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1545) 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the greatest transgressions of 
democracy is for a government to insist on maintaining power 
and control by taking over every bit of self-determination that 
people in this province have enjoyed. And that is what this 
government has done. 
 
Time and time again they have done it to the people. They have 
done it in health care; they have done it out there with taxes; 
they’re taxing people to death; they’re squeezing the life out of 
this province. And everyone in this province knows it. 
 
And why? For what ends do they do this? To what end? To 
maintain power in the province. That is the only reason; that is 
the sole reason. And the people of this province know it; they 
understand you; and they know exactly what you’re doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, forced amalgamation threatens the freedom 
that people enjoy in this province. It threatens the autonomy of 
people. It threatens self-determination. It threatens 
self-determination that grassroots people have enjoyed for 
hundreds of years. It drains the life out of people because they 
feel helpless. They feel helpless when they see a government 
such as this NDP government controlling people’s lives over 
and over again. It threatens, Mr. Deputy Chair, the very 
democratic principles that this country was built on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I have received from the RMs in my 
constituency, some of the most thoughtful position papers on 
the interim report that Mr. Garcea has put forward, some of the 
very most thoughtful papers. And I want to honour these RMs 
by reading some of these papers here in the Assembly. 
 
And from the RM of Fish Creek, the administrator says: 
 

It is quite evident that rural Saskatchewan is opposed to the 
Garcia Report, the Jack Stabler Report and any form of 
forced amalgamations. The council of the municipality is 
requesting that you and the Saskatchewan Party support 
our position of opposition to this matter. The provincial 
government has failed to address the need of these reports, 
nor to mention the waste of tax payers money to fund both 
of those reports. If there is a need for amalgamation, then it 
must come from the grassroots, the people who know what 
is best for them and not the provincial (NDP) government. 
 
One has to question the motive of the provincial 
government. How can forced amalgamations work. Our 
council is not against the idea of amalgamation where it is 
necessary and locally requested by the residents. There are 
many small villages and towns that could become part of 
the rural municipality, but they are the ones that need to 
decide what’s best for them. Both reports (the Garcea 
report and the Jack Stabler report) state that it will help 
keep families in the business of farming and help keep 
open small businesses in our town’s (if there’s forced 
amalgamation). They have no evidence to prove this theory 
as it (is) not substantiated by any supporting evidence. 
 
The provincial government spends approximately 2 % of 
its annual budget on local governments. This amount is not 
substantial and should not warrant the destruction of 
responsible local governments who operate efficiently and 
deficit free. 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

The provincial government should have learned their 
lesson with health care reform and leave amalgamation 
issues to the people who know what’s best for them. 
“Bigger is not (necessarily) Better” 
 

The administrator of the RM of Fish Creek states that: 
 

We already share in services such as equipment, fire 
protection, regional parks, recreation boards, rail line 
committees, water pipelines, libraries, Redas, waste 
disposal just to name a few. There maybe areas to expand 
upon this tradition of co-operation, but amalgamation (and 
certainly forced amalgamation) is not the answer. Larger 
units will mean higher taxes, poorer service and loss of 
local autonomy. If larger units become a reality, try calling 
your representative (at that time) to report a problem and 
you’ll be calling to someone who will probably live many, 
many miles away. A trip to the municipal office could be 
100 miles away or more (than that), this is not service or an 
improvement. If residents are forced to go to the city to pay 
their taxes and utilities or just to discuss an issue it will 
mean that they will probably spend some time shopping in 
the city, does this help our local businesses (thrive) . . . ? 
 
No matter where you go or who you talk to, people in this 
area are totally against this issue and we trust . . . (that the 
Saskatchewan Party) will support us. 
 

And I guarantee you that we will. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I have a succession of letters from different 
RMs and from concerned citizens that are not necessarily on 
municipal councils. And many of them make references to the 
provincial government policies, sort of in line with the 
communist state and that really does alarm me. It alarms a lot of 
people, but I have heard that said over and over again in the last 
few years. 
 
People are now referring to this government as a communist 
government, a dictatorial government, who cares nought about 
the people but cares only about maintaining their own power. 
And I would suggest to the members in the backbench that 
maybe you should actually go out there and talk to some of the 
people. 
 
Go to coffee row, get out there and talk to them, and I think 
you’ll have a rude awakening as how to people in this province 
really think about your government and how very worried they 
are about what’s going to happen to their homes and their 
families, what’s going to happen to rural communities. We are 
already experiencing major destruction. And, if forced 
amalgamation takes place as your government is intending to 
do, the destruction of this province will be irreversible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, another report that I have had submitted to 
me, and there was submitted also to the latest round of Garcea 
presentations, was the paper, a position paper from the RM of 
Aberdeen. Mr. Deputy Chair . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Members I’m 
having difficulty hearing the member for Humboldt and I’d ask 
all members to reduce the noise in the Chamber. Let’s give the 
. . . Order, order. Let’s give the member for Humboldt the 

opportunity to make her remarks without undue interruption 
and I’d ask all members for their co-operation in that regard. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what I’m going to be quoting 
from is the document that has been submitted to the task force 
on municipal legislative renewal, to Mr. Garcea, from the RM 
of Aberdeen. The RM of Aberdeen points out some very 
fundamental flaws in the interim report that has thus far been 
tabled. And one of the things that is a major flaw is the very fact 
that there is failure to analyse municipal functions. The Garcea 
report stated that form should come before function. Now there 
is a comprehensive analysis here of what has happened in that 
report, and also some very good suggestions as to how to do 
this the right way, that the government may want to consider. 
 
I commend the RM of Aberdeen for this because it really does 
state some very workable purposes, workable statements that 
could be, could be adopted by government, and that could in 
fact leave the whole idea of amalgamation as a voluntary 
process. 
 
The first fundamental error, as I had mentioned, is failure to 
analyze municipal functions. 
 
The second fundamental error that was posed by the RM of 
Aberdeen was the assumed homogeneity of Saskatchewan — 
meaning that the interim report seems to suggest that 
differences among municipalities are undesirable. There are 
comments in this report decrying inequality of resources, local 
variations in the provision of services, and other differences 
between municipalities. And the theme springs from an 
assumption that municipalities should all be alike. As desirable 
as this might be in theory, it ignores a great deal of reality. 
 
Saskatchewan is a diverse province in terms of population 
density, age, demographics, ethnicity, land quality, resource 
base, and social attitudes. Under the present structure there is no 
such thing as a typical or average municipality — nor can there 
be unless the plan is to create municipalities so huge that they 
submerge any semblance of locality. Accordingly, divergence 
among municipalities is a reality that cannot be wished out of 
existence. 
 
And the third fundamental flaw in the Garcea interim report that 
is pointed out by the RM of Aberdeen is the fallacy of optimal 
organization. The RM of Aberdeen points out that unfortunately 
the task force seems to have been bitten by the same bug as 
provincial and federal governments engaged in an endless spiral 
of reorganization. 
 
One need only look at the multitude of Saskatchewan 
government departments, under which administration of 
tourism has recently fallen, to see how absurd the exercise has 
become — Natural Resources, Parks and Renewable Resources, 
Tourism and Small Business, Environment and Resource 
Management, and so on. 
 
Similarly the different names under which rural municipal 
administration has fallen are too numerous to recite. Obviously 
some administrative structures do not work. However, for the 
better part, the key to good administration is not so much what 
you call it or how you organize it, but rather how you actually 
carry it out. All the rest is empty activity. 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

The fourth fundamental error in the Garcea report is the failure 
of the task force to support its conclusions. 
 
The fifth and largest error is the indication by Garcea to have a 
directed, consultative renewal. And this is the most 
objectionable suggestion in the interim report, in that the wishes 
of municipal governments ought to be overridden in the renewal 
process. In other words the task force is suggesting that its 
suggestions are too important to leave to the vagaries of the 
democratic process. 
 
This of course ignores the fact that the most important thing in 
government is not the product but the democratic process by 
which the decision is made. To suggest that the democratic 
process ought to be muzzled for its own good is the equivalent 
of the soldier who told the media during the Vietnam War that a 
village has to be destroyed in order to save it. 
 
Now the RM of Aberdeen has put forward a proposal for 
municipal renewal, a proposal by the people. And they state that 
clearly it’s not enough to simply point out the errors in this 
interim report. There is a challenge here that has been issued, 
and the RM of Aberdeen takes the position that there are 
opportunities for municipal renewal that ought to be taken, 
small and large. 
 
Number one, recognize the differences and deal positively with 
diversity. The same solutions will not work everywhere. Each 
community has its own needs and can fashion its own solutions. 
Thus rather than the cookie-cutter approach to municipal 
renewal, any legislation should provide for and permit local 
variation. And they go on with further explanation of this. 
 
The second proposal from municipal renewal by the people is 
starting small, and they talk about that in here. They have some 
very good suggestions. And I’m going to table this position 
paper from the RM of Aberdeen so that members opposite may 
be able to have the privilege of looking at it and certainly 
considering it. 
 
The third proposal for municipal renewal by the people, 
voluntary renewal . . . or voluntary amalgamation is the need to 
test and refine. And they state here one of the biggest problems 
with the process advocated by the interim report is that it 
involves the simultaneous regionalization of all parts of the 
province. And that poses two major difficulties. 
 
The first is that to the extent that there are resources to assist 
with the process, these are spread dangerously thin. It is 
impossible to be in all places at the same time. Choices will 
have to be made and the result will be uneven assistance to the 
various regions of the province. 
 
The second and more important is what if it doesn’t work? If 
that should occur we have abandoned the system of local 
government that, regardless of its many flaws, still works 
relatively well in favour of a system that will work poorly. In 
order to succeed, chances need to be taken and the risk of 
failure must be courted. The problem with the scheme proposed 
by the interim report is that it courts province-wide failure. 
 
(1600) 
 

How much better it would be to experiment to see if municipal 
renewal works. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, that was what the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition has proposed — that we have a 
pilot project in place before any hare-brained scheme of doing 
this all at once takes place. And there are other places in this 
division paper that cites examples that can be of assistance, and 
I invite the members again to have a look at this. 
 
The final piece in the puzzle, municipal powers and funding. 
And as stated here as was noted, the task force process has 
provided little enlightenment about the role and function of 
municipal government. No, a pilot project can sort out issues of 
this nature, however a pilot project may be put in place if in fact 
those things were sorted out ahead of time. What are the 
functions? 
 
What is required is a focused debate on what constitutes a core 
area of municipal functions — what is less central and what 
falls outside? 
 
To illustrate the point there are likely no functions that are truly 
municipal. Certainly road construction and maintenance is often 
offered as a core municipal function but it is not as simple as 
that. A municipal road that serves only to bring residents to the 
centre of a municipality serves a purely municipal function. 
What, however, of a road that serves to take the residents of one 
municipality to different municipalities? And what of a road 
that serves to take them out of the province? 
 
In each situation the case for municipal power over the road 
varies. And again I would love to continue with this full 
explanation, but the position paper is really quite lengthy. 
 
And so the RM of municipality closes their presentation here 
with a message of thanks. And they say: 
 

The Rural Municipality of Aberdeen thanks the members 
of the task force for the opportunity to make the 
presentation. Thanks are due also to the ratepayers of the 
RM of Aberdeen for their support and encouragement, and 
thanks too to the staff and board of SARM . . . 
 

And also some other municipalities who have assisted in their 
presentation. 
 
And I would . . . like I said, I would invite the members 
opposite, the members of the NDP government, to take a look at 
this wonderful position paper. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the people of this province have spoken loud 
and clear in respect to forced amalgamation. They are truly 
speaking louder than ever before because they truly are afraid. 
They feel that all power is being taken out of their hands by this 
government, and they certainly are going to fight to their last 
breath, you could say, in order to maintain and save their RMs. 
 
And I would like to just read one more . . . some excerpts from 
one more person in my constituency. A woman who has been 
there for her community, time and time again, who has paid 
attention to what is happening, who has over and over again 
looked at how the people in those areas have worked together to 
maintain their communities, their towns, and certainly their 
self-determination. 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

And this is a woman from Middle Lake, Saskatchewan who 
attended the March 2 ratepayers’ meeting in Middle Lake. And 
at that meeting legislative renewal and municipal consolidation 
was discussed. And she says: 
 

. . . my husband, many other farmers and village 
councillors were very upset with the meeting. The most 
upsetting point is that the gov’t is not listening to the 
public and everything is cut and dried before we have a 
chance to speak our minds. 
 
First of all our forefathers have put together the 
constitution which they felt would protect and enforce 
freedom for their generation and (for) ours. Now (it seems 
like this government, this provincial government) . . . 
wants to take that away from the municipalities. 
 
Our forefathers worked so hard, with hard manual labour 
and sweat to build towns, railroads, telecommunications, 
now railroads have disappeared and elevators are taken 
down from the local areas causing every farmer to have to 
buy their own semi-truck to transfer their grain to far away 
places, breaking down highways and inconveniencing the 
little farmer (for) whom it is almost impossible to survive. 
 
Now with the (proposed) consolidation of RMs, who have 
built those roads, (who have) kept the snow off (the road, 
who have patrolled the roads) . . . and still run their own 
business with money in the bank, (the NDP government) 
. . . want to take that away so (that they) . . . can fill their 
own coffers and leave the farmers to die. 
 
One of the first items on the agenda . . . 

 
I am quoting from a letter . . . this is a letter coming from one of 
my constituents: 

 
One of the first items on the agenda of the Garcea 
recommendation is to borrow money, and where will you 
get it from to pay it back — (you’ll get it from) “The farm 
land.” 
 

So what can happen in the end, the farmland can just be taken 
back, just like in Russia. 
 

Where is our democracy? This is Communism! 
 
What about the Health Service? (What about the health 
services). The Directors of care or administration (seem to 
have very little say) . . . They have to do what they are told 
and the Home Care is not a Wellness Centre. It is only for 
the money that some people work there. 

 
These people, Mr. Deputy Chair, are despairing. They don’t 
know really what’s happening, but they know that there’s a 
great deal of money that is issued to some areas of health care 
and not to others. 
 
This woman states that it is obvious in this health system: 
 

. . . there is no love for seniors. They are not allowed to do 
this or that. Anybody can sit and watch a Senior eat and 
give them their pills. And it seems that our system is so 

very hard on these people, that they seem to have no rights 
anymore. 
 

She says, I am very disgusted with the fact that love and 
concern are supposed to be shown for our seniors and aren’t. 
 
And she suggests that: 
 

If you want to save money in the municipalities consider 
leaving things as they are instead of trying to run the whole 
province. It costs more money to have gov’t run the 
country because they don’t care where (the money) comes 
from. (And it comes from) “The Taxpayer.” 
 
How can the cities know what the rural areas need? You 
are trying to improve our country in the wrong way. 
 
Why didn’t it work in Ontario. You can’t compare us to a 
province of Nova Scotia and P.E.I. 
 
Please LISTEN. 
 

Please listen to the ratepayers of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, with that I would like to thank the 
Assembly for the opportunity to make my comments on behalf 
of the constituents of Humboldt and on behalf of all ratepayers 
there. 
 
We are, I assure you people of the Humboldt constituency, 
fighting to maintain that you have the determination; that your 
communities maintain the right to determine their own destiny 
and to form their communities and the areas in which they live, 
in the way that they deem best. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of 
interest this afternoon I’ve listened to this debate. And as the 
members opposite seem not to want to listen to our responses in 
question period, our responses here, they want to go out and 
they want to build hysteria out in the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think if they in fact supported what they put forward in their 
original motion, they would vote for this amendment. Because 
how many times does the Premier have to say what our position 
is? He puts it in writing to SARM and SUMA; our position’s 
clear on the issue of taking municipal reserves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we say that there’s no foundation in law to do 
that, we tell them that, and they simply do not listen. They come 
here, Mr. Speaker, and they talk about forced amalgamation; 
they talk about all these things that we’re supposedly doing. 
The only thing we’re doing is having a task force of 
independent people going out and listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan. What’s so wrong with listening to people? I 
don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, this government, this government’s not out at 
meetings telling people what’s going to happen and creating 
hysteria. No, we’re letting the people speak freely and we’re 
going to listen to what they have to say. We’re not out there 
telling them all the evil things somebody else is going to do. 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re not into playing those types of 
political games. But, Mr. Speaker, I can’t be at fault for what 
the opposition wants to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everybody, everybody talks about that there needs 
to be change — SARM says it, SUMA says it; they’ve been 
saying it for 40 years. I challenge the members opposite — I 
challenge the members opposite — rather than being so 
disruptive to come on board and help with some co-operative 
change. Get around the table, be part of it; don’t be such a 
destructive force, don’t always want to play politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s shameful, it really is shameful that the focus 
of debate is about something that nobody ever intended to do, 
created by an opposition who simply wants to play politics, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know. It’s a sad world we live in when the 
focus is always about how you can stir people up and get them 
mad versus doing anything positive for the people of this 
province. 
 
Our goals, Mr. Speaker, are about improving our economy, 
improving our rural economy, so that those communities in 
rural Saskatchewan are more viable in the 21st century. It’s not 
about doing evil things; not about this sort of black world that 
the opposition talks about — that we’re just so mean and evil 
we want to do everything negative to hurt people. Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t know. It really surprises me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that without any further rhetoric or 
political speech coming from the opposite side, I want to take 
time to look into this issue in more detail. And at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, I will move we adjourn debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:12 p.m. until 4:22 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Melenchuk Cline 
Atkinson Goulet Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 
Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 

Nays — 18 
 
Elhard Heppner Julé 
Draude Boyd Gantefoer 
Toth Peters Eagles 
Bakken Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Hart Allchurch 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Economic Diversification 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, as I was saying, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I am very happy to have the opportunity today to 
address some very real issues that are happening throughout our 
province both in urban and in rural Saskatchewan. Some of the 
many success stories that we have around our province and it 
gives us an opportunity to talk about some of the issues that real 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families are 
experiencing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is more 
diversified today than it has been at any point in its history. It is 
an economy which is no longer . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Kindersley on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — To introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
member from Albert South for yielding to allow me to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, seated in your gallery is a gentleman from 
my constituency. I think he now lives in Medicine Hat but he 
certainly has farming interests in the Eatonia area and Leader 
area and very instrumental in economic development in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to the Assembly 
members, Mr. Bill Dearborn, and welcome him here to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Economic Diversification 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
always a pleasure to have people join us in the galleries who 
have an opportunity to witness what we’re discussing today. 
 
This debate this afternoon and the resolution I’m sponsoring in 
the House in fact is very much a sign of the optimism that we 
feel on this side of the Assembly about the future of our 
province. 
 
Though the members opposite have droned on now for some 
hours this afternoon talking about the negative pieces, about 
how government organizes itself, what we are interested in 
talking about on this side are the very real situation of how 
Saskatchewan people are coming together, investing in our 
province; how our families are growing here, and how we are 
seeing a better future for young people and for our businesses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this approach is one that works not only in 
Regina, not only in Saskatoon, in Prince Albert, in North 
Battleford, it works in every community in our province. And 
the members opposite will know this because representing some 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

of those areas, they will know the success stories in those 
communities. 
 
Things are not a big, dark cloud sitting over rural Saskatchewan 
today. Rural communities are thriving. There are new 
businesses; there are new ventures; there’s optimism; and 
there’s investment happening. 
 
Certainly there has been some shock to our normal provincial 
economy with the problems we have in the grains system, some 
of the problems we have with prices. And certainly that is being 
felt to a certain extent in rural Saskatchewan. However, there 
are also a great number of successes. 
 
Take, for example, the situation up in Carrot River. To listen to 
the member from Carrot River speak, you would think that 
everything has gone wrong in his riding. You would think that 
there is nothing good happening in the communities of Hudson 
Bay that he represents, that nothing good is happening in 
Porcupine Plain, that nothing good happens in northeast 
Saskatchewan. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
What we’re seeing, particularly in this member’s area, is we are 
seeing an expansion of the forestry. We’re seeing a lot of new 
development and new technology being employed to further 
deal with the forestry issue. We’re seeing partnership being 
built between community businesses, between the provincial 
government, and with Aboriginal people. 
 
We’re seeing that part of the province move forward from the 
disastrous situation that we had with Simpson Timber in the 
’50s; to start to revitalize, to regenerate, to move forward in 
positive economic development. But we don’t hear a word from 
the members opposite about the positive things. 
 
It’s as my friend from Saskatoon Sutherland says, the sky is 
always falling, but only on that side of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is important that we 
take a look at these success stories. It’s important that we 
celebrate the successes. Because if we fail to do that, it will 
become a self-fulfilling prophecy of doom, that the economy 
will in fact start to suffer the problems that the members 
opposite seem to allude to. 
 
Business people do not believe in the gloom and doom put 
forward by the members opposite. They certainly don’t believe 
in it here in Regina. They don’t believe it in Saskatoon. They 
don’t believe it in Weyburn. They don’t believe it in Melfort. 
They don’t believe it in Swift Current. And you can go to the 
next level of smaller communities and you can say it’s the same 
there as well. Business people are optimistic. 
 
I was recently in Estevan and had an opportunity to meet with 
business people from that area, and they were talking about how 
optimistic they were feeling in terms of what was happening in 
the oil patch. Obviously Estevan is a community that relies 
heavily upon oil resources for continued growth. 
 

The one thing that they were saying to me, though, is that we 
needed to figure out how to get more Saskatchewan people to 
get these Saskatchewan jobs. As is the nature in much of our 
industries, we have a problem in our labour force in getting 
people trained up and being able to take the jobs which are 
available. We know particularly in areas of heavy industrial 
welding, we’ve got shortages. 
 
Our government has laid out a plan over the past several years 
to work more closely with industry, to work more closely with 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) to make sure Saskatchewan people share in the 
successes of Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
These are some of the successes that we have that we never hear 
about from the members opposite. I think it’s unfortunate that 
we do not spend more time celebrating the good news in our 
communities. 
 
When people talk about Saskatchewan’s economy and 
Saskatchewan’s growth and Saskatchewan’s benefits, I think 
that all too often the members opposite would leave the 
impression that those successes stop at the radius of the Regina 
city, or in Moose Jaw, or in Saskatoon. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
Because if we take a look at where the jobs are being created, a 
large number of the jobs that are being created today, the 
full-time jobs that are being created, are in fact in rural areas 
and smaller communities. 
 
Whether that is in the forest sector because in part of the 
partnership agreements that we are working on, the new 
forestry strategy, which was very successfully announced this 
past spring; whether it’s because of the expansion of our oil and 
natural gas sector; whether it’s because of the work that is being 
done by our ministries to make sure business have an easier 
time dealing with negotiating the red tape that previously was 
associated with some of the expansion; whether it’s in new 
industries such as information technology; whether it’s in new 
industries like biotechnology; whether it’s in the expanding 
industry that I never thought we’d really see take off in this 
province, such as film and video — these are areas that 
Saskatchewan people have new opportunities in. 
 
It used to be that people had to leave Saskatchewan because 
they didn’t fit into the core set of businesses or they wanted to 
work in other areas. This is no longer the case. Saskatchewan’s 
economy is in fact greatly diversified today. 
 
It’s interesting to take a look at the statistics that talk about how 
the province has grown in terms of its job numbers. 
Saskatchewan today leads the West in job growth — best in the 
West. Best in the West. And for the members opposite, and for 
the members opposite, I would just add this little asterisks to it 
and say, by the way, Alberta’s in the West too. 
 
Because the members opposite always say, oh, but why aren’t 
we more like Alberta. Why would we want to slow things 
down? We’ve got more than 3 per cent growth in our jobs — 
more than 3 per cent. That’s better than Alberta. It’s better than 
Manitoba. We are seeing this growth here. Fifteen thousand 
more people working in this province now than a year ago; 
5,700 more young people found work in this province now than 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

a year ago; 15,000 more full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the good news about Saskatchewan. 
This is good news from Saskatchewan business people, from 
Saskatchewan workers, from co-operators, from researchers. 
This is good news from everywhere except the members 
opposite. 
 
But we’re not petty on this side, we’re not petty on this side 
because the good news is in your ridings too, members 
opposite. The good news is in your communities as well. 
Business is doing well — steady growth, more jobs, new 
industries, more success stories. 
 
And what this comes down to is if we can celebrate the work 
being done by Saskatchewan people, if we can harness that and 
continue to move it forward, we will see an extension of the 
largest economic growth record in this province’s history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Sustainable growth, sustained economic 
growth — that’s what this government believes in, this is what 
we are here to work for, and this is what we’re doing. 
 
The members opposite can tie themselves up in knots worrying 
about how many governments we have. The fact is on this side 
our eye is on the ball — and that’s how many people are 
working, that’s how many businesses are moving forward, 
that’s how we are expanding our industries. That, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is what we believe in. We’re not caught off in 
navel-gazing and worrying about how the things are organized 
on paper and flow charts and organization. It’s not relevant to 
us. What we’re interested in is how do we build those 
partnerships to help our province move forward. 
 
Saskatchewan has moved forward in terms of its economic 
diversification like we have not seen before in this province’s 
history. Now some of the members on the opposition benches 
— I know, know this — some of them have been very 
important parts of helping our economy grow. What I don’t 
understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why those members don’t 
stand up and celebrate those successes as well. 
 
I ask again, is it because it is bad for Saskatchewan or is it 
because it is bad for the Saskatchewan Party to put out these 
success stories? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what 
we are seeing from the members opposite is an attempt to paint 
a picture of gloom and doom, gloom and doom. Well that is not 
shared by Saskatchewan people. 
 
People in our communities are feeling good. People in our small 
towns are feeling good. People in my neighbourhood are feeling 
good. Why? Because there are people that are seeing their 
businesses expand. Because we’re seeing consumer confidence. 
Because we’re seeing young people being able to work in this 
province. Because we are seeing Saskatchewan has turned the 
corner. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Eight years ago there were a lot of concerns 
about what was happening in this province. The government 
that was previously here, the government of Grant Devine, had 
talked a great deal about diversification. I think that they said at 
one point that Saskatchewan was the kind of place where you 
could mismanage it and still break even. Grant Devine always 
liked to say, don’t say whoa in a mudhole. 
 
The good news is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t need to say 
whoa in the mudhole, because we’re not in that mudhole any 
more. We have gotten ourselves out, and Saskatchewan people 
are seeing the benefits today of fiscal responsibility, of an 
economic development plan that started with the Partnership 
for Renewal, has moved onto the Partnership for Growth, and 
is now in a Partnership for Prosperity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a partnership started not by this 
necessarily . . . not by this government but by the people who 
have come to us to ask us to build that coalition. That is what 
we have seen and that is the legacy of this government. People 
are better off today than they have been. Our province is in 
better shape. Young people have a better chance of finding a 
job. 
 
When I graduated from university some years ago, everyone felt 
that they needed to leave. In 1989 and 1990 there was very little 
hope in this province. There was a time when people didn’t 
understand what was going to happen; they understand that the 
debts were not sustainable; they knew that the taxes were going 
to be a problem. Because as Grant Devine used to say, taxes are 
nothing . . . deficits are nothing but deferred taxes. 
 
When we came to office, when this government came to office 
in 1991, it had to deal with those issues. It set forward a plan 
which we have followed, not slavishly, but we have followed 
and amended and allowed to grow in a way that today we are in 
the midst — I don’t say we are at the end — we are in the midst 
of the longest sustained period of growth in our economy’s 
history. 
 
And that is something we should all be very proud of, and it’s a 
caution that I would say to members, it’s something we need to 
be very mindful of. Because if we take on that attitude of gloom 
and that attitude of doom that the members opposite would do, 
what we will see is we will see the inevitable come to be. We 
will start to see consumer confidence slip. We will start to see 
people hold back in their expenditures. We will start to see jobs 
evaporate. That is not good for Saskatchewan people. But I bet 
you the members opposite think that’s good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what we are 
here to make sure does not happen today, does not happen next 
year, does not happen next term. 
 
This province is in a period of sustained economic 
development, sustained economic growth that all Saskatchewan 
people are sharing in. People in the cities, people in the towns, 
people in the country, all Saskatchewan people — young 
people, old people, working people — have the opportunity to 
participate in, and they know that this is true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2000 

Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for North 
Battleford on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — A point of personal privilege, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of personal privilege. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it has just come to my 
attention that in a press report in The Leader-Post of today, it 
was reported that I moved an amendment to the motion of 
twinning, insisting that the Yellowhead be included in any 
twinning plans as well as the Trans-Canada. That was correct. 
 
However, I am described in the page of The Leader-Post as 
North Battleford NDP MLA Jack Hillson. I trust you 
understand the humiliation and embarrassment that such an 
error can cause. And I would ask that the House take steps to 
make sure that such errors do not recur. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I thank the hon. member for 
North Battleford for stating his point of personal privilege. 
However, there was nothing that this Legislative Assembly did 
to cause The Leader-Post error. As such, I have to rule that in 
fact you had no point of personal privilege. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I of course 
would, if it had been true, welcome the member for North 
Battleford into the NDP caucus with open arms. 
 
But nevertheless, we still have room for the Liberals on this 
side. And I would note that Liberals are enjoying the economic 
successes as much as the rest of us, and that certainly the good 
people in North Battleford are as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am mindful that other members will 
want to extol the virtues of our Saskatchewan growth, and I do 
not want to take too much more time today. 
 
As such, I will move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Sherwood: 
 

That this Assembly congratulate Saskatchewan business 
people, workers, co-operatives, and researchers for 
working with the government to diversify the economy 
which has since 1991 led to steady growth and a record 
number of people working. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak on behalf of the motion 
moved by my colleague from Regina South dealing with our 
economy of the 1990s. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes and go 
over for the benefit of members of the House and for the people 
of Saskatchewan, the highlights of our economic performance 
during the 1990s. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy posted the 
second-highest economic growth during the 1990s in the 
country. Our real economic growth averaged 3.7 per cent from 
1993 to 1998, compared to an average growth in Canada of 3.1 
per cent during the same time period. 
 
I’d like to point out as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Alberta 
posted the highest growth at 4.8 per cent; BC (British 
Columbia) by 2.3 per cent; Manitoba by 2.3 per cent; and 
Ontario by 3.5. Not very bad company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan had the highest real growth 
in real GDP (gross domestic product) during the 1990s. Highest 
in the country. Saskatchewan’s real GDP per person grew by 
3.3 per cent on average. In Canada, the growth was 2 per cent. 
We’re 1.3 per cent above the Canadian average. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan outperformed the national 
average in almost all other economic indicators during the 
1990s. These economic indicators included personal income 
growth which averaged 3.5 per cent for the time period 1993 to 
1998, compared to a growth in personal income of 3 per cent in 
the rest of Canada. Personal disposable income grew by 3.2 per 
cent compared to national Canadian growth of 2.5 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1645) 
 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturing shipments increased by 3.5 per 
cent, compared to a national . . . sorry, 9.5 per cent compared to 
the national average of 7.9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, housing starts in our province grew by 9.5 
per cent during the 1990s. Whereas housing starts across the 
rest of the country declined, in effect, by 2.1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, retail trade grew by 6 per cent in this same 
time period compared to a Canadian growth rate of 4.9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure I need not go on much further to 
point out that during the 1990s, Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, Saskatchewan’s economy experienced real, 
sustained, and although not spectacular, definitely moderate 
growth. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the employment level in our province 
reached 480,100 in 1999 — the highest ever in the history of 
our province based on the Labour Force Survey — Canadian 
Labour Force Survey. 
 
In the same time period, full-time employment in our province 
increased by 39,000 — that’s 39,000 jobs during the 1990s. In 
this figure, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to point 
out to members that youth employment during this area, during 
the same time period, increased by 7,300. 
 
With the exception of employment in the health care sector, 
which has been unchanged, Mr. Speaker, and public 
administration, where jobs in effect did decline — all other 
sectors of the economy including construction, manufacturing, 
and mining experienced growth in employment during the 
1990s. 
 



April 18, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I might like to take a couple of minutes 
and also highlight some of the comparisons of our budget and 
fiscal situation with other provinces in the country. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, eight of Canada’s 11 senior governments 
are currently forecasting balanced or surplus budgets in the 
current fiscal year. Sorry, and I’d also like to say that the only 
ones that aren’t are Nova Scotia . . . it looks like BC, 
unfortunately BC . . . and Ontario. So it’s again, our province is 
in very, very good company when it comes to fiscal 
management. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some other areas that I’d like to point out 
in terms of our economic performance during the 1990s include 
the fact that we have diversified our economy quite 
considerably with, certainly in agriculture, and as I pointed out 
to my colleague from Regina South, other elements of our 
economy have been diversified quite considerably during the 
1990s. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to also take a couple of 
minutes to point out some of the financial accomplishments that 
have been experienced here in the last year. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as was pointed out by the Minister of Finance during 
our budget, we achieved in this province our sixth consecutive 
balanced budget here in the past year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventh. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Seventh, that’s right. Sorry. You’re right. 
That’s right. 
 
Anyway, I’d like to maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, turn to some 
. . . a recent labour force development report that just came out 
in March of this year. And this is very good news for us here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our labour market continues to be strong 
with employment increasing in March by 15,000 from March 
1999 to March of 2000 — 15,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in March 2000 it 
represented the third consecutive month that Saskatchewan led 
Western provinces in job growth with the 3.2 per cent increase 
in employment compared to 3.1 in Alberta, 1.9 in Manitoba, 
and 2.3 in British Columbia. 
 
In March 2000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan maintained 
the second lowest unemployment rate in Canada at 5.2 per cent, 
which was down from 7.3 per cent in March of 1999. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the number of unemployed, the number of 
unemployed in Saskatchewan dropped by 10,200 or 28 per cent 
between March of last year and March of this year. This was the 
largest percentage decrease of all provinces in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those aged 25 and over, the 
unemployment rate in March, 2000 was 4.0 per cent, down 
from 5.7 in March of 1999, while the unemployment rate for the 
province’s youth — that is the age group 15 to 24 — dropped 
from 14.7 per cent in March, 1999 to 11 per cent in March of 
2000. Mr. Deputy Speaker, nationally the youth unemployment 

rate is 13.5 per cent, which is two and a half per cent above our 
youth unemployment rate. 
 
More locally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here in Regina, we’re at . . . 
the city of Regina was tied for the lowest unemployment rate 
among major Canadian cities which in March, 2000 was at 4.3 
per cent, down from 5.8 per cent the year before. The 
unemployment rate in Saskatoon was at 5.9 per cent, down 
from 7.5 per cent the year before. 
 
On a seasonally adjusted basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan enjoyed the lowest unemployment rate in Canada 
for the second month in a row at 4.6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the level of employment in March, 2000 stood at 
four thousand . . . as I indicated earlier, 478,100, up from 
463,000 in March of 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Full-time employment in the province 
increased by 17,100 during the same time period. Employment 
increased in every major sector, Mr. Speaker, except public 
administration compared to March of the year before. 
 
Employment in agriculture was up 400; in manufacturing up 
1,200; in construction up 1,500; transportation, 5,200; retail and 
wholesale trade up 200; finance, insurance and real estate up 
1,200; and the service sector was up 5,700 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are good news statistics which back up the 
optimistic remarks of my colleague from Regina South in the 
resolution that he has moved that during the 1990s we here in 
Saskatchewan have experienced slow, steady, but most 
importantly, sustained growth which is good news for all of us 
here. 
 
I think that it’s . . . Mr. Speaker, on that note, I think I might 
note it’s approaching 5 o’clock here and I might at this time 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:54 p.m. 
 
 
 


