





























































Hansard: June 01, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1497 
 June 1, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition by people from this province concerned over the price 
of gasoline. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this comes from people in Kinistino, Albertville, 
Edmonton, and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today to save the hospitals at Lanigan and Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all 
from Young. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition that is presented by the citizens of Young concerned 
about the hospital in Lanigan and Watrous. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners may ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s fitting 
in light of the increase in the fuel prices this morning that we 
have this petition to present. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting is signed by people 
from the communities of Melfort and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petition is . . . Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by 
people from Wakaw, Kinistino, and Weldon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens concerned about the future of the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Allan and Young, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people of the province who are 
concerned about health care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this is signed by people from Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of people from the community of 
Young. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of the people of Lanigan and 
Guernsey who are extremely concerned about the future of their 
hospital in light of NDP hospital closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding hospital closures throughout the 
province, and this one is in the Lanigan, Watrous area. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from the good people from the Young 
area. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Young, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from Redvers, Saskatoon, Davidson and Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with a 
petition for citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The petitioners are from the community of Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of 
fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitioners come from the community of Cupar. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a 
litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the petition is signed by the good people of Spiritwood and 
also one from Edmonton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good citizens of Young, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To cause the government to keep the boundary road near 
Okema Beach open; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — I shall give notice that on day no. 56 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many outstanding 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

claims are currently being processed or otherwise handled 
by the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation; how 
many of the current outstanding claims were submitted less 
than six months ago; how many of the current outstanding 
claims were submitted between six months and one year 
ago; how many of the outstanding claims were submitted 
between one and two years ago; how many of the 
outstanding claims were submitted between two and three 
years ago; how many of the outstanding claims were 
submitted between three and four years ago; how many of 
the outstanding claims were submitted between four and 
five years ago; how many of the outstanding claims were 
submitted five years or more? 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: were any of the 1999-2000 
annual health district budgets initially submitted to the 
Minister of Health for approval altered by the Minister or 
Department of Health officials prior to their approval; if so, 
which districts had their budgets altered and what were the 
specific changes made or ordered by the Minister in each 
case? 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also give notice that 
I shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: of the 
companies listed under the accounts resolved column in the 
1999 Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation annual 
return, what were the details regarding the final resolution 
of each of these accounts? 
 

Also on day no. 56, I ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for the Women’s Secretariat: 
which employees of the Women’s Secretariat attended the 
Women’s Organization On Line Conference in Saskatoon 
on May 29 and 30, 2000 and what are their job titles; 
second question, what was the role of each at this 
conference; were any instructed by their superiors to make 
any statements or allegations about any members of the 
legislature to those attending the conference; and what is 
the minister’s policy regarding public servants making 
political statements while at such conferences in their role 
as employees of the secretariat? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the Associate 
Minister of Health: 
 

Regarding the two audits done for the provincial 
government regarding the Uranium City hospital which the 
minister discussed in the legislature on May 31, 2000: what 
was the cost to the government to have these audits 
conducted and who conducted them? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

legislature, some special guests seated in your gallery. Firstly, 
His Excellency Mr. Urs Ziswiler who is the ambassador to 
Canada from Switzerland. And he is accompanied by Mr. Pierre 
Riem who is the consul general of Switzerland in Toronto. And 
they arrived in Regina yesterday. 
 
They are visiting with the Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker, 
the Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development, the 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General, the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, the Leader of the 
Opposition, officials with the Department of Agriculture and 
Food, officials of Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 
and the mayor of Regina. They’re also visiting the University of 
Regina. 
 
Tomorrow they’re meeting with representatives of Tourism 
Saskatchewan and the Regina Chamber of Commerce. And they 
are visiting 15 Wing in Moose Jaw where they will be having a 
briefing tour and lunch hosted by Col. Marc Ouellet. 
 
And then they are travelling to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, for 
more visits. So it’s obviously a very action-packed visit to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I had the honour at noon today of hosting the ambassador 
and Mr. Riem at a very nice lunch in the members’ dining 
room, which was very enjoyable and informative. And I know 
that all members will want to join with me in very warmly 
welcoming the Ambassador and the Consul to our legislature 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I would like to join with my colleague 
opposite in welcoming Ambassador Ziswiler and Mr. Pierre 
Riem to Saskatchewan, to beautiful flat Saskatchewan. I know 
that’s a little different than your home country. Here it gives 
you an opportunity to see our vast expanses. 
 
We hope that the trip proves very fruitful and beneficial to us 
all, and welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t believe my 
good fortune. Yesterday I introduced three people from the 
Cypress Hills constituency and today I have the good fortune of 
introducing 46 students representing one of those outstanding 
schools in the Cypress Hills constituency. 
 
These students are from the community of Frontier, and they 
travelled part of that notorious Highway No. 18 to get here 
today. 
 
These students, Mr. Speaker, whom I would like to introduce to 
you, are in the east gallery, on the right side of the east gallery, 
and there’s 46 as I mentioned. They’re in grades 6 to 9 and 
they’re accompanied today by their teachers, Brad Gasper, Gail 
Wilson, and Sheila Erickson. And chaperones are Ernie 
Coakley, Tanya Howell, and Joel Christenson. And I’m sure the 
school bus driver was Norm Baker. 
 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

I’d like to welcome them and have all members of the 
Assembly join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to 
pre-empt the member from Lloydminster, but I’m sure that all 
members would like to join with me in welcoming two former 
members for Lloydminster area, two former MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly), Mr. Bob Long and Ms. Vi Stanger. 
 
In their retirement, Mr. Speaker, I should point out that one 
grows gladiolas and the other one sows wild oats and I leave it 
the members to decide which is which. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to introduce a class from the 
Canora-Pelly constituency that are seated in the east gallery, 
along with the class that has been introduced from Cypress 
Hills. It is my pleasure to introduce an elementary school class 
from the community of Foam Lake. 
 
The group that is visiting today is 28 grade 5 students along 
with their teachers Ruth Gislason and Jim Hack, and also bus 
driver Dennis Friesen. I look forward to meeting with that 
group at about 2:30 and hopefully help with the explanations of 
the things that the students will see this afternoon, not only here 
in the Chamber but also throughout their tour of the building. 
 
I ask all members to welcome this group to the Chamber here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

NDP Wood River Nomination 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of attending the New 
Democratic Party nomination meeting for Wood River. I am 
delighted to report that Robert Anderson, a Shaunavon area 
farmer and businessman, will once again be our candidate for 
that area. 
 
Robert is an outstanding, respectable, community-minded 
individual who was unchallenged in his bid to be our candidate. 
And in spite of a wonderful rainy evening — that will help the 
seeded crops — and very busy schedules of the constituents, 
there was twice the number of people attending this party event 
last night than attended the nomination a year ago. 
 
Clearly the support for the New Democrats in this constituency 
is growing. An enthusiastic crowd of New Democratic 
supporters was very upbeat. We have a strong united campaign 
team in this constituency, and now that their candidate is 
officially in place they are more than ready to get on with the 
campaign. 
 
Robert Anderson is very much looking forward to this 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, and he’s glad voters in Wood River 
will have a clear choice into what type of representation they 

want in this legislature. 
 
Do they want a representative who will be a strong rural voice 
within government and cabinet, someone who will work 
positively with local communities to get things accomplished? 
Or do they want someone who will just to throw stones from 
the sidelines and continue with the negative gloom and doom 
message? 
 
The Wood River NDP (New Democratic Party) campaign team 
is on the move. 
 

Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to spend a moment today talking about something positive 
in the constituency. The efforts of teachers and students and the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) certainly in my . . . in 
the communities of Whitewood and . . . Whitewood and 
Broadview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m talking about is the DARE program, and 
that’s the button I’m wearing today. And you may ask well, 
what does DARE mean? DARE is the Drugs Abuse Resistance 
Education. 
 
Let me read to you what some students have said about the 
program. They have said: 
 

Our right is to say no. It can damage the brain, lead to a 
shorter life, and get you into trouble. I think it’s important 
to be drug free and violence free for a longer life. 
 

The DARE program teaches young people the consequences of 
using drugs, positive self-esteem, and different ways of saying 
no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the students, the grade 
5 students in Whitewood and also the Grade 5 students in 
Broadview, who will be graduating next week, for having taken 
the program. 
 
I think a hearty congratulations as well has to go out Cst. 
Sandra Sutherland for teaching the program to the school, the 
teachers, and the principal for opening up the doors to allow 
this program to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that we recognize 
worthwhile programs such as this, and I say congratulations to 
all involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Co-ops and Credit Unions Show Profits 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And more good news for the 
people of Saskatchewan who believe that working together in 
co-operation and supporting each other builds a better 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Co-ops and credit unions, Mr. Speaker, are associations that 
believe in those values. Co-ops and credit unions, Mr. Speaker, 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

allow for local autonomy, community stability, community 
reinvestment, and leadership development. And they are the 
foundation under which this province was built. 
 
It has been a banner year for many co-ops across the province, 
and credit unions as well, Mr. Speaker. The Melfort Co-op had 
a record year with $20.1 million in sales, 317 new members, 
and a profit of nearly $1.5 million. 
 
The Swift Current co-op made history this past year. For the 
first time the Swift Current co-operative surpassed $80 million 
in sales. In the coming months, the Swift Current co-op will be 
expanding as a result. 
 
The Swift Current credit union reported a profit of over $2 
million with improved assets, growing loans, and decreased 
loan delinquency. And the Kamsack Credit Union had one of its 
best years ever with its assets increasing by $2.4 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate all the members of 
co-operatives and credit unions around the province for their 
commitment, and that their belief that working together will 
build a better province for us all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Montmartre School Green School Project 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk 
about and give congratulations to the Montmartre School. I 
attended an award ceremony there yesterday on a project that 
they have undertaken and have done very well in in the last four 
or five years. 
 
The project is called the Green School Project and has been 
developed by the Society of Environment and Energy 
Development Studies Foundation, or SEEDS for short. The 
program encourages students to undertake projects which 
enhance and communicate about the environment. 
 
The school receives recognition as it proceeds through the 
program to become green at 100, jade at 250 and emerald at 
500, which the Montmartre School has accomplished. 
 
The projects that these young people take — undertake — 
range from planting trees to giving speeches about global 
warming to picking garbage and cans. The imaginative projects 
that they have undertaken show us all that there is nothing that 
we cannot reduce, reuse, or recycle. 
 
I am honoured to represent them in the legislature and once 
again welcomed and enjoyed their company yesterday. The 
students from Montmartre deserve a lot of credit and their next 
goal is 1000 points. 
 
And I must also make mention that they are one of 300 schools 
in all of Canada that’s reached this goal. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Silverspring School Sod-turning 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of Saskatoon 

has one of the best health care systems in the country. As my 
colleague from Saskatoon Southeast mentioned recently, it has 
a rapidly expanding economy. And, Mr. Speaker, to complete 
the cycle, Saskatoon is blessed with one of the best educational 
systems anywhere and it’s getting better. 
 
Last Friday I was very pleased to take part with the Minister of 
Education in the sod-turning for the new Silverspring Public 
School in my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. This school 
is in addition to a new separate elementary school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when its doors open, this school will initially 
welcome around 400 students, which will grow as the 
neighbourhood grows. 
 
This school demonstrates our government’s commitment to 
work with school divisions to provide students with 
comfortable and well-equipped learning facilities. Buildings are 
not everything in education, but they help. The capital budget 
for new construction and renovations was increased by 20 per 
cent. The Silverspring announcement is possible because of this 
increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new school is a good sign. It tells us we have a 
secure and growing community. It is a commitment to that 
community on a long-term basis. I am pleased for the future 
students of Silverspring school and I look forward to my first 
visit to their new classrooms. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Tuba and Euphonium Conference 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a poem that goes 
something like this: 
 

You can hear the sound from here to Aruba 
when Roger Bobo plays on his tuba. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this week people in Regina have the unique 
opportunity to hear Roger Bobo, the world’s greatest tuba 
player, as well as about 500 other tubists and euphonium 
players all of whom are gathered in Regina for the International 
Tuba and Euphonium Conference. This is the first time this 
event has been held in Canada, and it gives us all the chance to 
learn first-hand about this much maligned instrument and those 
who lug it around. 
 
It is worth noting that many of these delegates are getting their 
first look at our province and our city. This conference is good 
for business as well as for the ear. 
 
I am particularly proud to tell the Assembly that this tuba 
conference is almost solely the work of one man who happens 
to be a constituent and a friend. Professor John Griffiths is the 
director of the conservatory of music and dance, and dean of 
Extension at the University of Regina. And John plays a pretty 
mean tuba himself with the Regina Symphony and as a soloist 
of world renown. 
 
There are daily concerts by ensembles and soloists from the 
States, from Canada, and from Europe, and there are nightly 
jazz sessions. There are lectures, including one on the 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

psycho-sexual aspects of tuba playing which received no 
government funding; and a documentary on the conference is 
being filmed by Four Square Productions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to congratulate all of these tubists as 
they parade around Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reduction of Fuel Tax 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Oh my, oh my, 
this morning the gas prices in Regina shot up again. It’s now at 
an all-time high — 74.9 cents a litre. And what’s the NDP 
doing about it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That’s right. Absolutely nothing. For 
months we’ve been asking the Finance minister to pick up the 
phone and call Paul Martin and at least discuss this proposal to 
cut the gas tax. But the fact is, this government doesn’t believe 
in tax cuts. 
 
To the Minister of Finance. Gas prices are now at an all-time 
high. Why don’t you talk to Paul Martin about a 
federal-provincial gas tax cut? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the oil companies 
are making record profits as gas prices soar, and what is the 
answer for . . . that the Leader of the Opposition has? In typical 
Tory fashion, it’s let the oil companies have all the profit and let 
the taxpayers and the public have none of the money from gas 
prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Opposition and I say to the 
people of the province, this is the same kind of thinking that we 
saw in the 1980s when the Devine government, of which many 
of those members were members and supporters, cut gas taxes, 
let the oil companies take all the gravy leaving nothing to repair 
the roads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the one hand they say, put money into the roads; on the 
other hand they say, give the people of Saskatchewan no money 
to fix the roads. And it doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well this government, Mr. Speaker, is 
doing absolutely nothing. They are collecting high gas taxes 
and they aren’t fixing the roads. They’re sitting and doing 
absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t spend the gas tax on 
highways. It doesn’t do it. It might as well give some of the 
money back to Saskatchewan drivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps using its argument about . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP keep 
using this argument about highway funding. The fact is 
Saskatchewan’s gas tax is 15 cents a litre; Alberta’s gas tax is 
only 9 cents a litre. And I’ll bet Alberta’s highways are 10 times 
better than our highways are here in NDP Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re not going to spend the gas tax fixing 
highways, then why don’t you at least give drivers a break? 
Will you talk to the federal government about a 10 cent a litre 
gas tax cut cost shared by the federal and provincial 
governments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — For the information of the Leader of the 
Opposition who is playing fast and loose with the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, we are spending 87 per cent of the net revenue we’re 
taking in in gas taxes to build the road and highway system in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Over the opposition of those 
members opposite, we’re spending more money this year on 
highways and roads than ever before in the history of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The problem with the approach of these members, Mr. Speaker, 
is they refuse . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. Minister of Finance, to complete your 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They refuse to learn from their mistakes of 
the past, Mr. Speaker. To leave all the revenue from gas tax to 
the oil companies who give them all the gravy and to keep 
nothing for the people of the province to fix the roads will 
either result in bad roads, such as we’ve got as a result of their 
legacy, Mr. Speaker, or it will result in a return to deficit and 
debt. 
 
Let’s keep collecting road tax and let’s put it as we are doing, 
Mr. Speaker, 87 per cent into fixing the transportation system in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, what can be more frightening 
than a Finance minister who can’t do his math? Mr. Speaker, 
over the last 10 years, just 56 per cent of the gas tax in the 
province went back into highways. Just 56 per cent. That’s dead 
last in Canada. 
 
You’re not spending the money on highways anyway so you 
might as well be giving consumers a break. Mr. Minister, why 
won’t you consider a gas tax cut? Five cents from Ottawa; five 
cents from the province. That’s a 10 cent a litre break at the 
pump. That will go a long way to helping customers who are 
now paying 75 cents a litre. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you waiting for? Will you at least call 
the federal government? Give them a telephone call and discuss 
this proposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we’ve called the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker. What we’ve called the federal government upon to 
do is put some of their tax revenue that they collect into the 
road system in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’ve been joined in that call by every 
province in the country, Mr. Speaker, because we’re putting 87 
per cent of the net revenue we receive from gas tax into the 
highways and roads. The federal government also has gas tax 
and that money isn’t going into the highways and roads. 
 
The answer is not, Mr. Speaker, to give all the money to the oil 
companies as the Leader of the Opposition would do. The 
answer is to do what we’re doing. Use the money from the gas 
tax as eight . . . we’re up to 87 per cent. Put it into the road 
system and rebuild the road system. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition’s argument that you can have no tax 
and spend more money on the roads is as phoney as a 
three-dollar bill and he knows it. He knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Uranium City Hospital 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Associate Minister of Health. Yesterday the 
minister admitted that she knew about the problems in the 
Uranium City hospital prior to being elected to the legislature in 
the spring of ’98. 
 
The associate minister said that the Department of Health 
learned about mismanagement problems by management at the 
hospital in June of that same year and conducted their own 
operational audit. The chairman of the Uranium City Hospital 
Board says the CEO (chief executive officer) and the director of 
nursing were both fired in the fall of 1998. 
 
But the Acting Provincial Auditor in his spring report says the 
department didn’t begin a forensic audit until after the hospital 
board requested help, and that audit didn’t begin until March, a 
year after the associate minister knew there were problems. 
 
Madam Minister, in light of the severe management problems 
that were uncovered in ’98, why did it take so long for your 
department to do something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll go through 
the chronology again as I did yesterday. In June of 1998 there 
was a complaint filed about the mismanagement issues . . . or 
identifying mismanagement issues at Uranium City hospital. In 
July of 1998 we initiated an internal investigation of the 
hospital. 
 
And in January . . . in February of 1999 we had started looking 
at a forensic audit. We had asked the Provincial Auditor to 
participate and he declined. And then we went ahead and 
commissioned SPMC, Saskatchewan Property Management, to 
do that provincial audit starting in March of ’99, which was 
nowhere near a year after June of ’98. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister says that the problems were only discovered after the 
audit in ’99 . . . ’98. 
 
But what is alarming in the Provincial Auditor’s examination of 
what happened in 1999, after the operational audit by the Health 
department and after the start of the forensic audit, he said — 
and he still highlighted major, major problems including 
misappropriation of funds by hospital board members — there 
was no control of inventory, no budget process or proper 
financial reporting. 
 
How is it that a year after your department realized there were 
problems the mismanagement was allowed to continue? How is 
it that the CEO and the director of nursing were fired in the fall 
of ’98 and these problems continued into ’99? 
 
Madam Minister, with all of the problems there, how could you 
allow budgets to keep being approved by your department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I run through the chronology again, 
I’d like to say that the budget still had to be approved since 
services still had to be delivered. 
 
In June ’98, the complaint was received. In September, an 
internal operational review was done; in March ’99, a forensic 
audit. That is not a year in my calculations. 
 
The forensic audit was given to us in March of this year and 
turned over to the Justice department. The Justice department 
now has it in their hands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, you were saying that you don’t have any 
responsibility in this matter. Yesterday you told the media that 
your department is working very closely with the hospital to 
strengthen or straighten out the situation. And what has your 
department done? 
 
Has the department replaced the board members who are paying 
themselves for personal expenses? Have they got the medical 
supply inventory under lock and key? Have they hired financial 
professionals to do the books to make sure that the budget 
process is properly being monitored and mandated? 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing on a day-to-day basis to 
straighten out this mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The auditor’s 
report and the audit suggested that the board needed some 
assistance in training and some of the code of conduct and 
conflict of interest procedures. 
 
We have been working . . . the Department of Health has been 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

working very closely with the board. The board has significant 
challenges of geography. A board member . . . some board 
members have resigned for health or have died. So the board is 
. . . Now also that area of the province is in a transition. The 
Athabasca Basin is being served by Uranium City and will soon 
to be taken over, the services there, at Stony Rapids. 
 
So this is a transition in the very North of our province. And 
there’s, there are geographical and other challenges when you 
work so far up in the North. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
now you’re ducking behind the fact that the health system is in 
transition. Of course, it’s in transition. 
 
Are you going to approve the current budget for this district 
health board in light of all this mismanagement? 
 
Madam Minister, you say you’re helping the Uranium City 
Hospital Board. You’ve had four different facility managers 
since the fall of ’98. Right now, I understand, you’ve got some 
guy flying out of Regina one week in the month to provide 
some support because you can’t find anybody to work there. 
And probably the reason is no one knows what this transition is 
going to be. 
 
In this current budget, Madam Minister, are you going to shut 
down this hospital? Or are you going to keep it? Are you going 
to convert it? Or at the very least, are you going to manage it 
properly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Uranium 
City facility is being operated on a . . . as a health facility due to 
staffing issues. And like I said, there’s difficulties in the North 
dealing with distance, geography, and the facility is being 
supported by a very competent administrator. We are working 
with them on an ongoing basis from the department. 
 
And there are services being delivered into the Athabasca Basin 
that we are confident are meeting the needs of the people in the 
basin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
the Associate Minister of Health has been hiding behind the 
Minister of Justice for the last two days, I’d like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, even though there’s been two years of problems 
outlined by the forensic audit by the Department of Health, Mr. 
Minister, we understand that there have been people terminated 
and that the Provincial Auditor has indicated that there is very 
severe misdoings going on in the department. 
 
Mr. Minister, when did you receive the forensic audit? And 
number two, when will you be making a decision on which 
charges will be laid or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the 
forensic audit was completed in March of this year. It was 
passed on to the Department of Health who passed it on to the 
Provincial Auditor’s Office. In April of this year, which was 
just one month ago, we gave it to the Department of Justice. It 
is now there and we’re awaiting . . . their response will be 
forthcoming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Death at Battlefords Union Hospital 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Madam Minister, a report was released yesterday 
regarding the death of a patient at Battlefords hospital on 
Christmas Eve. The review was completed by a five-member 
panel appointed by the Department of Health. It was alleged by 
the doctors who tried to save the man’s life that the lack of ICU 
(intensive care unit) services played a role in the patient’s death 
but the findings of the report suggest that that was not the case. 
 
According to the review panel, all of the necessary emergency 
equipment was available. The review panel recommends that 
the conduct of one of the doctors should be investigated by the 
college of physicians and surgeons. 
 
Madam Minister, the findings of the review panel contradict the 
attending doctors’ statements and the family is left in the 
middle with no answers. Madam Minister, who is the family to 
believe — three medical professionals in the province or your 
appointed review committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
member is that people on the review committee: Dr. Dennis 
Kendel, the registrar of the college of physicians and surgeons 
— an outstanding medical physician in this province; Dr. 
Daniel Kirchgesner, also former president of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, representing the college of physicians and 
surgeons — an outstanding medical practitioner in this 
province; Ms. Helen Grimm, from the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association — an outstanding registered nurse; and Dr. 
Stewart McMillan, a physician that is known far and wide in 
this country, whose credentials are impeccable. 
 
I would ask the member: are you besmirching these citizens 
from the province of Saskatchewan that act independently from 
the government and are highly regarded professionals in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again for the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, the doctor involved in the case claims the 
report is a cover-up, a whitewash. So now there are rising 
concerns within the medical community and the public about 
who to believe. 
 
This controversy may not have arisen if the province had an 
independent health care ombudsman to investigate situations 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

such as this. This would remove the health district, your 
department, and the medical professional association from 
direct involvement in reviewing health cases. 
 
Madam Minister, will you appoint a health ombudsman so there 
is accountability in the system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the 
member is that the first recommendation from this review 
panel, Mr. Speaker, is that this matter be referred to the college 
of physicians and surgeons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second thing I would say to the member opposite, is that 
there are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can say to the member . . . and Mr. 
Speaker, this is an important thing. This is an important matter, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would ask members to listen, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, as the minister pointed 
out, this is an important issue. Kindly allow the minister to be 
heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there are times in our 
health system when allegations are made and they are made by 
members of the public, and they are made by members of the 
opposition. And Mr. Speaker, we set . . . Mr. Speaker, we set in 
place a review, a review, Mr. Speaker, that reviewed all of the 
facts. They interviewed the staff, they visited the area under 
question. They review . . . they visited the charts, they looked at 
all of the documentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an executive summary of the report has been 
released . . . Matter, the first thing is to refer this to the college 
of physicians and surgeons for a review. And I understand that 
will happen. And, Mr. Speaker, there are other 
recommendations that have been made and those 
recommendations will be followed up upon, but these members 
are playing politics with the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ with the Minister 
of Health. This side of the party is not playing politics. We are 
concerned about people’s lives in this province and maintaining 
a decent health . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, I was not able to hear 
the question. Hon. member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, your 
question, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we have another 
government-ordered review now mired in controversy. The 
family of Mr. Robin feels they are no further ahead than they 
were five months ago. Mrs. Robin was there that night. She saw 
the health professionals at work. She knows the situation. They 
feel betrayed by this review. 

And isn’t this a reoccurring theme, Mr. Speaker? The no-fault 
insurance review is nothing but a complete $90,000 fiasco. The 
review into Channel Lake yet another example. And now we 
have SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). People do not trust this government to look after the 
public interest. 
 
Madam Minister, you could do a lot to restore public 
confidence in the health care system. Will you approve the 
establishment of an independent health ombudsman for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Stewart McMillan — 
who yesterday these people were crediting him with integrity — 
he is the chair of the review. Dr. Dennis Kendel, the registrar of 
the college of physicians and surgeons, whose credentials are 
undisputable. Dr. Daniel Kirchgesner, who the member from 
Humboldt will know — his credentials are not disputable. And 
what we can say to the member is that we have a representative 
of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, Helen 
Grimm. 
 
Now I ask those members, when we ask for these reviews, it’s 
to expose all of the facts, all of the facts. The facts have been 
exposed, Mr. Speaker, and this has been referred to the college 
of physicians and surgeons. And I would say to the member: 
stop playing politics. It doesn’t look . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
third straight year, the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) is refusing to open the books of the First Nations fund to 
the Provincial Auditor. And the law requires the FSIN to allow the 
Provincial Auditor to audit the fund. Yet for three years in a row 
they have refused to co-operate. And what is this government 
doing about it? Absolutely nothing. 
 
Over the past three years the FSIN has received about $22 million 
in gambling revenue from the First Nations fund, yet they refuse 
to fulfill their legislative requirement to co-operate with the 
auditor. 
 
To the minister responsible: what are you doing about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said on a previous 
occasion, and I say to the member opposite again today and said a 
couple of days ago to the media, that I had a discussion with Mr. 
Bellegarde and the discussion that I had with Mr. Bellegarde is 
about looking for ways in which we might be able to work with 
the Provincial Auditor, the Provincial Comptroller, to look at the 
account that the member is speaking about. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Bellegarde made it very clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they’re prepared to allow the opening of those 
books and he’s going to be sharing that information with the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I say that to the member. That was 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

Mr. Bellegarde’s words yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the FSIN now says they’re going to 
run ads explaining how the money is being spent. That’s nice, but 
it still doesn’t fulfil their requirements under the law. The 
Provincial Auditor says the First Nations fund is a Crown 
corporation. The auditor says, and I quote: 
 

It’s a lot of money and we haven’t been able to tell the 
Assembly what they’ve complied with the authorities that 
govern them. We just don’t know. 

 
Mr. Minister, that’s unacceptable. This has been going on for 
three years. What’s the point in having laws if you don’t have 
any intention of ever enforcing them. Mr. Minister, what are 
you doing to force the FSIN to co-operate with the Provincial 
Auditor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to 
the member’s comments, and I want to say to the member 
opposite a question. That you used a very significant word 
which is a part of your vocabulary over there, which is forcing 
people to do things. It’s about forced amalgamation, it’s about 
forced minorities, it’s about forcing things to do with the people 
in communities. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, on this side of the House, we 
use a different approach. The approach we use over here is to sit 
down with people, to have a discussion, to have a consultation, 
to recognize their inherent rights as they are with Aboriginal 
indigenous people. That’s what we do on this side of the House. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that we have an 
understanding and a working agreement with First Nations 
people today on many fronts. And on this particular issue, we’re 
going to find resolve as well, as Mr. Bellegarde has said. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, stay tuned, pay attention 
over the next couple of weeks or months, we’ll have . . . get a 
resolution with this group of individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, now that 
you’ve had your little rant, do you have any thoughts on the 
question? The FSIN is refusing to co-operate with the 
Provincial Auditor, and now they’re asking for even more 
gambling money. They want more casinos, they want more 
share of the VLT (video lottery terminal) money, they want 
Internet gambling — they’re asking for all of these things. At 
the same time, they’re refusing to co-operate with the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would you give even more gambling money 
to the FSIN when they refuse to allow an audit of the $22 
million they’ve received in the last three years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, as I said to her when she asked me the question last 
December, and it’s this: that in this province, KPMG, which is 
the auditor of notion here, do a great deal of work in this 
province not only for First Nations community but across the 
piece. And today, Mr. Speaker, what you say to me is that this 
particular auditing firm isn’t capable of providing the kinds of 
information that you’re satisfied with. 
 
Now if you have a dispute with the work of KPMG, you should 
be saying that the work of KPMG does not meet with your 
satisfaction. You should then say that KPMG’s work doesn’t 
meet with the satisfaction of school boards or health boards or 
municipalities across the province in which they do, which 
there isn’t any dispute. 
 
And so you say to the member opposite, who is it that you have 
the problem with here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, you’ve had a chance to do 
something about this situation and you blew it. 
 
Your five-year agreement with the FSIN expired last February. 
You could have used that opportunity to tell them, you have to 
co-operate with the Provincial Auditor. Instead, typically, you 
did nothing. You signed an extension and the FSIN continues to 
defy the law by not co-operating with the auditor. 
 
Mr. Minister, the contract extension expires in December. Why 
don’t you just tell the FSIN that you will not extend the contract 
until they open their books to the Provincial Auditor? Will you 
do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite again, that on this side of the House we don’t use that 
strong-armed tactic that you believe in, which is to go around 
and forcing people — forcing people — into all kinds of 
understandings. That’s not what we do on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side of the House, what we do is we sit down with 
people, we sit down with municipalities, we sit down with 
school boards, and we sit down with health districts and we 
negotiate things on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We 
don’t strong arm a . . . (inaudible) . . . thing. Forcing people to do 
things is what you believe in; forcing people on this side of the 
House is not what we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Centre 
of the Arts Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 79, 
The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act, 2000 now be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 
accountable government we’re always happy to answer the 
questions put forward by the opposition. At this time I’ll table 
the answer to question 152. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 152 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Being an open and accountable government we 
always want to answer the questions. But I should point out one 
part of the question wasn’t really a question; there’s no such 
word. But anyway we’re always happy to table an answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 153 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — We’d like to convert that please, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 154 is converted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I rise to move second reading of The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces 
amendments to The Urban Municipality Act, 1989 that will do a 
number of things. 
 
First, it will respond to and accept many of the 
recommendations made by the Property Tax Exemptions 
Review Committee and to the 1997 Reassessment Review 
Committee. 
 
Secondly, it will implement changes to respond to specific 
procedural and approval issues which have arisen over the past 
year; and thirdly, improve the property tax assessment appeals 
process. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that none of these amendments in any way 
relate to the issue of restructuring of municipalities, the 
municipal government system in Saskatchewan. As you are 
aware, our government is pursuing this issue in co-operation 
with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities). And amendments from that process, if 
necessary, Mr. Speaker, may in fact be introduced this session, 
but only if in fact SUMA and SARM are interested in having 
that occur. Or they may occur in subsequent sittings of the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are ones that 
need to proceed now. They include adjustments to the new 

provisions recommended by the two tax policy committees I 
mentioned earlier. 
 
The proposed amendments will improve the ability of local 
governments to respond to the upcoming 2001 reassessment, 
and to manage their own financial affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year issues are brought to our attention by 
municipal administrators, by local government, associations, 
other stakeholders, and our own officials. These amendments 
come as a result of our government’s ongoing commitment to 
ensuring that local government systems work for the people as 
well as for municipalities. And our government is committed to 
the improvement of municipal government systems in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to briefly describe the key 
provisions in this Bill as I mention some of the amendments 
proposed to the recommendations made by the Property Tax 
Exemptions Review Committee and the 1997 Reassessment 
Review Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these committees examined many issues and 
provided a number of recommendations concerning property 
tax policy in this province. Both committees have 
representation from local government associations representing 
the municipal and school sectors, as well as from a number of 
government departments. The committees’ reports were 
presented to the department in March of 1999. 
 
The 1997 Reassessment Review Committee report dealt with a 
broad range of topics such as the timing and the cycle for 
reassessment, property tax policy, the assessment appeals 
process, the interjurisdictional issues, and the extent to which 
property classes and percentages of value should be used for the 
next reassessment. 
 
The Property Tax Exemptions Review Committee examined the 
province-wide interest for Saskatchewan property tax 
exemptions. This committee identified existing property tax 
exemptions in legislation, developed principles of public 
interest for exempting such properties, and acknowledging the 
rationale for certain exemptions existing in legislation based on 
a province-wide interest. 
 
This committee examined the extent to which municipalities 
have or should have the authority necessary to determine which 
properties should receive an exemption from municipal and 
school property taxes. The key recommendations of both 
reports have been accepted by government, and are included in 
the Bill that we are introducing today and we’re bringing 
forward today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, stakeholders are expecting government to address 
these issues in a timely fashion as part of a gearing up for the 
2001 reassessment. And the amendments include the 
elimination of business assessment and tax vacancy adjustment 
and provisions related to adjusting school levies if a 
municipality has eliminated the business tax. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1997 municipalities have had the option of 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

eliminating business tax assessment for business tax purpose. 
The majority of municipalities are in favour of eliminating the 
business tax and many have already done so. Mr. Speaker, this 
amendment is a response to the recommendation of the 1997 
Reassessment Review Committee at the request from the 
various municipalities to eliminate business tax on a 
province-wide basis. 
 
As well the amendment removes the need for municipalities to 
level an equivalent amount of tax for school divisions and other 
taxing authorities. Mr. Speaker, our government believes that in 
fairness . . . it believes in fairness and equity in our property tax 
system, and eliminating the business tax will provide 
municipalities and their residents with a fair, more realistic and 
understandable property tax system. 
 
The changes will significantly streamline the assessment 
process since neither SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) nor cities will have to calculate the 
business assessments. Both private business organizations have 
made representation to the Reassessment Review Committee. 
We’re in agreement that it was time to complete these changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment sends an important signal to our 
province’s business community that they are in favour . . . that 
we are in favour of economic development. Local governments 
have sufficient local tax tools to manage an effective, an 
effective change in most instances. This has been shown by 
those municipalities that already decided on their own to end 
business tax assessment . . . or business assessment and tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also proposes to provide authority for 
municipalities to exempt properties from school division taxes 
for economic development purposes for a limited time period 
without the need to replace lost tax revenues. This amendment 
proposes . . . response to the proposal submitted in the 1997 
Reassessment Review Committee by the local government 
federation which consists of SUMA, SARM, and SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). This change will 
provide municipalities with increased flexibility of providing 
property tax exemption for economic development purposes. 
 
Another key provision this Bill introduces, Mr. Speaker, is to 
amend the established municipality authority to levy a base tax. 
Mr. Speaker, under this provision municipalities will be 
provided with the authority to establish a fixed amount of 
property tax that would be payable for all properties in a 
property class regardless of their assessed value. Compared to 
the existing minimum tax provision, a base tax will be much 
more simpler to administer. However, like minimum tax, base 
tax will not apply to school taxes. 
 
Providing municipalities with this additional tax tool will offer 
greater municipal flexibility and manage local tax policy to 
respond to local needs and local circumstances. We are 
responding to requests from SUMA and all of the city mayors 
and commissioners in doing this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997, Reassessment Review Committee and the 
local government federation recommended that municipalities 
should have unilateral authority to abate property taxes, 
including school taxes, for limited specific purposes listed in 
legislation. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that our 

government has accepted this recommendation, and will 
provide councils with a list of circumstances in which they may 
abate school taxes, and ensure that municipalities are not 
constrained by legislation that inhibits their local autonomy 
respecting municipal taxes. 
 
This change has support from both SUMA and SSTA. It will 
provide more clarity in public policy, and remove the source of 
needless friction within municipalities and school . . . and the 
school sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will also ensure that school 
abatement provisions are not used unfairly by municipalities as 
a tax tool to manage tax incidents or a covenant to provisions 
relating to tax exemptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of these amendments was recommended 
during the tax policy review process, which I am very pleased 
to announce today that government is responding to and wishes 
. . . the wishes of the municipal sector by accepting and 
implementing the recommendation. 
 
Other amendments, Mr. Speaker, address specific procedural or 
approval issues which have arisen over the past year, and these 
include removing the procedural requirement for an order in 
council and replacing it with approval by a minister’s order for 
the incorporation of resort villages and their boundary 
alterations where all parties agree to the changes. 
 
This change will make the Act consistent with The Rural 
Municipality Act of 1989 and The Northern Municipalities Act. 
It will also make the Act internationally consistent . . . 
internally consistent in that some of the incorporation and 
boundary alteration process currently required by OC (order in 
council), while others require a minister’s order. These 
amendments will streamline the process of incorporating 
municipalities and altering their boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently this Act provides for a board of 
reference to investigate the circumstances surrounding the 
dismissal of a clerk or a treasurer. The board’s authority is 
insufficient to really deal with these issues of wrongful 
dismissal as the board does not have any binding powers. The 
board’s authority to conduct hearings into the dismissal of a 
clerk or treasurer or related provisions are being removed. 
These changes being made with the full agreement of the 
present board of reference, SUMA, and the urban municipalities 
administrators association. This amendment will remove 
government from the area of municipal responsibility. 
 
Labour issues respecting the dismissal of clerks and treasurers 
will now be handled in court where they are more appropriately 
dealt with. This change is consistent with my department’s 
policy direction taken in previous legislative changes to reduce 
provincial government approvals of municipal actions. Similar 
amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act are being 
proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other amendments to this Bill that will improve 
the effectiveness of the property tax assessment and appeals 
process has been requested by municipal leaders and will serve 
to make the system fairer for both taxpayers and municipalities, 
and these include clarification that where two or more persons 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

are owners of land or improvements, the owner shall have the 
opportunity to designate to whom the assessment notice should 
be sent. 
 
Secondly, introducing provisions that will require information 
regarding the sale transactions to be provided to the assessor by 
a vendor and/or purchaser with the form of which it is reported 
to set by regulation. 
 
And thirdly, clarifying that when a council passes a bylaw to 
dispense with mailing of assessment notices, except in cases 
where the assessment value is new or altered, the bylaw remains 
in force until changes are repealed. 
 
Fourthly, clarifying that a notice of appeal is given to the 
secretary of the board of revision and not the assessor. 
 
And fifthly, introducing the improvements of the assessment 
appeal process that will aid appellants to ensuring that proper 
and . . . (inaudible) . . . notices of appeal are submitted, further 
clarifying the tax levy as a result of an appeal decision or 
reconvertible pursuant to the Act and The Tax Enforcement 
Act. 
 
This amendment will also provide councils with the authority to 
treat the additional levy as arrears of taxes where the appeal 
decision is received by the municipality subsequent to the tax 
year in which the appeal relates. 
 
Replacing the fee for the issuing of a tax certificate from an 
amount set by the minister in regulation to an amount set by the 
council, subject to any limits set by the minister in regulation. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to the significant 
concerns in three areas: firstly, implementing the 
recommendations made by the Property Tax Exemption Review 
Committee and the 1997 Reassessment Review Committee; 
secondly, implementing specific procedural or approval issues 
which have arisen over the past year; and finally, improving the 
fairness and transparency of the property tax assessment and 
appeals process. 
 
The provisions within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, help to ensure that 
property owners, municipalities, and school divisions receive 
fair treatment and are part of a transparent and equitable process 
in order that they may have confidence in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments should be supported by all 
members of the legislature and they are in the best interests of 
municipalities, their communities, and all of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill No. 69, The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand in the Assembly today and to raise . . . or speak 
to the Bill that has just been read and presented to the 
Assembly, The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the minister, certainly there 

needs to be a lot of changes made in regards to municipal 
agreements in the province of Saskatchewan. And based on 
what the minister was sharing with us today, the minister is 
quite well aware of this as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had for the past number of months an 
ongoing debate in this Assembly regarding amalgamation of 
municipalities, both urban and rural, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve had two reports presented to the people 
of Saskatchewan and municipal governments and to this 
government to take a look at and review. 
 
And most recently the minister basically said to municipal 
governments there will be no forced amalgamation, that we’ll 
sit down and work together to find areas of common interest 
and common bond. And then last week again, the minister 
stands up and says that he favours a level of amalgamation that 
would see just a reduction of the number of RMs (rural 
municipality) and municipalities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So one has to ask, what exactly is it? And we trust that this 
piece of legislation the minister was talking about will indeed 
clear the air so that municipalities know beyond a shadow of a 
doubt exactly what they have to work with. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is going to do a lot to 
enhance the work between municipal governments and the 
province in addressing a number of concerns, be it school 
taxation, which is a major concern. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t one 
MLA in this, especially a rural MLA, that doesn’t face the 
question and the concern about the level of school taxes on 
property in the province of Saskatchewan on an ongoing basis. 
 
In fact, every time we spend some time in our constituencies, 
that issue comes to the forefront. And no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
after the most recent budget and what we’ve been hearing, it’s 
going to be an issue that is not going to die. In fact it’s going to 
increase as the municipal levies, the tax levies are sent out to 
taxpayers and they again see that their taxes are going to 
increase, specifically in the area of taxation on . . . or school 
taxes on that property. 
 
Now I realize this piece of legislation doesn’t totally address the 
issue of taxation on school . . . or school taxation on properties. 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it opens up the door for some 
discussion in regards to how those levies are assessed. And the 
other area that has to be addressed is going to come from the 
leadership of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Education in accepting the responsibility for carrying a higher 
load of the tax . . . of the education tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t doubt that the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs would like to see his colleagues finally start to accept 
their responsibility rather than leaving it up to him to go out to 
municipal governments and explain the fact that there just isn’t 
the money there. The Minister of Education and the Minister of 
Finance haven’t given . . . funded equally or appropriately the 
level of education in this province, therefore I’m left to try and 
address it as best I can with the . . . in my responsibility as the 
minister responsible for Municipal Government. 
 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

However, Mr. Speaker, having said that, we need to take a 
serious look at how we tax and the tax levels in the province of 
Saskatchewan, especially when it comes to school taxes. We 
need to work at building relationships between the school 
trustees and municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the minister, I think it’s certainly 
imperative that we improve the property tax assessment process 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’ve had the privilege of 
talking to the minister on a number of occasions regarding the 
assessment . . . the form of assessment, or the form of making 
assessments in the province of Saskatchewan when it comes to 
taxes and setting levies. 
 
There’s no doubt that since the last assessment was done, Mr. 
Speaker, that there has been a lot of concern and discontent and 
a lot of improvements need to be made in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s appropriate I believe that we take a look and 
come up and listen to a number of the recommendations and 
bring them forward before the next assessment is tackled so that 
we can, if you will, Mr. Speaker, alleviate the problems that we 
had in the past. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, we trust that this piece of 
legislation will address a number of those areas and concerns 
and that we’ll be able to work together with municipal leaders 
to develop a fairer assessment process in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of concern is the business tax. And 
the minister talked about it. The minister talked about different 
areas. Different jurisdictions have already looked at eliminating 
the business tax because their interest is in trying to build the 
business community, and the business tax has just been an 
irritant over the years. 
 
And I believe, as the minister indicated, this amendment . . . 
municipal amendment Act is going to address and create a more 
level playing field so that every jurisdiction has the opportunity 
to really look very carefully at their business tax and remove 
that business tax if that’s in the best interest of that jurisdiction. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we will see the elimination 
of the business tax and a more fair tax brought forward so that 
businesses are not . . . don’t feel that they’re carrying the total 
burden; that everyone is paying equally through a fair taxation 
system. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s all people are asking for. 
They’re calling for a fair taxation system. And when you talk 
about a fair taxation system, well we’re going to look at it very 
closely. 
 
The Bill before us talks about a base tax. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
not exactly sure if you’re aware — the minister might be aware 
— but certainly a community in my constituency two years ago 
brought forward what I would call a base tax, which I totally 
agree with. 
 
They looked at . . . when the assessment came in, and the new 
assessments, and they looked at the discrepancy in properties, 
and no doubt different properties have different values. 
However, Mr. Speaker, everyone who lives in a community 

pays for water services, pays for the sewer, pays for street 
maintenance and repair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this community felt it was appropriate to set out a base 
level of tax so that everyone paid for those services, and then 
value the property and the assess . . . the tax levy and 
assessment of over and above that. And as a result, Mr. 
Speaker, I think people in that community are very pleased with 
what their municipal government has done. 
 
And I’m pleased to see that the Minister of Municipal 
Government has certainly picked up on this and is making 
provisions for all communities to take a good look and a close 
look at a base tax and how we assess taxes in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well when we talk about amalgamation and talk 
about communities working together, there’s a concern that’s 
been raised with my colleagues and I, and certainly brought to 
my attention, is the fact that many RMs and towns have been 
working over the past number of years to try and build 
relationships and create liaison between their levels of 
government, to find ways in which they can provide services 
that are fairer and as well as saving dollars at the local level. 
 
(1445) 
 
And the minister talked about that. The minister talked about 
creating amendments that will assist RMs and towns in working 
more closely together and, Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s 
important. 
 
It’s important that we give rural municipalities and local 
governments or towns, town administrations, the ability and the 
tools with which they can work together, more closely together, 
to provide services to their constituency and to their ratepayers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was indicated by the minister, this amendment 
that we’re dealing with today is covering a fair number of areas. 
It’s covering quite a broad range and spectrum of changes that 
need to be made. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be appropriate for 
this Legislative Assembly to take the time to review the Bill and 
the legislation before us more carefully and more closely. To 
scrutinize it more carefully so that when indeed we move into 
committee and at the end of the day the passage of this Bill 
moves forward and if, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we find there are 
areas that we feel the Bill could be improved upon, we trust that 
the minister and this government will see fit to allow for some 
amendments through discussion to this piece of legislation so 
that we can make it a more comprehensive piece of legislation 
— one that will meet the needs of the public in rural 
Saskatchewan. Actually in all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to allow for the greater 
debate and more scrutiny of Bill 69, The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000, I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

Bill No. 68 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 
2000. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments to 
The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 that will do a number of 
things. 
 
First it will respond to and accept many of the 
recommendations made by the Property Tax Exemptions 
Review Committee and the 1997 Saskatchewan Reassessment 
Review Committee. 
 
Secondly, it will implement changes to respond to specific 
procedural and approval issues which have arisen over the past 
year, and improve the property assessment appeals process. 
 
As I mentioned in my earlier remarks regarding The Urban 
Municipality Act, 1994 amendments, none of these 
amendments in any way relate to the restructuring of municipal 
government system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you and I and the members of the Legislative 
Assembly know, the three municipal Acts, urban, rural, and 
northern, are similar in many respects. And where applicable, 
the amendments that I detailed earlier during my address on the 
urban Act are also being made to The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989. 
 
And rather than reiterating all of those amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, I will instead concentrate on those amendments 
specific to the rural Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill are ones that 
need to proceed with now. As I mentioned, some of the 
amendments respond to the recommendations made by the 
Property Tax Exemptions Review Committee and the 1997 
Saskatchewan Reassessment Review Committee. 
 
The key recommendations of both reports have been accepted 
by government and are included in the Bill before you today. 
And in addition to the amendments I spoke of in my address 
concerning the urban Act, the following additional changes are 
being made to the rural Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the property tax exemptions review 
committee carefully considered the existing tax exemption for 
rural dwellings provided for under the infamous clause 
331(1)(q) of the Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to reaffirm to you that the review 
committee was comprised of representation from local 
government stakeholders on this issue, including SUMA, 
SARM, and SSTA. And in its deliberation on this matter, the 
exemption committee members reached a compromise. 
 
As you and I and the rest of the colleagues in the legislature 
know, this has been a very contentious issue and many 
representations have been made to me on both sides of this 
matter. At the centre of the issue, Mr. Speaker, is the question 
of who should be eligible for the exemption. 
 

During their deliberations, the review committee discussed the 
original rationale for the exemption. Issues of fairness and 
equity among neighbours and how best to resolve the 
differences in their views. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the review committee sees this issue as 
one of principle and fairness. And I agree with their approach. 
The exemption was introduced many years ago as a method of 
supporting our farm families in the agricultural sector in 
general. It was changed in 1989, straying from the original goal. 
 
It is the recommendation of the original principle that 
government has decided to accept the review committee’s 
recommendation for change to the clause 331(1)(q) of the Act. 
The committee’s recommendation protects and preserves the 
tax exemption for legitimate farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the recommendations of the Tax 
Exemptions Review Committee, the property tax exemption for 
rural dwellings outside an organized hamlet will now be based 
only on the ownership or lease of agricultural land. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this adjustment restores the original intent 
of the rural dwelling exemption and will continue to ensure that 
only farmers and agricultural land owners or lessees receive this 
important benefit. 
 
We recognize that there are some impacts on other property 
owners who have also had the benefit for the last few years. But 
this is a matter of principle and fairness. We wonder how the 
previous government would justify dramatically changing tax 
treatment for two similar residences across the street from each 
other because one happened to be within the urban municipality 
and the other within the RM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to state one more time that the changes to 
this Bill will not affect farm residencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has also accepted the 
recommendation of the 1997 Reassessment Review Committee 
to provide rural municipalities with the authority to apply 
separate property tax tools to organize hamlets and properties. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this amendment provides a solution to a 
very problematic situation in rural municipalities with regard to 
different levels of services in hamlets and the rural 
municipality’s ability to collect appropriate revenues from the 
respective hamlet. These provisions for organized hamlets will 
give RM councils the authority to implement a separate 
municipal mill rate factor, minimum base, minimum tax, or 
base tax in organized hamlets subject to the approval of the 
organized hamlet board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this amendment will give municipalities 
more autonomy in deciding local tax policy and increased 
flexibility when responding to local needs and local 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, both of these amendments were 
recommended during the tax policy review process and I am 
very pleased to announce today that our government is 
responding by accepting and implementing these 
recommendations. 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

Another amendment specific to the rural Act, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is the issue relative to the rural board of 
examiners. I am pleased today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
announce new provisions for the establishment of a rural board 
of reference. Currently the Act provides for a rural board of 
examiners which has two functions: the certification of 
administrators and investigation of administrators dismissals. 
 
We are proposing to split these functions and have a rural board 
of examiners continue with the certification of administrators. A 
rural board of reference is being created to consider 
administrators’ dismissals. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rural board of reference will have three 
members: one from SARM, one from Rural Municipal 
Administrators Association of Saskatchewan, and an individual 
appointed by both SAMA and the rural administrators 
association who is not a member of either association. 
 
The creation of the rural board of reference is being done with 
the support of the rural board of examiners, SARM, and the 
rural municipal administrators association. It eliminates the 
provincial government’s involvement through my department in 
what is primarily a labour relations matter between the RM 
council and that of the administrator. 
 
This change is consistent with my department’s mandate of 
strengthening communities and ensuring local accountability 
and the policy direction taken in previous legislative changes to 
reduce provincial government’s approval of municipal actions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned in the onset of my 
amendments, intent . . . my amendments, intended to improve 
the effectiveness of the property tax assessment and appeal 
process, are similar to those I presented earlier in the urban Act. 
I would like to remind the members that these changes have 
been requested by municipal leaders and will serve to make the 
system fairer for both taxpayers and municipalities. 
 
In summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill responds to 
significant concerns in three areas. Number one, implementing 
the recommendations made by the Property Tax Exemptions 
Review Committee and the 1997 Saskatchewan Reassessment 
Review Committee. Secondly, implementing specific 
procedural or approval issues which have arisen over the past 
year. And finally, improving fairness and transparency of the 
property tax assessment and appeals process. 
 
The provisions enunciated in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, address all 
of these concerns. These provisions ensure that property 
owners, municipalities, and school divisions receive fairer 
treatment and are part of a transparent and equitable process in 
order that all may have confidence in Saskatchewan’s property 
tax system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments should be supported by 
members of the legislature. They are in the best interests of 
municipalities, their communities, and all Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 
68, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2000. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in regard to The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 
2000, I think it’s important that we take a look at this piece of 
legislation, as well, very carefully and that we scrutinize the 
piece of legislation. Certainly, as the minister has indicated, 
there are a number of changes that are being proposed. 
 
The minister talked about fairness. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we talk about fairness I don’t think there’s anyone in this 
Assembly that doesn’t believe that we should not have or work 
towards building a fairer working relationship and a fair more 
. . . a greater fairness in regards to taxation. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the problems we do 
find is that when legislation changes, it doesn’t necessarily 
always reflect what we hope and the fairness we talk about. 
Certainly in the past we’ve seen situations where there have 
been major discrepancies which has led to misunderstanding 
between levels of government and groups providing services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the — Deputy Speaker — one of the things 
I think is very important that this legislation needs to address, 
and I trust will address, is the whole appeal mechanism, and the 
process. 
 
And I talked with the minister in regards to this process, and I 
know we’ve moved forward already in regards to how appeals 
are handled and when we’re dealing with assessments, and I 
believe that’s appropriate. Certainly I trust that the legislation 
that’s before us will just enhance that opportunity so that there 
is that greater level of fairness and flexibility seen in the appeal 
mechanism, especially as we enter into another phase of 
reassessment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt that each and every one 
of us would just as soon not pay taxes period, or at least pay a 
lower level of taxation. However, I believe most people feel that 
there has to be a level of taxation that reflects the level of 
services that they would expect from government, whether it’s 
local, the municipal, rural or the provincial levels of 
government, Mr. Speaker. And therefore, it’s important that we 
certainly do take the time to portray that level of fairness that 
the minister was talking about. 
 
And as was indicated, the minister informed the Assembly that 
a number of the provisions that are being brought forward in 
The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 are much the 
same too as they are in The Urban Municipality Amendment 
Act, 2000. And I would guess that — and assume, and we will 
find out shortly — whether or not it was reflected in The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2000 as well. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of 
changes. The minister’s indicated that we were taking some 
significant steps to try and alleviate a number of the problems 
that have been there in the past. And I believe it would be 
appropriate in view of the changes that are being brought 
forward and in review of the amendments, that we take the time 
again to review this legislation very thoroughly and very 
carefully to indeed see whether or not that level of fairness that 
the minister was talking about has been achieved. 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

And therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Northern Municipalities Amendment 
Act, 2000. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill introduces 
amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act that will do a 
number of things. 
 
It will respond to and accept many of the recommendations 
made by the Property Tax Exemptions Review Committee and 
the 1997 Reassessment Review Committee. It will implement 
changes to respond to specific procedural or approval issues 
which have arisen over the past year, and improve the property 
tax assessment and appeals process. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I outlined amendments being 
proposed to the urban and rural municipalities Acts, and as I 
noted during those remarks, provisions in the three municipal 
Acts are similar in many respects. And I am pleased today to 
announce amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act that 
mirror those being made in The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 
 
We’re bringing these amendments forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because we believe in our northern communities and 
we want to ensure that northern communities are provided with 
the same legislative update and tools that are available to 
municipalities in the southern part of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year we established a Northern 
Revenue Sharing Trust Management Board, and I am pleased to 
say that this board has proven to be of valuable assistance to my 
department not only in matters of dealing directly with the 
operations of a northern revenue sharing account, but also in 
providing advice and comments on the amendments being 
considered today. 
 
I would like to say and recognize that the board has 
recommended that the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 
Account match on an annual basis the funds that the province 
will be providing for the northern water and sewer project 
initiatives. 
 
This pooling of financial resources will allow us to undertake 
badly needed water and sewer projects having a value in excess 
of 25 million over the next five years. This co-operative effort 
will ensure that by the year 2006 the residents of all northern 
communities will be assured a safe, reliable water supply and a 
safe and reliable system for liquid waste disposal. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill relate 
primarily to tax policy and administrative issues that are ones 
they need to proceed on. They include adjustments to the new 
provisions recommended by the two tax policy review 
committees I mentioned earlier and will improve on the ability 
of local governments to respond to the upcoming 2001 
reassessment and to manage their own financial affairs. 

These amendments come as a result of our government’s 
ongoing commitment to ensure that systems work for people as 
well as for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the following are the key provisions of 
this Bill. 
 
Firstly, the elimination of the business assessment and business 
tax . . . the elimination of business assessment for business tax 
purpose. 
 
Secondly, authority for municipalities to exempt properties 
from school division taxes for economic development purposes 
for a limited time period without the need to replace lost tax 
revenues. 
 
And thirdly, an amendment establishing municipal authority to 
levy a base tax, and authority for a municipality to abate the 
property tax, including school taxes, for limited specific 
purposes listed in legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, each of these amendments was 
recommended during the tax policy review process. And I am 
very pleased to announce today that government is responding 
to the wishes of municipal sectors by accepting and 
implementing the recommendations. 
 
Other amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, address specific 
procedural and approval issues which have arisen over the past 
year including removing the requirement for an order in council 
and replacing it with an approval of the minister’s order for the 
incorporation of northern municipalities and settlements, and 
for boundary alterations where all parties agree to the changes. 
 
Provisions which provide the urban board of reference the 
authority to conduct hearings into the dismissal of clerk or 
treasurer and related provisions are being removed. Other 
amendments to this Bill that will improve the effectiveness of 
the property tax assessment and appeal process have been 
requested by municipal leaders and will serve to make the 
system fairer for both taxpayers and municipalities. And these 
include clarification that where two or more persons or owners 
or land improvements, the owner shall have the opportunity to 
designate to whom the assessment notice should be sent. 
 
Further introducing provisions that would require information 
regarding the sale transaction to be provided by . . . to the 
assessor by a vendor and/or purchaser when the form in which 
it is recorded to be sent by regulation. Further clarifying that 
when a council passes a bylaw to dispense with the mailing of 
assessment notices, except in cases where the assessment value 
is new or altered, the bylaw remains enforced until changed or 
repealed. 
 
Further clarifying that the notice of appeal is given to the 
secretary of the board of revision and not to the assessor. 
Further introducing improvements to the assessment appeal 
process that will aid the appellant in ensuring that proper and 
complete notices of appeal are submitted. 
 
And further clarifying the tax levied as a result of an appeal 
decision are recoverable pursuant to the Act and The Tax 
Enforcement Act. And replacing the fee for the issuing of a tax 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

certificate from an amount set by the minister in regulation to 
the amount set by the councils subject to any limit set by 
regulation. 
 
In summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill responds to 
significant concerns in three areas. Firstly, the implementing the 
recommendations made by the Property Tax Exemptions 
Review Committee and the 1997 Reassessment Review 
Committee. Secondly, implementing specific procedural or 
approval issues which have arisen over the past year. And 
improving the fairness . . . improving the fairness and 
transparency of property tax assessment and appeal process. 
 
The provisions within this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, address 
these concerns. These provisions ensure that property owners, 
municipalities, school divisions receive fair treatment, and a 
part of a transparent and equitable process in order that they 
may have confidence in the system. 
 
These amendments should be supported, Mr. Speaker, by the 
legislature. They’re in the best interests of northern 
municipalities, their communities, and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill No. 67, 
The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as the minister has indicated, this piece of legislation 
as well does have a number of the same changes reflected in it 
as we have in the previous two, the rural and the urban 
municipality amendment Act. 
 
However, the piece of legislation as well reflects the differences 
in northern municipalities and what we would consider southern 
municipalities — just the differences in the communities and 
the types of services that are expected, and certainly the 
geographic location; and also some of the problems associated 
with the . . . for many of these communities almost more of an 
isolated . . . isolation type of area that they would live in 
compared to our southern municipal areas, simply because of 
the geography they live in and some of the problems that they 
face. I think the minister was reflecting that in his presentation 
this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, note the minister talked about a safe water 
supply and waste management and having, just in the last few 
days, some of the problems that have arisen across this country 
when it comes to bacterial outbreaks in water supplies. I have 
no doubt that each community in this province is going to want 
to be somewhat concerned and be very careful in how they 
manage their water supplies. 
 
And I think what the northern municipalities have been asking 
for, for a number of years is some legislation that really gives 
them greater control and assists them in providing a more safer 
water supply and waste management process that they can build 
for the residents of their communities and their areas, so that 
those residents can certainly feel that any time they go to the tap 
that the water that they’re drinking is healthy and certainly isn’t 
going to create a problem. 

It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we would talk about 
water quality, especially when we look at our northern areas in 
the province and the amount of water — there’s almost 
everywhere from most of these communities. But we just need 
. . . We must be careful we just don’t take for granted that that 
water supply is always going to be the healthy water supply that 
we would just expect of it, and that we have the processes in 
place to ensure that residents of any community have access to 
quality water and waste management. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important that, as 
the minister had indicated, that we listen to communities, we 
listen to the groups, and we listen to the assessment . . . the 
panels as they bring forward their recommendations. And that 
therefore, when legislation is brought forward, it reflects the 
concern and addresses a number of the issues that certainly 
open up the door for greater co-operation between governments 
in providing the services that are needed by these communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it would be apparent that we need 
to be very careful in assessing this piece of legislation and 
giving it the thorough research that is needed as well to make 
sure that it reflects everything that the government is talking 
about and that municipal leaders are bringing to our attention as 
well. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 70 — The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 

Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi sur 
l’éducation (élimination de la taxe professionnelle) 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Education (Elimination of Business Tax) 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments to The 
Education Act, 1995 that are required as a result of the decision 
to eliminate the business assessment and tax provision in The 
Northern Municipalities Act, The Urban Municipalities Act, 
1984, and The Rural Municipalities Act, 1989. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know this government received a 
number of requests from municipalities and received a 
recommendation from the 1997 Reassessment Review 
Committee in conjunction with a proposal submitted by the 
local government federation to eliminate on a province-wide 
basis business assessment and tax. I am pleased to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we have done that and our proposal to 
amend the three municipal Acts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the elimination of business assessment 
and tax will recognize municipal autonomy by making their 
own decisions in response to local needs and local 
circumstances. My colleagues and I believe that our local 
government property tax system should recognize local 
autonomy and minimize inter-municipal and interjurisdictional 
tax policy spillovers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1997 Reassessment Review Committee 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

indicated that the province’s role in property tax policy should 
be to oversee the fairness and consistency of the municipal 
property tax system, including the limited application of 
province-wide property tax management tools or other 
programs that are based on the public interests of Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
We accept this principle and others that were contained in the 
final report of the Reassessment Review Committee. In keeping 
with those principles our government has introduced a number 
of amendments to the municipal Acts to increase flexibility and 
provide broad direction for municipal councils to determine 
their own local tax policy without fear of creating inequities 
between neighbouring municipalities. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
consequential amendments proposed in this Bill will remove all 
reference to business tax assessment and tax from The 
Education Act, 1995 in conjunction with the amendments to the 
three municipal Acts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 70, The 
Education (Elimination of Business Tax) Amendment Act, 
2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I indicated earlier, when we talk about tax, there 
isn’t anyone that really enjoys paying taxes. 
 
And certainly one of the greatest irritants we’ve had over the 
past number of years is the business tax. And I guess the reason 
the business community has felt isolated by that tax is the fact 
that they feel that they pay tax on their property, they’re paying 
a tax on their . . . and when I talk property, I talk of their 
business property as well as their private property, their home. 
And then they have a business tax on top of it when they’re 
actually providing a service, and providing a basis of 
employment in the community. Just a feeling that they have 
been overtaxed and it was time for a real review of that matter. 
And we’re certainly pleased to see that the government has been 
listening, and listening very carefully to the business 
community. 
 
I know that a number of municipalities themselves have gone 
ahead on their own to address that concern. And I think it’s 
appropriate that we are taking a broader look at the tax, and the 
current Bill before us is going to address that tax, and address 
areas surrounding the business tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to free up businesses to do exactly what they 
want to do. And that is to provide employment and generate job 
opportunities and create economic activity within the 
jurisdiction that they would choose to provide that business. 
 
And so it’s appropriate that we indeed free up businesses to 
provide the services that they have so long and arduously been 
providing to our communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, without small businesses and without . . . I 
shouldn’t say small. We use the word small a lot of times, but I 
think it’s appropriate for us to recognize that any business, 
regardless of the number of employees or how large that 
business may be, is an economic engine within a rural . . . 
within a community, be it large or small. 

And it’s important for us to recognize the hard work of the 
businessmen and women across this province, who are so 
diligent in providing services for their communities. And it 
would be as the minister has indicated, this current piece of 
legislation certainly opens up the door for them to enhance their 
business opportunities and continue to look at this province as a 
province in which to live. The elimination of the business tax is 
something that our caucus is certainly in favour of and has been 
promoting as well. 
 
Because it’s important for this province to realize that it needs 
to create a fairer tax structure and a tax if you will, a lower tax 
regime so that we can encourage other businesses to look at the 
province of Saskatchewan as a place to not only invest, but 
create job opportunities for the many residents of this province. 
And specifically the younger generation who would like to . . . 
or are entering the workplace and would like to look at building 
this . . . or assessing a job in the province in which they have 
had the privilege of living and would like to continue to live in. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a number of the 
provisions that the minister is talking of certainly are positive. 
We want to look at them very closely. And I have a feeling, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we’ll be . . . in our review of the 
legislation and as we move into further debate in the legislation, 
there may be some areas that we would like to discuss a little 
more in depth with the minister, and possibly even offer some 
areas of which we can even add to this piece of legislation, 
whether it’s through amendments or just working with the 
government to basically address areas that we might have 
concern in regards to the legislation. 
 
Having said that, I agree with the Minister of Social Services 
that we need to take time to review, and therefore I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 14 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to talk on Bill No. 14, The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2000. The film employment tax credit 
was introduced in 1998, and as a way of growing the film 
industry in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it really 
has done that. The film industry in the province has really 
grown in the last couple of years. 
 
And it makes good sense to give tax credits to try and promote 
the film industry which, as I mentioned, had grown. And it 
should grow in our province, when you look at what our 
province has to offer in the film industry — from the forests in 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

the North to the prairies in the southwest. 
 
I was watching a number of years ago the movie Dances With 
Wolves, and how they had the wide open spaces. And I found 
out later that they filmed most of that movie in Montana, just 
across the border from Saskatchewan . . . or North Dakota. And 
the wide open spaces which we have to offer, we could really 
build the film industry in Saskatchewan. And to try and attract 
business by offering a tax credit we think is just a really good 
idea. 
 
Film producers and people like that are looking for places to go, 
and natural environment, natural settings with which to create 
their craft, the filmmaking craft, and we certainly have it here. 
And I really . . . I think that the film industry . . . And just from 
the numbers that we have, film production has doubled over the 
last couple of years to 50 million annually. 
 
As we always work in our province — and I think we agree on 
both sides of the House that we need to broaden the economy 
and we need to look at different things — this is one area to 
certainly look it. And we can see the results of tax breaks. 
 
And it just makes me think then, if it’s working so well in the 
film industry, why don’t we try it in a whole bunch of other 
areas? You know, why do we . . . I guess in the . . . as far as the 
government opposite, pick and choose winners and losers. 
Okay, we’ll give a tax credit to this to build the film industry, 
but then all the other areas in our economic sector that need 
improving and need to be growing aren’t getting those breaks 
and they’re stagnating. 
 
And I know we on this side of the House talk a lot about 
companies that are moving across the border, whether it’s to 
Alberta or maybe south into the States. And I think if we looked 
at some of the initiatives that has been looked at in this Bill in 
giving a tax credit to the film producers, that we’d probably 
keep a lot of those businesses and industries and certainly, if 
nothing else, expand on it. 
 
The film industry is one where there is a lot of competition 
between province and province, and especially country to 
country. I know a number of film producers, local film 
producers in our province that have really struggled. But they 
really, when you talk to them, they’re really passionate about, 
of course, the business, because that’s what they’re in. But they 
really see an opportunity in the province, and this is an area 
where they really feel that we can expand. 
 
But when I look at it and I expand it over the whole piece of . . . 
over all the different areas that we could expand our economy 
and increase our economy and diversify our economy, there are 
a number of areas. And unfortunately, as I mentioned earlier, 
that this government picks and chooses the winners and the 
losers. And they have picked this . . . they have chosen this as a 
bit of a winner. And it just shows when we reduce taxes, good 
things happen. 
 
That’s what the whole thing is, is to create more business in our 
province. And the one way that we really . . . on this side of the 
House, we campaigned on that very issue. We campaigned on 
the very issue on trying to increase our economic base, our 
foundation in this province, so that we’re not so agriculturally 

dependent; that we have a broader base. And certainly that is 
what we campaigned on. 
 
And really, when I look at Bills like this, I realize that members 
opposite do believe that’s the proper method to go. They 
haven’t quite released themselves enough to follow it through 
the whole economy, because it does; it brings people into the 
province. When we become a competitor for taxpayers and for 
industry and for business, good things happen in our province. 
But unfortunately we haven’t spread it over the whole piece. 
 
One area that does cause some concern when I’m at . . . a few of 
the producers of films that I have talked to, is the reporting 
mechanism as far as the audit and things like that as far as 
keeping track of the books of the smaller film producer. And it 
gets to be really quite an onerous process. And so there is some 
concern with that, and they really would like that to be looked 
at — is there a better way of dealing with that issue. 
 
And we’ve come up with some different ideas, some sort of a 
three-tier system where if the net income is below a certain 
level, perhaps the audit system is not as severe and things like 
that. So there are some problems with the Bill as it is right now 
that need to be addressed. 
 
But overall I just think that the strategy of reducing and giving 
tax breaks and allowing more business into the province is 
certainly something that we can support and will support. 
 
As I mentioned, there are a couple of areas in the Bill that we 
do have some question with, that we’d want to get some more 
consultation with some of the filmmakers in the province. But 
overall, by reducing taxes, we really feel it’s the best way of 
expanding our economy and this is just a classic example of 
what can be done in our province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 22 — The Local 
Improvements Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to join in the debate on The Local 
Improvements Amendment Act, 2000. And I must say it is with 
some relief that I noted in this Bill, at least in this one, there 
was no mention of forced amalgamation. So I’ll speak to some 
of the various points contained in this Bill. 
 
And of course as always when it comes to legislation that is 
going to affect municipalities and municipal legislation in this 
province, it’s something that we want to take a very, very close 
look at. Because I think even this government will admit that 
they don’t have a lot of the trust of municipal government in 
this province any more. 
 
So I think that it falls to the official opposition to make sure that 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

the Bills are scrutinized in their entirety and that they are fully 
understood prior to their being passed. 
 
Now this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, deals a lot with boards of 
revision. And boards of revision, as most of us will know, are 
used by local governments for assessment appeals. Now up 
until very recently, last year as a matter of fact, local 
governments and their own local councillors were in fact 
allowed to sit on boards of revision. Now this has all changed, 
and the requirement is now that boards of revision must be 
made up by someone other than members of council, and 
appointed separately. 
 
Now on the surface of course this doesn’t necessarily indicate 
all of the difficulties that were inherent in this change. And 
some of those included the escalation of costs for 
municipalities. For smaller municipalities to go out, Mr. 
Speaker, and to recruit individuals to sit on boards of revision, 
to provide the training that was made available to them, and 
then to in fact reimburse them for their work, ended up being 
quite expensive. 
 
And I know in the case of the town of Porcupine Plain, for 
example, we tried a number of relatively low-cost options, 
perhaps having administrators from the surrounding 
communities be the board of revision, and the administrator 
from the community in which the board would be sitting simply 
dropping off and the rest of the administrators acting as the 
board. 
 
This was perhaps a way of saving cost because the 
administrators were already in fact receiving a salary and some 
of their other expenses were being looked after through their 
employment. 
 
But as it turns out, that wasn’t a viable option for a whole 
number of reasons. And in the end a lot of communities, as 
Porcupine Plain and many, many others throughout this 
province, ended up having to go and in fact recruit community 
people to act as a board of revision. 
 
And as I indicated, this in fact raised the cost of operation for a 
lot of municipalities. A lot of the per diems that were paid to 
members of a board of revision were equivalent or close to 
equivalent to that of mayors and councillors. A lot of the 
expenses were equivalent. 
 
And then of course as I indicated, there were all of the expenses 
that were associated with having these members of boards of 
revision going off to training sessions in order to be able to 
fully understand their duties. And in a lot of cases those training 
sessions, Mr. Speaker, were a great distance from the 
community in which the board of revision was to be operating. 
 
So consequently there was a huge amount of cost associated 
with what on the surface would have appeared to be a relatively 
minor change. 
 
So this is why we as the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, want 
to make sure that any legislation that’s coming through from 
Municipal Affairs and through the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs is scrutinized in its entirety in order that we can make 
sure that those types of issues don’t arise again and that 

municipalities aren’t surprised by extra costs with respect to any 
changes that might be proposed here. 
 
Now a lot of these changes . . . the government insists that it has 
consulted and that it has spoken with the stakeholders. Well as 
was the case with the changes with respect to boards of revision 
. . . and I happened to be at the SUMA annual meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, when the minister was questioned on the changes with 
respect to the boards of revision. And it was very obvious that 
there hadn’t been a great degree of consultation, and that in fact 
the vast majority of people representing municipalities — 
mayors, councillors, administrators — were in fact very, very 
unhappy with the changes with respect to boards of revision. 
 
So here we are again, another piece of legislation, and talks 
about boards of revision once again, and once again we have the 
government saying that they have consulted. Well the question 
is, Mr. Speaker, who have they consulted? Have they consulted 
SUMA? Have they consulted the mayors and the councillors 
and the administrators of the various municipalities? 
 
Or is this something that they are doing which has become so 
typical of this government in the last while that they initiate a 
consultation process but then, without waiting to see the results 
of that, actually start implementing legislation and starting to 
make the changes without waiting to see what the results of the 
consultation have been, and without respecting the input of the 
people that they are saying they’re consulting with. 
 
And we’ve seen this with this government, Mr. Speaker, over 
the course of the last number of months, particularly with the 
whole amalgamation issue in a way that I think actually maybe 
even surprised some of the members opposite that their 
government would be so callous. But it is very obvious that 
legislation oftentimes is getting formulated long prior to the 
consultation process being complete. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I think that when it comes to amalgamation for example, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen I think what is and what probably a lot 
of the people of this province believe, is really nothing more 
than a stay of execution. They believe that the whole municipal 
amalgamation issue is still on the agenda of this government, 
and they believe that it will be coming forward at some time in 
the future. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that wouldn’t 
surprise those of us on this side of the House. 
 
The boards of revision are a major part of municipal councils’ 
ability to be able to deal with the whole issue of assessment and 
taxation fairly and allow for an appeal process. And when the 
changes were made a year ago, where the boards of revision had 
to be made separate from councils, a lot of the costs, as I 
indicated earlier, were borne . . . all of the costs in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, were borne by those municipal councils. 
 
And in some cases those councils wondered for what. And once 
again I think specifically of the example of the town of 
Porcupine Plain. After incurring all of the cost that was required 
to adhere to the regulation, in the end this finely tuned board of 
revision dealt with one appeal — one appeal. 
 
And in fact that turned out to be a pretty cut-and-dried technical 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

appeal where there wasn’t a lot of latitude in terms of the 
decision-making ability. Pretty straightforward. And that’s 
what, as a result of all of the cost that the municipal government 
incurred and all of the headache of adhering to the regulations, 
that it ended up being, was just simply dealing with one appeal. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, meaningful consultations with 
municipalities don’t have to be a painful process. I think on a 
lot of occasions it just might be a matter of picking up the 
phone and talking to an administrator, a mayor, a councillor, a 
reeve, a councillor. It’s a matter of respecting that opinion, 
making sure . . . 
 
And for the edification of the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, there are both rural and urban councils in 
Saskatchewan. And in one case it is reeves and councillors, and 
in another case it is mayors and councillors. Just thought I 
would clear that up. 
 
But reassessment also created a fair degree of difficulty for 
municipalities in 1997 in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I 
noticed earlier today when the minister was introducing another 
Bill in second reading, he was talking about introducing the 
concept of a base tax. 
 
Well I want to echo the member from Moosomin’s comments 
in the sense that there were all sorts of difficulties involved with 
the reassessment in 1997 when it was dumped on rural and 
urban municipal governments. It was the rural and urban 
municipal governments in the end that found the creative, 
innovative, imaginative ways of implementing some of those 
very, very difficult measures. 
 
And in fact a lot of communities did go to a municipal-based 
tax. And that is how it is made fair for everyone in a community 
to receive the services that all receive in a community, 
including garbage pickup, street maintenance, sewer and water, 
all of those kinds of things. 
 
And I guess I get frustrated and I think a lot of members on this 
side of the House get frustrated, Mr. Speaker, after a while 
because really when you think about it, a lot of the really good 
ideas in terms of firstly the way municipal government should 
be managed and operated in this province — and even in some 
cases, Mr. Speaker, the way that the provincial government 
should be managed and operated — have in fact come from the 
municipal level. 
 
I was just reading an interesting documentary the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, a program that aired in 1990 on Lister Sinclair’s Ideas 
program. And it talked in some great detail about how health 
district no. 1 in the Swift Current area, which was the 
forerunner of all medicare right across the country, was in fact 
something that was created by mayors and reeves and 
councillors and by the leadership at the community level. 
 
And I think that somehow we have managed to get away from 
the respect that we had at one point for the ability of rural and 
urban municipal leaders to constructively contribute in this 
province. And that’s very, very sad. Because when it comes to 
doing things effectively and efficiently, you probably will find 
no more effective and efficient level of government than 
municipal government. 

So I think it would be in the government’s best interest, in the 
provincial government’s best interest to consult. Whether it’s on 
legislation such as this, or pending legislation such as the 
amalgamation legislation or any other initiatives, it would be in 
their best interest to consult with municipal government, and 
talk to the people who can run and operate governments 
effectively and efficiently, and apply some of that knowledge, 
perhaps even to the way that they do business, Mr. Speaker. 
And perhaps in the end, we’d all be better off. 
 
But with respect to this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, we do want to consult with municipal government. We 
have already begun our consultation process. We have started 
talking to the reeves and councillors, and the mayors and 
councillors, the administrators. 
 
There are some issues which certainly they are bringing to our 
attention. There are other areas that they want to further 
explore. And they are suggesting to us that perhaps we should 
be taking a bit of time as well, Mr. Speaker, to gather that 
information. 
 
And, so at this point, I think, pending the results of that 
consultation, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 23 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is my 
pleasure again to rise and join in debate on Bill No. 23, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Now here once again, Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill that appears 
on the surface to be of quite a technical nature, and in fact the 
minister indicated that it was primarily housekeeping in nature. 
And for the most part that’s probably true. We look at this and 
there certainly are some technical changes here that are, even at 
this point, very, very timely. 
 
But, once again as I indicated in my response to the previous 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, the smaller technical changes that sometimes 
the department and the minister don’t view as being major or 
view perhaps as being minor can cause a fair degree of 
difficulty in the communities and in the administration of local 
government. 
 
And with respect to the previous Bill, the example I spoke 
about was the board of revision. Now certainly that is a change 
that did cause some difficulties but yet at the same time I think 
that probably when it was enacted, the degree of difficulty and 
cost particularly that would be associated in terms of the 
communities having to adhere to it wasn’t really anticipated on 
the part of the government. 
 
Now here again we want to be able to make sure that the input 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

of municipal government has been respected and that that input 
will be gathered; that it will in the end, in the final analysis 
when this legislation is adopted, actually mean something. That 
in some way, what the mayors and reeves and councillors and 
administrators out there have said and have suggested will end 
up as a tangible part of this legislation. 
 
Now an interesting thing is — and I refer once again back to the 
board of revision because I think that is one of those really good 
examples, and the minister certainly heard that at the SUMA 
convention where he was asked a number of questions on the 
changes — but initially a lot of mayors and councillors, reeves 
and councillors, weren’t fully aware of the impact. However, 
once they started to try and grapple with some of these realities, 
well then, the phones started ringing off the hooks, and people 
were saying, did you folks realize, did the official opposition 
realize that this was what, that was what was in this legislation. 
 
And I think that the smaller things . . . Like I say, when it comes 
to the government putting legislation forward on the surface 
where they may not necessarily think that they have that 
dramatic an impact can certainly, on occasion, blindside a local 
government. And I think that local governments in this province 
certainly have been blindsided enough over the course of the 
tenure of this government. 
 
And that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly don’t like 
to see happen, and we will do our part to make sure that we do 
consult with local governments, that there is the ability for local 
governments to contribute, and that there is a place where their 
voice will be heard. 
 
Now there are a couple of interesting components to this 
particular piece of legislation, and we’re talking about the 
northern development and planning areas. Now once again I 
guess I have to ask the question is how adequately has the 
government consulted with the northern communities that are 
going to be affected here? 
 
Have they spoken to the community leadership? Have they? 
And I guess the respect is . . . the issue is, if they have spoken to 
them, will they in fact respect their input? 
 
(1545) 
 
Now the planning and development areas are something that I 
think have a tremendous amount of potential, Mr. Speaker. 
There are a lot of things that a more empowered level of 
government can accomplish. And I think that if one was to 
respect the ability of rural and urban municipal governments 
and empower them, then we could see a lot of local activity 
around economic development, social development. 
 
There could be a lot of jurisdictional transfers from the province 
to municipal government. And the one area that I think of — 
and this has been debated in this House previously, Mr. Speaker 
— is in the northern development and planning areas and some 
of the local regions, there has been and is some discussion 
around the assuming of responsibilities for policing. 
 
And I think that those kinds of initiatives are good, solid 
initiatives, and that the more that a community can control its 
own destiny and the closer that they can get to the delivery of 

those kinds of services, the better off they as a community and 
the better off we all as a province are. 
 
I think there has to be that respect for a community’s ability to 
be able to assume a lot of those kinds of responsibilities. And I 
think we would be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if we respected the 
input, the abilities of municipal governments, northern 
governments in this province and just how much they could 
really accomplish. 
 
And the one area that always excites me is the area of economic 
development because that is in a lot of ways an area where we 
have seen local communities, through their municipal 
governments, take ownership. And they have had to deal with 
some difficult issues in doing that. 
 
They’ve had to sort out some of the, perhaps, maybe even 
historical conflicts between communities in order to arrive at a 
working solution where they could as a group, as a region, work 
together collectively for the economic development benefit of 
all of their citizens. 
 
But in the end, in the successes that I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And for quite a number of years I was in fact the Co-Chair of 
the Etomami Valley REDA (Regional Economic Development 
Authority). And I think one of the reasons that those kinds of 
initiatives are successful is because if the communities are 
allowed to take control and they have the ownership, then they 
will make it work. They will somehow find their way through 
the local difficulties and issues that face them and that can on 
occasion be barriers and obstacles. 
 
But the whole issue of ownership is key to that kind of success, 
Mr. Speaker. And you don’t allow someone ownership by 
controlling what they’re doing, by dictating what they’re doing, 
by not consulting with them, by not respecting their views and 
their opinions and their input. You have to do all of those things 
in order that those communities feel like they have ownership 
of the process; that they can take ownership, that they can build, 
and that what they will do will be in the long-term benefit of 
their community. 
 
And that can even apply to Acts of legislation such as this, Mr. 
Speaker. When communities are allowed that input and when 
that input’s respected, they will in fact take ownership of the 
decisions that are ultimately made if those decisions . . . even if 
those decisions are made at a senior level of government. 
 
But what municipal governments in this province have been 
finding, Mr. Speaker, over the course of the tenure of this 
government is that that respect is not there. And there hasn’t 
been a lot of consideration for their input and for their role in 
this province. 
 
And consequently a lot of municipalities and municipal 
governments are feeling somewhat besieged. They feel that they 
are under attack, and they feel that there is an effort out there to 
undermine all of the things that they have built and that they 
have developed over the years for their communities and for 
their citizens. 
 
They feel that those are being deliberately undermined. Because 
instead of consulting with people, and instead of respecting 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

their opinion, the hand of government is attempting to somehow 
manipulate what they can be and what they should be, and they 
are taking that sense of ownership away on them. 
 
And it’s sad, Mr. Speaker, but I think at one point in this 
province municipal governments and the provincial government 
probably had a relatively healthy working relationship. Well 
that doesn’t exist any more, Mr. Speaker. Most municipal 
governments don’t see this government as their friend. 
 
They see this government as a government that wants to take 
what they have built, the communities that they have 
established over all these years. And they somehow want to 
take them and lump them into some large, gigantic, 
bureaucratic, administrative monstrosity that is virtually 
impossible for them to be able to be a part of, to have any sense 
of community in. 
 
And it is getting more and more difficult for municipal 
governments to in any way feel that they’re being listened to by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, we would like to be able to continue further consulting 
with the community leadership, the highly respected 
community leadership in rural and urban Saskatchewan, and to 
get their input on the potential impact of this legislation and be 
able to, through the official opposition, forward those views on 
to the government in a way hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will be respected and that they could become a tangible product, 
tangible final product as a result of the debate here in the 
legislature and future debates, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, and I 
would now move we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 37 — The Public 
Libraries Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I get to stand in the Assembly today to bring forth 
some concerns regarding Bill No. 37, The Public Libraries 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several revisions to The Public Libraries 
Act in 1996. Although those revisions clarified a number of 
issues, there were still some areas that needed addressing, that 
this main purpose for this Bill is to address those issues. 
 
In this Bill there are four distinct issues. The first issue 
surrounds boundary changes, especially as they apply to 
regional libraries in municipalities. Amendments will provide 
for voluntary public boundary changes not mandatory ones. The 
opinion to make boundary changes will be the decision of a 
particular regional library and they must notify the public as 
well as other library boards and related associations. 
 
The Bill provides a process that will . . . in which a library 
region can move to different library systems if they choose so. 
This would, of course, Mr. Speaker, alter the amount that the 

municipality could collect in library levies which are taxes 
collected for library services. At the same time, this would also 
affect how the library receives its levies. 
 
The second issue, Mr. Speaker, and an important one, is that 
this address in this Bill is a process of resolving local conflicts. 
Previously, the process often involved that public libraries and 
the minister . . . Conflict resolutions could also be lengthy, 
costly, and not have an acceptance outcome for any of the 
parties involved. The amendments will allow for more decisions 
to be made at the local level, which is certainly a much more 
effective process and one that municipalities are much more 
familiar and comfortable with. 
 
The third issue, Mr. Speaker, is that Bill 37 looks at the issue 
surrounding regional library agreements — agreements which 
essentially create libraries. Since all municipalities now 
participate in the library system, proposed legislation will not 
require them to enter into agreements unless they opt to do so. 
The amendments will still allow for those agreements. If there 
is a specific relationship that is to exist between a municipality 
and its libraries, the government does not require these 
agreements to be in place. 
 
The fourth issue, Mr. Speaker, and the final issue is that the Bill 
addresses its fair representation on the library board executive 
committees. Regional library boards have representation from 
each municipality in the province, rural and urban alike. From 
that board, which can number more than a hundred and only 
meets once or twice a year, the executive committee is elected. 
 
This committee is primarily responsible for most of the day to 
day operations and the majority of administrative decisions. 
There are virtually no regulations regulating representation of 
members on the executive committee. Proposed legislation will 
allow urban representation on the executive committee that will 
be related to the population — a regulation that exists in all 
regional library boards. 
 
In the province as regionally vast and diverse as in 
Saskatchewan, there can be no doubt that libraries play a vital 
and integral role in our lives. Over the years they have become 
much more than just a place to borrow a book. For many, the 
library is more than just a source of reading material and 
information. In addition to the many programs and services they 
offer, they have also become the galleries, theatres, public 
meetings, and much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, libraries have also become a haven for our 
children — a place to do . . . a place to play and learn as they 
read and are read to. Libraries open up the world of knowledge 
as students discover themselves and the world around them. 
 
Increased taxes and living costs have forced many families to 
find other ways of spending quality time together. And so we 
may see a row of libraries expand to a place for families to get 
together more often. 
 
Through the . . . every library connected program, a very, very 
important program, many of our rural residents now have public 
access to Internet. Of course, it’s also a fact that technology and 
lifestyles have greatly impacted on our province’s libraries. 
 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

Every . . . our ever resourceful and respondent to the needs of 
our communities and even facing extremely tight financial 
restraints, they have responded by offering more diverse 
programs and services. 
 
(1600) 
 
It’s important to note that at the proposed stage, these 
amendments have circulated to major stakeholders — regional, 
municipal, and northern systems, to public library boards, 
Saskatchewan Library Association, Saskatchewan Library 
Trustees Association, SUMA, SARM, and cities like Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton, as well as our local library 
boards. 
 
I hope that their input and recommendations were taken into 
consideration and implement whatever is possible. They are, 
after all, the organizations that will affect us most from this 
legislation. 
 
One of the main issues, Mr. Speaker, addressed in the issue of 
boundary changes is that we see the legislation as offering 
voluntary, not mandatory, public changes. A public library 
board or a municipality has the option of proposing to change 
boundaries if it so desires to. 
 
Given the recent public outcry over legislative renewal, forced 
amalgamation, I’m pleased to see the boundary changes will not 
be forced on municipalities or public libraries, but rather that the 
decision will be made on perceived benefits. 
 
I would hate to see the same turmoil, confusion, and anger erupt 
over library boundaries changes as what’s happened to the forced 
amalgamation issue. Municipalities were overwhelmingly 
opposed to that. 
 
I would hope that the boundary changes therefore would take 
place when there is to be true benefits recognized by both parties. 
By amalgamating programs and services, or expanding upon 
existing ones, both the municipality and the public library board 
must indicate that it will be a win-win situation and will be able to 
indicate to the public why it will do so. 
 
I would expect a cost-benefit analysis would be done along with 
the consultation and review. 
 
Given that it’s crucial that the public be kept informed of 
proposed boundary changes, it is important that public 
consultation and review take place. It’s noted that this proposed 
legislation has provisions for that. 
 
Another area that this Bill addresses is the issue of regional 
library amendments . . . agreements. As we understand it, 
regional library agreements are essential to create libraries. 
Changes to The Public Libraries Act in 1996 made participation 
mandatory within the regional library boundaries. However, 
since all municipalities already were and still are participating 
in this library system, their regional agreements are often, are 
often not required. 
 
This Bill will provide for an agreement to be put in place where 
one is requested between a municipality and a library. The 
agreement will spell out the specific relationship that will exist. 

Once again, I am pleased to see a co-operative partnership 
outlined here — one that will foster harmony and growth on a 
voluntary basis. 
 
Another issue that I’d like to address. My concern is that the 
ability for libraries to have Internet access and to be able to 
offer a service to the community as served. Again, the rural 
areas are the ones that will be detected . . . affected the most, 
since these libraries were forced into cutting more . . . more 
programs and more service because of the government-imposed 
fee hike to maintain those programs and services. This truly 
speaks to the hypocrisy of this government. 
 
While I acknowledge that this Bill does clarify some issues that 
need attention, I am still concerned that there are more areas 
that need to have more work done. There needs to be more 
accountability from this government in those areas. And 
therefore in light of the circumstances, I would move 
adjournment on this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 44 — The 
Insurance Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to speak today about Bill No. 44, The Insurance 
Premiums Tax Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
First of all I think the public should know that the title is at least 
misleading, if it’s not deceiving. The Bill should be called the 
insurance premium rate increase. They increase the premium 
rate from 2 to 3 per cent on life insurance, on accident 
insurance, and sickness insurance. And there’s a 3 to . . . a 3 to 
4 per cent increase on all other insurance except hail. Maybe 
this constitutes the government’s helping hand for farmers this 
year, Mr. Speaker, not putting an increase on hail insurance. 
 
I’d also like to note, Mr. Speaker, that the government didn’t 
fill the gallery with taxpayers today as we discuss this Bill or 
this increase, unlike yesterday when the minister called 
hard-working LPNs (licensed practical nurse) from across the 
province on the pretext that the Bill would be passed. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister deliberately misled a whole group of 
taxpayers just to play politics. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask the hon. member to 
kindly choose her words judiciously. A direct accusation of that 
nature is not acceptable. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the LPNs who should have faith 
and trust in the Minister of Health could have been considered 
pawns yesterday in a game of politics. Mr. Speaker, our health 
care givers have better things to do with their time and their 
money than to play politics. If you doubt that you can call them, 
Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, LPNs know who they should 
be ticked with and it’s not the Saskatchewan Party. 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the communication spin doctor for the 
government should be commended for their imagination being 
able to call a tax increase in this Bill an overall reform of the 
personal tax system. And it’s supposed to improve fairness, 
simplicity, and competitiveness. I guess if you’ve got a left 
wing person you could call a tax increase a reform, but on this 
side of the House we call a spade a spade. A tax increase is a 
tax increase; it’s black and white. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also stated that the Vicq committee 
recommended that education and health tax base be expanded to 
include insurance premiums. What the minister forgot to 
mention is the other part of the Vicq report that said they should 
be reducing the PST (provincial sales tax) to 5 per cent. It’s 
getting all too common for this government to pick and choose 
what they want to see and what they want to hear. The only 
common theme is how can I get more money from the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s just amazing, Mr. Speaker, that this government is still 
trying to convince people that this budget was a tax decrease. 
Even their own spin doctors using tens of thousands of 
taxpayers’ dollars have not been able to hoodwink the taxpayers 
into believing this ridiculous notion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked about SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) in the legislature this session but mostly it’s been 
involving SGI no-fault insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is trying to convince people of 
Saskatchewan that a system where a single person can be the 
adjuster and the medical officer and the judge, and is it good for 
the people. And then to discuss options and alternatives we deal 
again with the same people and we should consider that an 
alternative — they believe — and then that’s considered their 
review process. Mr. Speaker, the minister is quickly learning 
not too many people agree with him. In fact he can’t even find 
enough people to sit on his committee to make up a review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister introducing the Bill would 
like to enlighten taxpayers about government efforts to sell 
insurance in Manitoba. Maybe that’s part of the reason why we 
have to increase taxes in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly knows what happens 
when a government has the majority, regardless of how they got 
the majority. When they decide to pass a Bill, they will pass a 
Bill. It’s all a matter of numbers. Sadly and regrettably this 
government has managed to get the majority they needed to 
pass the tax increase of $150 million and counting that came 
about because of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated that the increased revenue 
for this tax grab would be $13.7 million to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. I’ve contacted insurance companies in my area, 
and beyond my area as well, and none of them can understand 
how the government can come up with this number. It will be a 
lot more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s always more. It’s sort of a Murphy’s Law. This government 
takes more than they say they will and they give less. They give 
less money, they give less services; and they have less interest 
in the people of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be asking the minister for details in a couple of 
months from now when this Bill goes to the Committee of the 
Whole for how this number was actually reached at. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we contacted our insurance dealers 
they advised us that this government, through SGI, increased 
the deductible for houses this year from 250 to $500. This is 
something they didn’t mention in the budget, Mr. Speaker. This 
is just another little increase of $250 for every house in 
Saskatchewan — and I don’t believe it’s part of this budget 
they’re talking about right now — but it’s sort of, if you don’t 
ask, you don’t know kind of system this government is working 
with; just $250, no big deal. And of course that means that you 
get an extra $50 if you want to keep your premium down at 
$250 like it was last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone on this side of the House knows that in 
order to get this economy moving we must allow people to keep 
more money in their pocket at the end of the day. Everybody 
knows that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve stated it over and over again 
for three years and the public have stated it over and over again 
and CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) have 
stated it over and over. And everybody has been telling him, 
you’ve got to lower taxes. 
 
But this government has started to think though, maybe — with 
the geniuses of business over there — that they will really . . . 
Maybe we should try and do that. But because they have no 
faith in the people’s ability to grow the economy, or maybe it’s 
really beyond their ability to understand business at all, and if 
you want to think about SPUDCO and NST and Channel Lake, 
maybe you can understand they don’t know about business. 
They don’t understand that you really have to let people make 
their own decisions when it comes to spending money. 
 
I think what the government did in this budget though, Mr. 
Speaker, was to pretend it got a tax decrease on one hand; on 
the other hand gouge them from every way you can from 
insurance. And this Bill is just one point of how they got money 
from the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this little Bill we’re discussing now will cost 
taxpayers $14 million. I’d like at this time to adjourn debate so 
we can search the province to find someone who thinks this is a 
very good idea. So, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax 
Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as we discussed in question period today, this government is 
quite involved in the fuel tax business. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, 
we have one of the highest fuel taxes in Canada which is a real 
detriment, Mr. Speaker, to all of the other activities of this 
province. 
 
As my colleague, the member from Kelvington, was just talking 
about, the high taxes in this province are a discouragement to 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

every person, every business in this province, and an extreme 
discouragement to anyone who might even consider moving to 
this province. 
 
Earlier today my colleague, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, talked on a Bill dealing with tax credits for the 
film industry. The government opposite recognizes in a few 
instances that there are benefits for people, for business, for the 
generation of prosperity in this province when taxes are 
reduced. And yet in virtually every other sector the government 
has its philosophical blinders on, reverting back to Tommy 
Douglas in 1944 for their policies, and refuse to admit and 
accept the fact that lower taxes mean greater prosperity for the 
province. 
 
This Bill, the revenue and financial services, an Act respecting 
tax on fuel and making consequential amendments would be a 
perfect opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Finance, 
for the members opposite to show some real initiative, some 
real intestinal fortitude that they want to help the people of 
Saskatchewan when the price of gasoline at the pumps today is 
75 cents — 74.9 cents. The highest ever, Mr. Speaker, under 
any government, but particularly under this socialist 
government. They’re gouging the public, Mr. Speaker, with 
these taxes. 
 
And they refuse to take an offer made to them by Paul Martin, 
the federal Minister of Finance, that he would be prepared to 
take a look at rolling back a matching income, a matching fuel 
tax reduction. We’re asking the government opposite: take a 
look at it, talk to Mr. Martin, see if he will agree to an 
immediate rollback of 5 cents a litre by each of the province and 
the federal government — a total reduction in the fuel tax of 10 
cents a litre. 
 
And what do the members opposite do? Sleep, Mr. Speaker. 
They are sleeping through this whole fuel crisis. They 
completely ignore it. They’re much more concerned about how 
they force workers who don’t want to be unionized into unions. 
That’s the priorities. 
 
(1615) 
 
Their priorities are not helping people in Saskatchewan. It’s 
how they replenish the coffers of the unions because they know, 
Mr. Speaker, they know that within a short period of time we 
could very well be into another provincial election. And if that 
happens, they’re only going to have one set of friends, and 
those are their friends in the union. 
 
And it’s not the union member, rank and file, that they count on 
— not at all. It’s the people at the very top of the unions that are 
making the hundred thousand dollar a year salary. Those are the 
ones they count on, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what their priorities 
are. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, they were concerned about the people, this 
particular Bill would deal with a reduction of the fuel tax, not 
simply the status quo, changing the dots on the i’s and the 
commas in the sentences, Mr. Speaker, which is basically what 
this particular Bill deals about. 
 
The member from Athabasca hollers across, what about Grant 

Devine. Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the actions of this 
particular government, to me it’s almost word for word, action 
for action, for what the Conservatives were doing in the late 
1980s and early 1990s. This is an old, tired, and out of touch 
government, exactly like those were in the 1980s, early 1990s, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And each and every one of those members, Mr. Speaker, is 
acting as arrogantly and as uncaringly as that government did, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re no longer concerned about the actions 
that are needed to make this province prosperous; they are 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced in this Bill, the fuel tax 
Bill, on how to maintain government, how to maintain their 
strangle grip on the throat of government in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they’re interested in. 
 
I look over, Mr. Speaker, the comments that the minister made 
in his address to this particular Bill and from Hansard . . . And 
the members opposite have traditionally and over time berated 
the Americans, Mr. Speaker. They have berated the American 
states for the way they operate. They like to refer to health care 
as an American-style health care, and yet the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker, is going to the American states looking 
for ideas on fuel taxes and following their examples, Mr. 
Speaker, following their examples. 
 
And he talks further on in his statements, Mr. Speaker, about 
coloured tax-free fuel. Yes, what we call purple diesel, Mr. 
Speaker, or purple gas. He’s talking about that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I think the way to describe 
that particular type of fuel should be zero-rated fuel, that the tax 
rate on that fuel is zero rather than tax-free because, at the whim 
of the government, it can be changed. 
 
So at this particular point in time, marked or dyed fuel is zero 
rated. Tomorrow the Minister of Finance could change that to a 
5 cent a litre tax, a 10 cent a litre tax, whatever he may feel is 
appropriate. So it’s not a tax-free fuel. If it was tax-free, it 
would never, ever have tax included in it. But that’s not the 
case. Taxes can be applied. So the term should not be, Mr. 
Speaker, tax-free fuel but rather a zero-rated fuel. 
 
Part of the reasoning behind this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 
dealing with standardization of fuels, types, and fuel tax 
collections across the province but across Canada. But we are 
also . . . Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is part of an organization 
called IFTA and that is the International Fuel Tax Agreement. 
 
Well there are some difficulties, Mr. Speaker, with that 
particular agreement in dealing with our marked fuel, our dyed 
fuels, which are zero-rated in this province. When a person who 
is entitled to operate with zero-rated fuel in this province 
crosses the international border into the US (United States) they 
may very well be — and if apprehended and checked will be — 
fined for operating with dyed fuel, even though, Mr. Speaker, 
they are meeting all of the requirements of the IFTA agreement. 
 
I’ve raised this particular issue with the minister because it’s 
affecting people in Saskatchewan. The minister’s response was, 
well it’s out of my jurisdiction. But this province, Mr. Speaker, 
is a signatory to the IFTA agreement. 
 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

We are part of it. We collect funds from truckers coming into 
this province from outside on the fuel they purchased in 
Manitoba or Alberta or Montana or North Dakota or PEI 
(Prince Albert Island), if they’ve got a truck that will go that 
far. We collect tax, Mr. Speaker, under the IFTA agreement on 
the fuel they burn in this province so it does directly affect us. 
And the Minister of Finance has a role to play in that. 
 
And yet when that agreement is not being lived up to in other 
jurisdictions, the Minister of Finance simply wants to wash his 
hands of it and say, it’s outside of my jurisdiction. Well when 
we have international agreements, when we have interprovincial 
agreements, it’s up to the government, and in this case the 
Minister of Finance, to ensure that the rules are being applied 
and are being applied correctly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in this particular case the minister has failed to do so. And 
I would ask him to review that situation again, find out what’s 
happening with the IFTA agreement, and how it affects 
Saskatchewan particularly when it comes to dealing with 
marked fuels. 
 
A second portion of marked fuels, Mr. Speaker, as outlined in 
the Act, deals with standardization of those marked fuels. In 
particular, Mr. Speaker, part of what needs to be taken into 
consideration of marked fuels is the environment and how those 
marked fuels may differ from other fuels being burned both in 
Saskatchewan and outside of Saskatchewan, and how they 
compare to the fuels being used in other jurisdictions. 
 
Part of the problem with the IFTA agreement in dealing with 
transborder use of marked fuels, Mr. Speaker, deals with the use 
in the US of a dye to mark fuels that have a high sulphur 
content and therefore have a high pollution content; whereas 
our fuels, Mr. Speaker, have up until now been comparable. 
Whether there was clear fuel or a marked fuel, they had the 
same pollution content, the same sulphur content, and had the 
same impact on the environment. 
 
We need to clarify in the IFTA agreement, Mr. Speaker, that 
our marked fuels are not a serious pollutant any more than a 
clear fuel is. It’s not to say that fuels of any kind are not 
pollutant, but some are more so than others. And in the US in 
particular, dyed fuels indicate a high sulphur rate and therefore 
a high pollution rate. 
 
The minister needs to sit down with his counterparts across the 
US border to iron out the difficulties that are being faced by 
Saskatchewan residents who are entitled to use zero-rated fuels 
within their businesses and within their equipment, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately that has not yet happened, and I would 
ask that the minister seriously pursue that avenue, Mr. Speaker, 
to provide the relief. 
 
The fines for someone who crosses the border with marked fuel 
and is apprehended with it — even though it’s legal in 
Saskatchewan, even though they have their IFTA permits, even 
though they may have paid a special tax for that particular load 
across the border — the fine for the first offence is over $500 
US, Mr. Speaker. It’s a serious situation. 
 
It applies not only just to large semi-trailer units, it also applies, 
Mr. Speaker, to any diesel vehicle which might be utilizing 

dyed fuel such as even pickups, Mr. Speaker. So if someone 
was to run across the border to buy a loaf of bread, let’s say, 
and happened to have some dyed fuel, marked fuel, in their fuel 
tank, they could be apprehended and charged this kind of a fine. 
 
And you can’t wash these dyes out very easily, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m told that it takes 10 full tanks of fuel to dilute the dyed fuel, 
the marked fuel, sufficiently so as not to be recorded on the 
equipment that is doing the checking. So it’s a very serious 
impediment to people who are entitled in Saskatchewan to use 
zero-rated fuels, if they cross the border in pursuit of their 
activities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you know that? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The member from Meadow Lake wants 
to know how I know that. I know that, Mr. Speaker, because 
one of my constituents contacted me after suffering that 
indignity. I approached the minister’s office and his response 
was it’s outside of my jurisdiction. He was not prepared to 
enforce the IFTA agreements to which he and his government 
are a signator, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You’re welcome, Mr. Member from Meadow Lake. Anything 
else you wish to know, you may ask. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, part of this Act deals with, 
as I said earlier, the rewriting of the fuel Act to standardize and 
simplify procedures. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re always in favour 
of simplifying procedures of government. Government is too 
top heavy, too bureaucratic, and too expensive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now I find it somewhat ironic that the 
members opposite would be bringing in anything that would 
change that fact. But if they do, we are certainly prepared to 
agree and thank them for that. Unfortunately, there are a lot of 
many other things in this Bill that do not provide a simpler 
solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the items that is part of this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the fuel tax on propane will not be charged on 
any cylinder which is 100 pounds or less. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
there are a lot of industries that utilize, a lot of farmers that 
utilize propane even to heat their homes. And yet they are going 
to be charged . . . according to this, Mr. Speaker, they will be 
charged if they have a tank larger than 100 pounds of propane. 
 
Now most farmers, most . . . not necessarily even farmers. I 
shouldn’t say farmers. Most people in the rural areas — and 
that might very well include urban municipalities away from the 
natural gas system — utilize 3, 400, 500 gallon tanks to store 
their propane. You don’t want the propane truck pulling into 
your yard every second day to keep your furnace going. They’re 
not going to do that. 
 
So under this Act, as I read it, it’s only those with 100 pounds 
or less tanks are going to be exempt from this fuel. I don’t know 
how you can possibly charge a fuel tax, which should be a road 
tax, Mr. Speaker, to heat residential homes. Hopefully the 
minister will clarify that situation if we ever get to Committee 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

of the Whole. 
 
Clearly this is an Act . . . That change, Mr. Speaker, will benefit 
those that are barbecuing, which is an important function, 
important social function in our society, but it’s not as 
important as heating your home when it’s 40 below in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so the minister needs to take a very serious look at that and 
make a determination as to whether or not the law is written as 
he intended, or if there is another explanation here. And perhaps 
an amendment needs to be put in place to clarify that this tax 
will not apply to residences, Mr. Speaker, when utilized for 
heating. And you have to ask why if it doesn’t apply to 
residences, why would it apply then to businesses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the things that need to be 
asked. There are other types of things that the government says, 
oh no, we’re there. The member from Regina Qu’Appelle is 
always standing up giving us a farm report. 
 
(1630) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, why would this tax apply to drying grain, 
which is a very, very important function across Saskatchewan 
in a wet fall. When we have a fall like we had had last year, 
grain drying can be extremely expensive. ’96 was another year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people look at natural hookups to dry grain, 
they’re extremely expansive. You’re talking up to $25,000 now. 
If you’re only in the area where you’re having a wet fall, you 
know once every three, or four, five years, you’re not going to 
spend $25,000 to get natural gas in. You’re going to utilize 
propane to dry your grain. 
 
Under this change, Mr. Speaker, under this Act there is no 
reason why this government should be collecting that kind of a 
fuel tax on people who are utilizing propane to dry their grain. 
Now the minister needs to clarify whether or not that’s part of 
this Act, but if you read the Act it says, the tax is exempt only 
on those propane cylinders of 100 pounds or less. 
 
Well there’s not many people who hook up a hundred pound 
bottle to their grain dryer, Mr. Speaker, because it isn’t going to 
last very long. So you’re going to have major tanks . . . you’re 
going to have 3 to 500 gallon tanks to do that kind of drying, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker, that is collected in this province 
is 15 cents a litre — 15 cents a litre. On average, Mr. Speaker, it 
works out to about $360 million a year of fuel taxes collected. 
That’s collected from individuals who drive your vehicle for 
recreational purposes, people who drive a vehicle for business 
purposes, from truckers, from the railroads, Mr. Speaker, from 
school buses, ambulances. Every vehicle that travels upon our 
roads, Mr. Speaker, virtually pays the fuel tax. 
 
And yet how much of that fuel tax, Mr. Speaker, actually goes 
back onto the roads? The government this year is putting $250 
million into road . . . into the Highways department, I should 
say. It’s about $106 million that goes to resurfacing — 
reconstruction they call it — that is when you have . . . used to 

have, 10 years ago, a nice stretch of highway. Now it’s full of 
potholes. Reconstruction means driving down the road, Mr. 
Speaker, and putting gravel in those holes. They don’t even 
pack it down, just pull up, dump some gravel in, and keep on 
going to the next pothole. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the government . . . of all the fuel tax it’s 
collecting is not putting enough in. The Highways department 
doesn’t even fill in every pothole. They fill in, depending on 
their budget, every other one or every third pothole. Next week 
they’ll come back and fill out every second pothole, and over a 
period of a month or two they will eventually have filled in 
every pothole once. But what happens with gravel that isn’t 
packed in, has no sort of sealant on it? Before they get back to 
fix the next pothole, it’s already pounded out. 
 
I was observing a construction, Mr. Speaker, last fall of a 
highway and the highway crew was ahead of me. They’ve got 
their large machines, they’re putting down a sealant, packing 
the road well, and within 50 yards behind that machine, Mr. 
Speaker, there was already a pothole developing. There was 
already a chunk of the sealant coming out. They hadn’t moved 
50 yards yet. And that’s the kind of money or lack thereof, Mr. 
Speaker, and competence that this government is performing. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance today said that they spend 87 per 
cent of the highway taxes on highways. Now I ask the general 
public, take $250 million and divide it by 360 and see what kind 
of a number you get. It works out to something like 75 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Not 87 per cent. 
 
That’s perhaps why our taxes are the way they are, Mr. Speaker. 
The Minister of Finance hasn’t got his numbers out yet. He 
must be using, Mr. Speaker, one of those socialist calculators 
that sort of rounds it up to a fairly large number, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not just the fuel tax though that is collected, Mr. Speaker, to 
be used to provide the services that the fuel tax was originally 
intended for. The fuel tax should be used, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide services to those that have paid the fuel tax. 
 
But there’s also licensing fees — $90 million to $100 million a 
year roughly collected, Mr. Speaker, on licensing fees on 
vehicles that could also be used to supplement the fuel tax that 
is supposed to be fixing our highways but that isn’t going to fix 
our highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our taxes, as I said earlier, are one of the highest if 
not the highest in Canada when it comes to fuel taxes. Only 
Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker, has higher taxes than 
Saskatchewan — only Newfoundland. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
visited Newfoundland last fall. Their highways are in very good 
shape — very good shape. 
 
And if they don’t want to believe me, Mr. Speaker — because 
they generally have a tendency to be somewhat skeptical — 
they can ask the member from Moose Jaw North . . . or excuse 
me, Moose Jaw South . . . Moose Jaw Wakamow, how she 
found the roads in Newfoundland because she was there with 
me as well, or the member . . . the Opposition Whip was there 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people in Newfoundland maintain their roads. But that’s 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

not the case in Saskatchewan with our fuel taxes and we collect, 
as I said earlier, 15 cents a litre for every litre of gasoline. 
 
There is another person in Saskatchewan, or another entity, as 
well as this government that is collecting fuel taxes. And this 
Bill will help standardize that collection as well, Mr. Speaker 
— standardize the fuel, standardize the collection. And that is 
the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The federal government is failing drastically in their 
responsibility to maintain a highway infrastructure, not just in 
Saskatchewan, but across Canada. And the fuel taxes that are 
paid from Saskatchewan should be utilized in that area — 10 
cents, Mr. Speaker, 10 cents a litre for the federal government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why the provincial 
government could not approach the federal government as 
offered by the Minister of Finance, Paul Martin, to roll back the 
fuel taxes jointly to give consumers a break. But this 
government opposite will hear nothing of it, nothing. They’re 
not concerned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It reminds me of the situation back in 1982 prior to the 
provincial election. I listened to the budget. I listened to that 
budget with great interest, Mr. Speaker, and I remember the 
premier, Allan Blakeney, stating: the government is strong. The 
government is in good shape. And at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, people across Saskatchewan were losing their homes 
because of the usurious interest rates — 24 per cent interest 
rates but the government of the day — Allan Blakeney, the 
Premier was the minister of Justice at that time — didn’t care, 
Mr. Speaker. They were more interested in governing than they 
were in helping the people. And this fuel Bill, this fuel tax Bill, 
is another example of that, Mr. Speaker, where they’re more 
interested in maintaining power than they are in actually 
helping the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Three hundred and fifty million . . . $360 million a year of fuel 
tax collected in this province and yet every week, Mr. Speaker, 
we receive phone calls from people across this province who 
have had their vehicles damaged; some, Mr. Speaker, who have 
even suffered personal injury because of the lack of concern of 
this government and the terrible condition of our highways. 
 
People on school buses, Mr. Speaker, are afraid to put their 
children on the school bus to send them to school. And fact is, 
some divisions are even instructing their drivers not to utilize 
the provincial highways. I have a highway in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, that runs up the entire eastern side of the province 
and goes through my constituency, the member from 
Moosomin’s, the member from Saltcoat’s, the member from 
Yorkton’s, the member from Canora’s, the member from Carrot 
River Valley — No. 8 Highway. 
 
No. 8 Highway, Mr. Speaker. Today you could probably canoe 
from the US border to Hudson Bay and never get out of a rut on 
that highway. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, we received a notice 
from the Conservation department in our office the other day 
indicating that the bag limits on fish in the potholes on No. 18 
Highway were the same as in any other body of water in this 
province. Same rules. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that there 
was a concern that some anglers were taking above their limits. 
Also that they were blocking . . . 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the House some special 
guests in the west gallery. 
 
As the member from Regina Lakeview indicated earlier, the 
International Tuba and Euphonium Conference 2000 is being 
hosted in the University of Regina between May 30 and June 3. 
And this is a yearly conference but it’s the first time that it’s 
been held in Canada. 
 
And the conference being conducted by the Tubists Universal 
Brotherhood Association, T.U.B.A, has more than 400 
participants in Great Britain, Japan, Switzerland, Germany, US, 
and Canada. The week features solo recitals, concerts with the 
Air Command Band and the Regina Symphony Orchestra, a 
jazz band, small ensembles, and the workshops. 
 
And there’s four young men from the Canadian Cadet 
Organizations as well as some officers from the Prairies who 
are participating in the conference. And if I could ask them to 
stand as I read out their names: Air Cadet Greg Slaa, a tuba 
player from 177 Squadron located in Winnipeg; Air Cadet 
Richard Wiens, a tuba player from 176 Squadron located in 
Winnipeg; Air Cadet Ryan McIntosh, a euphonium player from 
191 Squadron located in Winnipeg; Sea Cadet Ian Morgan, a 
tuba player from 42 Sea Cadet Corps in Thunder Bay, Ontario; 
and Lieutenant Ryan Graham, a euphonium player from 
Thunder Bay, Ontario; as well as Captain Alan Cann, a 
euphonium player from Regina. 
 
I also just wanted to say thank you to Alan and his wife Jennifer 
for being such wonderful hosts. So if the House would please 
welcome the special guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
also introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague across the floor in welcoming the air cadets 
to Saskatchewan. We’re certainly very pleased to have them 
here. 
 
I myself was a member of the 675 Bow Valley Squadron of the 
air cadets, and it’s certainly a very worthwhile participation. 
And although I was not a tuba player, I always wanted to be, 
Mr. Speaker. Please welcome the cadets here again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



June 1, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although I am 
not a tuba player, I can make some noise in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and hopefully the members opposite will hear what I 
have to say. Because we’re talking about the fuel tax Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and the members opposite find it very difficult to 
utilize that tax for what its intended purpose was — to provide 
service to drivers and to maintain the highway and byway 
infrastructure of Saskatchewan. And they’re simply failing in 
that duty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would hope that our guests in the galleries, Mr. Speaker, 
take the opportunity to tour around Saskatchewan. We have a 
very beautiful province, Mr. Speaker, a very beautiful province. 
But it’s difficult to see our province. 
 
I was across the border earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, on 
Monday to a Memorial Day service in Sherwood, North 
Dakota. And the question there that everyone wanted to ask me 
was, when are you going to fix the highway? 
 
We collect 350, $360 million a year on fuel. As I was driving 
from my home down to the border, I passed innumerable oil 
service trucks, trucks hauling tanks of oils, saw many pump 
jacks. There’s a large amount of revenue generated in the 
southeast corner, Mr. Speaker, from the oil patch. Every one of 
those wells, every one of those installations, takes a large 
amount of work to maintain. The people doing that burn a lot of 
fuel, they pay a lot of taxes. 
 
(1645) 
 
But they’re also very, very hard on the road system, Mr. 
Speaker. But unfortunately all of that revenue that is generated 
from the fuel taxes collected in providing that service is not 
returned to make that highway system work, Mr. Speaker; to 
maintain it in place so that the traffic can continue. 
 
When you cross at the Carievale-Sherwood border, Mr. 
Speaker, and drive north, you have to drive on the highway for 
two miles. You really can’t get off on that first two-mile stretch. 
But as soon as you’ve gone up the road two miles, virtually 
everybody that knows the area, Mr. Speaker, turns off 
immediately and takes the grid roads to get wherever you’re 
going to. 
 
It’s only the tourists, Mr. Speaker, who don’t know exactly 
where all the roads run to, that actually drive No. 8 Highway. 
They drive it once, Mr. Speaker. They buy their fuel at the next 
town or wherever they happen to be going to. In the case of No. 
8 Highway, they’re probably going up to the Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park. They buy their fuel there but they don’t drive 
that highway ever again. 
 
Once they get back across the US border, they never come 
back. They don’t dare come back, Mr. Speaker, because they 
can’t maintain their vehicles driving on Saskatchewan 
highways. In fact is, Mr. Speaker, I was told that down in the 
KOA (Kampgrounds of America) campsites across the border, 

they have big posters in those sites: “Do not go to 
Saskatchewan. You can’t drive on the highways.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite talks a lot about 
tourism. They collect a lot of money in the fuel taxes. But 
they’re doing everything they can to keep people out of this 
province, because they simply can’t drive on the highways to 
get into this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I drove down No. 1 Highway, Mr. Speaker, yesterday, and there 
was a lot of vehicles driving up and down that highway, each 
and every one of them paying fuel taxes. The road, Mr. 
Speaker, on the north side was in terrible shape. So we got 
talking to the people in the car, why do you think No. 1 
Highway on the north side is in such bad shape? Well they had 
the answer. It’s everybody moving out of this province with 
their heavy loads; nobody’s coming back. 
 
Everybody’s going out, Mr. Speaker, because this government 
refuses to deal with the issues and the concerns and the needs of 
the people of this province. 
 
And the fuel taxes and the highways, Mr. Speaker, are a clear 
example of what this government is not doing — not doing, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re not doing the job that they were elected to do. 
Even though, Mr. Speaker, they received a minority of the votes 
in this province, they are the government, and they are failing to 
provide the service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We receive many phone calls, Mr. Speaker, about people that 
have had their vehicles damaged on the highways. The 
Highways department, if you apply to them and you can prove 
that they were negligent, Mr. Speaker, they will provide you 
with the cost of repairs. 
 
That money, Mr. Speaker, comes in part from the fuel taxes 
collected under this Bill — $95,000 is what the Department of 
Highways paid out last year to provide restitution to people who 
had their vehicles damaged driving on Saskatchewan highways. 
Not driving in the ditch, not hitting an animal on the road, 
simply because the road was not properly maintained by the 
government opposite. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a sad, sad commentary on the state of our 
highways, and a true statement, Mr. Speaker, on the lack of 
concern that the members opposite have to maintain the 
infrastructures of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the CAA, Canadian Automobile Association, 
is very unhappy about the utilization of the fuel taxes, or the 
lack thereof, in supporting the infrastructure of this province. 
They believe that the taxes, the entire amount of the taxes, 
should be utilized for exactly what it was collected for — its 
road tax, its fuel tax — and go back and maintaining the roads, 
Mr. Speaker, of this province. 
 
And what’s happening because the province is not supporting 
the road structure in this province, the traffic is moving off onto 
the municipal roads and the government has been reducing their 
support to municipalities. So even those roads, Mr. Speaker, are 
now starting to deteriorate again because of the lack of concern 
and funding by this government for the infrastructure. 
 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2000 

They talk a lot about infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, but they only 
want to be involved in infrastructure when they can have their 
name up in bright lights and say the Minister of Highways is 
doing this. Unfortunately, they pay a lot for the big sign but 
they don’t pay very much to fix the road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a number of other items in this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that I believe need to be seriously addressed, and I’ve 
mentioned some of them earlier. 
 
The propane taxes. Are they being charged on residential fuel as 
would seem to be indicated in this Bill? Are they being charged 
on propane being utilized for agriculture as would seem to be 
charged, Mr. Speaker? Because clearly this Act states that it’s 
only those items that are less than 100-pound cylinders that can 
qualify. So, Mr. Speaker, there are a good number of items here 
that need to be addressed. 
 
We see the Highways department driving around with very nice 
vehicles, but they’re not doing a lot of work. The fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, $61 million is actually going for highway 
reconstruction, to build new highways. But most of that, Mr. 
Speaker, is being spent on two projects. It’s being spent on two 
projects. A little bit on twinning No. 1 Highway and on 
twinning No. 16. 
 
And even then, Mr. Speaker, with all the fuel taxes that are 
collected by this government, it’s going to take 15 long years, 
Mr. Speaker, 15 long years to complete the twinning of No. 1 
Highway. 
 
How many deaths, Mr. Speaker, have we already heard reported 
in this legislature? We were discussing the Department of 
Highways. It was kind of ironic, a very sad, ironic situation, Mr. 
Speaker. We were discussing the estimates of the Department 
of Highways when we were first informed of that very tragic 
accident in the Maple Creek area where three people lost their 
lives and about five or six vehicles were involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re just lucky, Mr. Speaker. We’re extremely lucky. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — To ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you, children from Leask School. And I thank you 
very for coming and I’d like to speak to you after if you’re 
available. Please join me in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Fuel Tax Act, 2000 
(continued) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I was stating, we’re very lucky that the buses involved in that 
particular accident were not carrying school children or were 
not carrying people on a tour. The buses were empty, and thank 
God for that, Mr. Speaker, because we would have had a very 
major tragedy, and a tragedy that I would hope we could avoid 
in the future, Mr. Speaker. And the way to avoid those tragedies 
is to fix the highways. 
 
And we very, very much, Mr. Speaker, need to start proceeding 
in that manner as quickly as possible. We’re prepared to join 
with the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, in approaching the 
federal government and demanding, Mr. Speaker, demanding 
our fair share of the tax dollars that are collected in this 
province for fuel taxes, that they be returned to the highways. 
 
Between the province’s 350, 360 million, the federal 
government’s $200 million, there is money available, Mr. 
Speaker, to actually start repairing the highways in this 
province. It’s time that it actually happened. 
 
So I call on the members opposite, join with us, send a strong 
message to the federal government that they must start living up 
to their commitment and providing the tax dollars that they 
collect in this province for fuel taxes and turn it back into fixing 
our highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe at this point in time it would be 
appropriate that I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 
 


