





























































Hansard: April 11, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 635 
 April 11, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of the Cypress Hills area in 
connection with the prospect of forced amalgamation of 
municipalities, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to call upon the government to 
reject proposals of any forced amalgamation of 
municipalities. 

 
And it’s signed by individuals from Gull Lake, Tompkins and 
Hazlet, Saskatchewan. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition representing the attitude of people across 
Saskatchewan concerned about government confiscating 
reserve accounts, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are opposed to 
forced amalgamation of municipalities, and the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Humboldt, from Muenster, from Bruno, Guernsey, and 
Lanigan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased, on behalf 
of the good folks of Weyburn and district, to present a petition 
on their behalf with respect to their court house, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue the Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 
 

I’m pleased to present this petition from the residents of 
Weyburn and Midale. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition in regards to the court house in Weyburn and I’m 
reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Weyburn itself. 
 
Mr. Peters: — I rise to bring a petition in regards to the 
proposed or suggested confiscation of municipal reserves and 
the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And they’re from Watrous and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn 
concerned about their court house closure and the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by some citizens from Weyburn. 
 
I so present or give. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of people in 
Swift Current and area concerned about the Swift Current 
hospital. And they’ve signed a petition. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital by providing approximately 
$7.54 million and thereby allowing the Swift Current 
District Health Board the opportunity to provide improved 
health care services. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Swift Current, Waldeck, and Webb. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 
who are concerned with keeping the court house in Weyburn 
open, and I read: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And this is signed by residents of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to stop municipal reserve account 
confiscation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Guernsey, Drake, 
Watrous, Yellow Grass, and Maple Creek. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of people of the province dealing 
with the confiscation of municipal assets. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the citizens of 
Lanigan and Guernsey area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of people . . . citizens in Saskatchewan 
regarding the Weyburn court house, keeping the court house 
open. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from the Yellow Grass, Weyburn, Fillmore, 
Milestone area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I also like to present a petition 
concerning keeping the Weyburn court house open: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue Court of Queen’s Bench services in the 
community of Weyburn. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Weyburn. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to reduce fuel 
tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Davidson, Girvin, Unity, Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with concerned citizens in municipalities about their assets. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly pray. 

 
The signatures are from the RM (rural municipality) of Osler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from people concerned with the high cost of fuel. Petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and the 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures, Mr. Speaker, from Southey and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens concerned with 
enforced municipal amalgamation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Southey, Markinch, and Cupar. 
 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned about enforced municipal 
amalgamation, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea and Rouleau. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To cause the government to continue Court of Queen’s 
Bench services in Weyburn; 
 
To halt any plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To ensure reliable cellular service to Watson and area; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; and 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, members of the House, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce a very special visitor to our province who 
is seated, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today. And I hope I have 
your permission and the permission of the House for a 
somewhat lengthier introduction than is our tradition. 

 
Seated in your gallery with Herr Dr. Guenter Kocks, the 
honorary German consul to Saskatchewan is our special guest, 
His Excellency Dr. Juergen Poehlmann, who is making his first 
official visit to our province in his capacity as the German 
Ambassador to Canada. I’ll ask him to rise at the end of my 
remarks in just a few short moments. 
 
He’s already up. All right. Well, how about a big hand to all of 
them now. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Please be seated because this may be 
a little bit longer, Your Excellency, than you would want or 
anybody else would want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Poehlmann is a career diplomat and — don’t 

hold this against him — but he’s a lawyer by way of official 
professional background and training. And he has been posted 
in the past to represent the German people in Brazil with NATO 
(North Atlantic Treaty Organization), and especially dealing 
with the vitally important issue of disarmament and arms 
control. He was appointed ambassador to Canada last year and, 
as I said, he’s now making his first visit in that capacity to our 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday he met with the Minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development and the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. Today, in addition of his tour of 
the Legislative Building, His Excellency is meeting with the 
Lieutenant Governor, the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, the mayor of Regina, 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, and, as well, other members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I’m going to have a private meeting with His Excellency later 
this afternoon. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that you entertained 
His Excellency at the honoured guests’ luncheon where the 
members of this House attended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many families in Saskatchewan, including 
members on both sides of this House, are proud of their German 
heritage. Indeed, German pioneers and their descendants have 
made many important contributions to our province and our 
communities. 
 
Our trading relationship with Germany continues to benefit all 
the people of Canada and the people of Germany. Germany is 
our fifth largest export marketer and our sixth largest import 
supplier. Saskatchewan trade with Germany involves about $90 
million per year of imports and exports. 
 
German investors have significant interests in this province 
particularly, as an example, Thyssen Mining Construction of 
Canada and AgrEvo. And we’ll look forward to developing and 
expanding our trading relationships with the German people in 
the years to come to our mutual benefit. 
 
We already have a sound foundation upon which we continue to 
build. Since 1971 we’ve been involved in exchange programs, 
we have visitors at the University of Saskatchewan from 
Germany as students, and a parliamentary exchange program. 
And I could go on. 
 
Let me say this, Mr. Speaker — that in view of the long and 
very productive and warm partnership the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada have enjoyed with the German 
people, I would like to invite His Excellency the German 
Ambassador of Canada to once again rise and to once again 
accept the greetings of all the members of this House. 
 
Thank you very much, sir. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition to 
indeed welcome His Excellency the German Ambassador, 
Juergen Poehlmann, and the Honorary Consul, Dr. Guenter 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

Kocks, to our Assembly here this afternoon. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure last summer of 
attending a Partnership of Parliaments tour to Germany along 
with a few members from the legislature — the hon. member 
from Saskatoon Southeast and the hon. member from Regina 
Albert South, as well as a couple of former members, the 
member from Weyburn, Judy Bradley, and the member from 
Lloydminster, Vi Stanger. 
 
And it was an extremely enjoyable program and trip that the 
German people hosted for us. And we travelled throughout the 
country of Germany, many stops including Berlin, Dresden, 
Hamburg, Papenburg, and various other communities and cities 
in the great country of Germany. 
 
We were certainly extremely impressed with the hospitality and 
warmth of the German people. Berlin was an extremely exciting 
city to tour. It is literally under construction with the new 
capital being . . . with the capital being moved from Bonn back 
to Berlin. It was extremely rewarding and exciting to see all of 
the construction that was going on in Berlin, and as well to tour 
places like Dresden and the reconstruction that is going on there 
in the former East Germany. So it was a very enjoyable trip. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, we’d like to join with the 
Premier in welcoming them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry 
that I’ve provoked such hilarity in the Assembly. But I rise as 
well to welcome the German ambassador and especially also to 
welcome the honorary consul for Saskatchewan, Dr. Guenter 
Kocks. Dr. Kocks and I had a very interesting conversation over 
lunch about the importance of the Germanic studies program 
here at the University of Regina. 
 
And as well, Dr. Poehlmann and I had, as well as the member 
for Kindersley and yourself, Mr. Speaker, we had a very 
intriguing conversation about the mutual benefits of exchanges 
that there could be between Saskatchewan and Germany, and 
about the importance indeed of having the media more involved 
in understanding the importance of our European ties. 
 
I found that Mr. Poehlmann is an extremely charming, polite, 
and interesting gentleman to speak with. And I know that he is 
taking his role as Ambassador to Canada very seriously. And 
because Germany is a federal state, he is intrigued with the 
parallels between Ottawa and the provinces, and Berlin and the 
German provinces. 
 
So I would like to as well welcome you to our fair province. I 
hope that . . . You are here I know just for a short time and 
going tomorrow to the wonderful city of Saskatoon. I hope that 
once you discover how wonderful Saskatchewan people are, 
that you will come back again and again and again. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly a number of students from McLurg School in my 

constituency. There’s 54 grade 5 students that are here with 
Carol Grant and Verna Taylor, and I want to welcome them as 
well; and chaperones Bill Edwards and Lori Proctor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ll be touring the legislature. They’re a little 
late getting here today; their bus was a little late. But they’ll be 
having a legislative tour and I’ll be meeting with them I think 
around 2:30 for a question and answer session. Carol Grant’s 
always brought a good class here. I think this is her fifth year in 
a row. It’s a tough group to follow and I might have to call for 
some help. 
 
But anyway I’d like you to join with me and have everyone 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25, ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what are the details of all 
revenues and all transactions and/or services provided for a 
fee at the Queen’s Bench Court in the Humboldt Judicial 
District in the fiscal year 1998-99; and what was the total 
revenue generated through these transactions? 
 

And the second question, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 

What was the yearly rental charge to the government for 
the Queen’s Bench Court in Humboldt for the 1998-99 
fiscal year; and how was this rental charge determined? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Housing and Job Growth in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to tell of yet another good news story 
for Saskatchewan. On Friday my colleague the hon. member 
from Regina South told us more good news about 
Saskatchewan’s economy. For the third month in a row 
Saskatchewan is leading western Canada in job growth — third 
month in a row, Mr. Speaker. We’re better than British 
Columbia; better than Manitoba; and yes, Mr. Speaker, better 
than Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — As my hon. colleague pointed out last 
week there are 15,000 more new full-time jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Today you will be pleased to know that the 
doom and gloom that the members opposite continue to go on 
about is again unfounded. 
 
According to the latest statistics from CMHC (Canadian 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation) Regina has noticed an 87 
per cent increase in housing starts in March of this year, a 50 
per cent increase for year to date. 
 
The figures also show that housing activity is expected to 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

continue to grow, a reflection of our improved job growth. All 
indications are the housing industry is expected to have yet 
another year — another very good year in Regina. But it 
doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. Forecasts call for an increase 
in housing starts both rural and urban across the province this 
year. 
 
So despite the continual doom and gloom scenario the members 
opposite rave about every day in this House, there’s plenty of 
opportunity and optimism in both urban and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Volunteerism in Southeast Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to bring a bit of recognition to the number of volunteers we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan. Now this past Sunday 
afternoon my wife and I had the privilege of joining with the 
southeast Saskatchewan Association for Culture, Recreation 
and Sport to recognize the achievements of a number of 
individuals in our area in regards to their commitment and their 
volunteerism and the effort in promoting culture, recreation, 
and sport in the southeastern area of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to commend the 
southeastern volunteer recognition group for their ongoing 
efforts of maintaining this recognition ceremony despite 
government cutbacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that volunteerism works in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And if it wasn’t for the efforts of 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, we probably wouldn’t have the 
community rinks in our small communities. We probably 
wouldn’t have the museums that speak about our local heritage 
and talk about the efforts of our pioneers, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly wouldn’t have the ongoing efforts of community 
groups that gather the funds that are needed for many 
worthwhile activities in our small communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the award ceremony on Sunday was 
just another effort in pointing out how important it is for us to 
recognize the volunteerism that we have in this province — that 
there are many people who do volunteer their time. And I 
would like to extend congratulations to the many volunteers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Clifton Associates Awarded International Contract 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Well, here we go again, Mr. Speaker — more 
good news from the Saskatoon information technology 
industry. Once again we’ve scored big time in international 
trade. 
 
Envista Technologies, a division of Clifton Associates of 
Saskatoon, has won a $1.5 million contract from the World 
Bank to develop an environmental information system for the 
capital of Colombia — Bogotá. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, Envista is also doing similar 

work for the country of Panama. 
 
Envista’s work will help Bogotá’s environmental authority 
process information on air, water, soil, and waste concerns in 
the Bogotá district. 
 
Officials from Envista and STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership Inc.) have been working for the past year to 
win the World Bank project. This is just one more example of 
Saskatchewan’s technological excellence winning markets in 
developing countries. 
 
I congratulate President Wayne Clifton of Clifton Associates, 
who went head to head with American and European firms and 
won. And I know we are all appreciative of the work of the 
Minister of Economic Development and her department, who 
first identified this project on a recent trade mission to 
Washington, DC. 
 
Once more, good news from Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Boy to Undergo Heart Surgery in Alberta 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to convey my very best wishes to a young man from my 
constituency, Cody Phaneuf. Cody is an 11-year-old hockey 
player from St. Louis. In November 1999 it was discovered that 
Cody had an irregular heart beat and that surgery would be 
required to correct the problem. 
 
The surgery is to be done in Edmonton. Cody’s parents, Emile 
and Sylvia Phaneuf will accompany him and stay with him in 
Edmonton. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, travel and accommodation is very expensive 
and the bill for this must be looked after by the family. The St. 
Louis Hockey Club are to be commended for undertaking a 
most caring initiative to help the Phaneuf family. 
 
On April 8, they hosted a benefit dance to raise funds for Cody 
and his family to help them to defray some of the costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker my thoughts and prayers are with the Phaneuf 
family during this very difficult time and I wish them all the 
very best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Credit Union Expansion 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Credit Union Central 
Saskatchewan recently announced that 15 Saskatchewan credit 
unions intend to acquire the business and physical assets of 17 
rural Bank of Montreal branches. 
 
The Saskatchewan central chief financial officer stated that credit 
unions responded positively when approached by the Bank of 
Montreal for three reasons. 
 
First, it is good business. The growth in business will allow the 
credit unions to serve their members and their communities more 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

efficiently. 
 
Second, credit unions are very keen to keep bank customers’ 
business in the local communities. 
 
And third, it offers the opportunity to offer employment to local 
branch employees. 
 
The credit union system in Saskatchewan has nearly 550,000 
members. Its 144 credit unions operate 336 service outlets and 
employ more than 2,700 people. In approximately 140 rural 
communities, the credit union is the sole financial institution. 
 
As a member of a credit union, I am particularly proud that credit 
unions are playing their part in providing service to rural 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
The Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today in the 
Assembly I’ll introduce a private members’ Bill entitled The 
Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act. The Bill is aimed at 
filling a major gap that exists in current urban and rural 
legislation . . . municipal legislation in our province. It is not 
driven by partisan politics in any way, Mr. Speaker, but rather 
by the need to afford Saskatchewan municipalities protection 
from legal action when they respond in good faith to a call from 
a neighbouring jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March of 1998 the city of Swift Current fire 
department responded to a call for help from a neighbouring 
municipality. They were able to put out the fire, Mr. Speaker, 
but for various reasons, none the fault of the department 
personnel, it re-ignited and further damaged the structure. 
Despite the best efforts of the firefighters and the adherence 
with proper procedure, the insurer of the property filed a lawsuit 
against the fire department in the city of Swift Current. 
 
Had the fire occurred within the city boundaries, provincial 
legislation would have prevented such action. This Bill will 
simply afford that same protection to municipalities who chose 
to help their neighbours. It is tragic, but entirely understandable, 
that in the absence of such protection the city of Swift Current 
has indicated it can no longer respond to calls for help from 
neighbours with which it has no mutual agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can fix this problem right here today in this 
Assembly. We can set aside partisan politics and help facilitate 
inter-municipal co-operation. I respectfully ask for the support 
of all members of this Assembly and of all parties in supporting 
this legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Qu’Appelle Valley Regional Science Fair 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains and I were happy to 
attend the first annual Qu’Appelle Valley Regional Science Fair 
held in Buffalo Plains School Division. The two-day fair 
featured projects and experiments in six scientific categories at 

the junior, intermediate, and senior levels. 
 
Yesterday I said that the future of the government leaders in 
Saskatchewan seems secure, based on youth parliament debates 
this past weekend. The same can be said of our future scientists. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, we have some very interested, 
interesting, and capable kids in all areas of endeavour; and we 
need have no fear that progress will stop with our generation. 
 
An event such as this science fair takes a number of people to 
make it a success. The Volunteer Week is a good time to 
congratulate the fair committee chaired by Rhonda Phillips, the 
many judges, and the several sponsors including SaskEnergy, 
IPSCO, Saskatchewan Education and the town of Lumsden. 
 
And I particularly want to congratulate these young scientists 
whose projects took top honours. I don’t have all the names, 
Mr. Speaker, but among the winners were Curtis Koskie, 
Kirsten MacNaughton, Lisa Bokinac and Derek Heisher. 
Committed young people like these help me believe our future 
is in good hands. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Amalgamation and Municipal Reserves 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. 
Minister, last night’s meeting of the task force on municipal 
amalgamation attracted between 700 and 800 people in 
Yorkton. Unfortunately, you weren’t one of those people so we 
thought it would be helpful if we brief you on what happened. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of the Yorkton area are pretty much 
unanimous, just like the people at every other task force 
meeting. They think your NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s plan of forced amalgamation stinks but 
apparently that doesn’t much matter to you or your NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, we ask again: will you confirm for us today that 
the government will not introduce legislation in this session that 
includes forced municipal amalgamation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First I 
want to say to the member opposite, I recall that he invited me 
yesterday to travel to Yorkton with him. My understanding is, is 
that the member from Kelvington travelled with him and I don’t 
see her in the House today, and that’s probably why I didn’t go 
either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ll remind hon. members that the 
presence or absence of members in this House is not allowed, 
not permitted. 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that I understand that in this province — and he should 
understand as well — that there was a committee that was 
established in 1998. And the work of that committee was to 
review with municipalities — urbans and rurals — about what 
kinds of legislation should be written to empower 
municipalities to have greater responsibilities, share of revenue 
sharing, greater opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to deliver services to 
enhance their economic development. That’s what the . . . that’s 
what that committee in 1998 was established to . . . it was put in 
place. 
 
And nowhere has anybody said that there is going to be 
amalgamation in this province. Nowhere has this government 
said it. Now I haven’t heard you say it. Nobody has said it, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re going to have amalgamation on this side of 
the House. Nobody has said that — except you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) is 
holding an emergency convention — the first time they’ve ever 
done that — to consider what actions they can take to stop your 
government from forcing amalgamation. But it may be already 
too late. 
 
Mr. Minister, here’s what you said just yesterday to reporters: 
 

By the end of April, I would be bringing (in) a 
recommendation to cabinet guiding (and I repeat, guiding) 
the Garcea committee on what kind of legislation needs to 
be crafted for change. 

 
Is that true, Mr. Minister? Are you planning to ignore Mr. 
Garcea’s committee’s public hearings, like the one last night in 
Yorkton, your constituency, and simply dictate to the task force 
on municipal amalgamation what the new municipal legislation 
will look like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that we have no plan. We have no plan on this side of 
the House to do any amalgamation of any sort; no plan about 
amalgamation. Unlike, Mr. Speaker, what their chief of staff 
and that party talk about in terms of consolidation of 
municipalities in the province. This is what your plan says over 
there, Mr. Member. 
 
Your plan says, written by your chief of staff, that what we 
should do is we should engage in not just a discussion, but we 
should engage in a call of action is what you people say — a 
call of action. And you say over there on that side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is never a perfect time for voluntary 
consolidation, that you should proceed with consolidation. And 
that’s your plan — not our plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Minister, if you have no commitment to amalgamate 
municipalities, all you have to do is stand up and tell them. 
That’s what we’re asking. That’s what they’re asking. Make 
that commitment today and the problem will go away for you 
and your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, it looks to most people like your government has 
every intention of bulldozing ahead with forced amalgamation. 
And just when municipalities thought it couldn’t get any worse, 
they started to hear about plans by the NDP to confiscate 
municipal reserve funds. 
 
Is that your plan, Mr. Minister? To force amalgamation, then 
seize bank accounts and assets of municipalities; or seize 
reserves and then force amalgamation? What will it be? 
 
Will you stand again in the House today and guarantee 
municipalities the NDP will not freeze their assets and 
confiscate the reserve funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say to the member opposite that if 
anybody has a history of knowing to bulldoze around, this 
member from Saltcoats has a history of bulldozing around. And 
he goes around the province and calls meetings together, Mr. 
Speaker, and he makes statements like this, Mr. Speaker, to 
individual communities where he says that communities in 
amalgamation would lose all of their staff. 
 
And then he goes on further and said that communities will lose 
all of their equipment. He goes on to say that all of those 
communities will lose their road signs and that they would be 
totally disempowered is what that member says. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is about bulldozing communities. That’s what’s about 
bulldozing communities. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that there has never been any 
suggestion on this side of the House or this minister that there 
would ever be any — any — taking of the reserves. The 
reserves are taxpayers’ money. The reserves are in the 
municipalities, and those reserves would stay within the 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, has been the position that we 
would take on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the only 
bulldozing I have in mind is come the next election is I’m going 
to help bulldoze you out of the Yorkton seat. You will be gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, yesterday you said the assets and bank 
account . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Now just kindly 
allow the member to ask the question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday you said the assets and bank accounts of 
municipalities were partly the property of your NDP 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

government. Would you explain to cities, towns, villages, and 
rural municipalities of Saskatchewan why you believe any part 
of municipal reserve accounts belong to the NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the member opposite is splitting 
hairs in terms of where the money comes from. And I think it’s 
important for the member to understand that any time that a tax 
. . . the tax levying authority, like a municipality, receives 
money from the taxpayer and the provincial treasury provides 
money to the municipality, that pool of money, Mr. Speaker, 
comes from the treasury and comes from the taxpayer. But it is 
only one taxpayer’s money, and it belongs to the municipality. 
Once that money is in the account of the municipality, it 
belongs to the municipality, Mr. Speaker, one taxpayer and it’s 
the municipality’s fund. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you did some bulldozing as a 
Conservative, you did some bulldozing as a Liberal, and now 
your bulldozing as a Saskatchewan Party member; that’s your 
history, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
know and I know that money is local taxpayers’ money and that 
was the message they wanted to send you last night. Stay away 
from their money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are municipalities across Saskatchewan 
today considering what they can do to protect their bank 
accounts and their assets. They’re trying to protect themselves 
against a government that seems determined to shut down 
towns and take away all their savings. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you stand in the House again today and 
clearly state that your NDP government will not confiscate — I 
repeat — will not confiscate the assets, reserve funds, and bank 
accounts of municipalities? Just make that commitment for the 
people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think that part of the 
member’s question clearly demonstrates what he’s been saying 
around the province, where he says and he uses the words, this 
is about shutting down towns. This is what he says. There is no 
intent on this side of the House to look at shutting down any 
towns. This is what the member says. 
 
And then the member goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
somehow we’re going to be capturing the reserves of 
municipalities and doing something different with them, which 
is again his words, Mr. Speaker; nobody on this side of the 
House. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that the revenues or the 
reserves today that are in municipalities belong to the 
municipalities. They’re the taxpayers. They’re the taxpayers’ 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, and I confirm today that those dollars will 
continue to stay, Mr. Speaker, with the municipalities. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot 
of noise over there and I was listening as carefully as I could 
and I couldn’t hear the Minister of Municipal Affairs declare 
that he wasn’t going to force amalgamation on municipalities. 
So I’m going to ask my question to the Minister for Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is planning forced municipal 
amalgamation. The reason that the NDP can bulldoze ahead 
with their plan for forced amalgamation of municipalities is 
because you joined the NDP. So let’s hear what the Liberal 
leader and the Liberal members of the NDP government have to 
say. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, do you and your Liberal colleagues 
support the Minister of Municipal Affairs in forcing 
amalgamation on municipalities? Do you agree that municipal 
reserve funds actually belong to the NDP government? And do 
you support the NDP plan to force municipal amalgamation 
from the top down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whether or not 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just repeat one 
more time, because the same question was asked three times by 
the member from Saltcoats. And I said to the member from 
Saltcoats and I repeat to the Leader of the Opposition that the 
revenues today that are in the reserves of municipalities will 
remain in the reserves of municipalities, like they did in the past 
and like they will continue to do. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you have a 
member on staff today who talks about the importance of 
consolidation and restructuring in this province. You have a 
chief of staff who says that. And you have people who sit on 
your side of the House who in fact support that there should be 
consolidation and restructuring in this province, like the 
member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. And you should have 
a chat with his mayor and see what he says to him — you 
should spend some time with him — who believes in 
restructuring in this province. 
 
You should have a chat, Mr. Speaker, with the member from 
Rosthern and their community, and find out from them what 
they believe in restructuring. And your member, your chief of 
staff talks about it. Why don’t you tell the House what you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all talking 
about forced amalgamation. And we’re wanting to hear what 
the Liberal portion of the coalition have to say on the issue. I 
thought it was a coalition but maybe it’s not a coalition. Maybe 
it’s the puppets and the puppet master over there. 
 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

Mr. Speaker, the question for the Minister of Education. The 
government says that he likes the idea of forced amalgamation. 
He also says municipal bank accounts, reserve funds, and assets 
belong to the NDP government. 
 
Since your decision to join the NDP is the reason the 
government can move ahead with this plan of forced 
amalgamation and confiscation of municipal assets — you’re 
the reason — people have a right to know where you stand. Do 
the Liberal members of the NDP coalition support forced 
amalgamation of municipalities? And do the Liberal members 
of the coalition agree with the government that municipal 
reserves and bank accounts are the property of the NDP 
government? 
 
I’d like the Liberal leader to get out of his seat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for us 
to examine how we got to this place in time, because the 
members opposite don’t seem to have an appreciation of how 
we got to this period of time. 
 
The member should understand that in 1998, the municipalities, 
urban and rural, said to the province, what we want to do in this 
province is to provide . . . have new legislation that would 
provide us with greater authority and autonomy so that we 
could become freer as municipalities to provide a broader range 
of services; and within that encompass changes to legislation, 
changes to revenue-sharing, changes to the way in which we 
deliver services, changes to economic development policy in 
this province. 
 
Municipalities asked that. Municipalities at least talked about 
getting together. And there’s only one group of people in 
Saskatchewan so far who have been talking about forced 
amalgamation, and it’s right there. You’re the people that are 
talking about forced amalgamation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, parliamentary rules — you got 
to allow me to properly respond to the answer by the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs. But I want to tell you, in Yorkton last night 
there were 800 people there and most of them, most of them were 
asking what was the Liberals’ position on forced amalgamation. 
Many of them had voted for the Liberals in the past and they felt 
they had a right to know. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is simple. Do the Liberal members of 
the NDP coalition support forced amalgamation of municipalities, 
and what is the Liberal party position on the Garcea report. Are 
you stuck to your seat or won’t they let you get up and answer the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to, I just want to reinforce, Mr. 
Speaker, one more time that on this side of the House . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order please. Kindly allow the minister to 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that on this side 
of the House we’ve had for some time, Mr. Speaker, a process 
in terms of how we consult and how we talk to municipalities 
across the province, and how we try to provide enriched, 
enhanced services in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And recently, Mr. Speaker, we just met around the round table 
of which SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM sits at, and they talk about the 
importance of working together to redesign the municipal 
structure in this province. And we sit at that table, and we 
concur. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we talk about 
how we’re going to do things collectively; on that side of the 
House they talk about forced amalgamation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Implications of Municipal Amalgamation for Businesses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs as well as the Liberal 
spokesperson. 
 
It is not just rural people who oppose the NDP forced 
amalgamation plan. We are starting to get many faxes and 
letters from Regina area businesses — from the RM of 
Sherwood. Almost all the people who work in these businesses 
live in Regina. They pay taxes in Regina. Many will lose their 
jobs if you push through your forced amalgamation plan. 
 
I have a letter, I have a letter from the owner of the Wascana 
Greenhouses. It says, and I quote: 
 

Forcing us to pay the high taxes and deal with the red tape 
of an urban metropolitan district could cause businesses 
like ours to close. Let us choose . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

Let us choose what is best for our businesses and best for 
our lives. 

 
Mr. Minister, will you listen to the Regina businesses? Will you 
cancel your forced amalgamation plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First I want to say to the member opposite 
— and I know that he’s new to the House, and he’s new as a 
critic to Municipal Affairs — but I want to say to the member 
opposite; the kinds of questions that are being asked, or the 
kinds of questions you’re asking today has very little to do with 
amalgamation. 
 
What it has to do  . . . the task force that went around and talked 
about exemptions in the province — talked about exemptions. 
And today you have bodies or communities in Saskatchewan 
who get privilege in terms of tax reduction called 331(1)(q). 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

And that’s what you’re talking about Mr. Member. It has very 
little to do with amalgamation. It has to do with changing the 
331(1)(q). And you should go back to those ratepayers, and tell 
them what your position is on 331(1)(q). What is your position 
on 331(1)(q)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the members opposite 
don’t care that business is going to be leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
Regina businesses are lining up against your forced 
amalgamation plan. Businesses that have sent us letters like 
Abtec Construction, Graham’s Tire, Wascana Greenhouse, 
which I’ve already mentioned; Brandt Industries; Ramco 
Paving; L & R Asphalt; Harrison’s Service; Precision 
Industries; Four T enterprises; Armour Steel Fabricators; and, 
oh no, IPSCO. 
 
These aren’t just small businesses. They are big business, 
they’re small business, they’re Regina business. They’re Regina 
business that employ Regina people. And they are telling us that 
they will be forced to shutdown if you ram through your forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you attacking these Regina businesses, 
their employees, and their families? Will you cancel your forced 
amalgamation now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member, I want to say that this is the 
further accentuation of exactly the same kinds of things that the 
member from Saltcoats and the Leader of the Opposition talk 
about — and that’s the kind of fearmongering out there. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that last week I met with 
the representation from IPSCO. Last week I met with IPSCO. 
Last week I met with the president of Brandt . . . or with Brandt. 
And what they said to me is exactly what you’re saying, is that 
you met with those people — or your party has met with these 
people — and you talk about exactly the same kind of 
fearmongering that you are today. 
 
And I want to tell you that when I met with them, when I met 
with them, Mr. Speaker, I assured them that Reggie Downs and 
the Saskatchewan Party reamalgamation and consolidation is 
not on. It’s not on. And it might be for you, but on this side of 
the House it’s not on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very curious that the 
minister would be saying that and send a task force out saying 
the exact opposite thing, and then directing them. That’s a 
question in my mind. 
 
These Regina businesses are saying, nothing but an NDP tax 
grab; a tax grab that may force them out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, those aren’t my words. I’m not the one saying it. 
Dawn . . . Cara Dawn Transport says, “it’s a tax grab by an 
out-of-touch NDP government.” Precision Industries says that 

they have already discussed relocation with their employees. 
Brandt Industries who employs about 300 Regina residents 
says, it’s another reason for business to move west. 
 
Mr. Minister, at a time when we can’t lose one more business in 
this province, you’re driving them out. Will you listen to these 
Regina businesses and cancel your plans for forced 
amalgamation? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have a difficult time 
understanding what the member is asking today when the 
member from Saltcoats asked me exactly the same question 
yesterday. 
 
I want to say that yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saltcoats stood up in his place and he said, why don’t you come 
to Yorkton and make a presentation to the task force? And 
today the member opposite says, you shouldn’t be directing the 
task force. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the task force, Mr. Speaker, was 
commissioned by the government to go out there and consult 
with people. Now the member opposite says you should not 
consult with the task force because you’re going to be directing 
them. Yesterday the member from Saltcoats wanted me to show 
up and make a presentation on how to direct them. 
 
Now what is it? Do you want us to direct them or not direct 
them? What is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, yesterday — thank you, Mr. 
Speaker — Mr. Minister, yesterday you declined an invitation 
from the member from Saltcoats. He offered to give you a ride 
to the task force meeting in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve ridden with the member from Saltcoats. I 
don’t blame you. I don’t blame you. 
 
You may not know, Mr. Minister, you may not know . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister, 
you may not know that I’ve spent probably 20 years in the 
traffic safety business. And there is also a hearing in Regina 
tomorrow. Why don’t you jump in with me? I can promise your 
safety to and from the meeting. At the meeting, you’re on your 
own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, we expect dozens of Regina 
area businesses representing thousands of their employees to be 
speaking at this task force. Will you attend the task force 
meetings tomorrow and listen to what these businesses and 
employees are saying about amalgamation? 
 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I said yesterday in the House and I say to 
the member again — and I respect the number of years that he’s 
worked in the public safety area and understands the municipal 
file relatively well in my view — but I say to the member 
opposite that he should examine fully about the work that’s 
being done by the task force today and how it . . . when it was 
commissioned. 
 
Because it would be inappropriate, as I said yesterday, for the 
minister to show up at a task force meeting of which you’re 
garnering and gleaning information about which direction you 
should go and then make a presentation to the committee about 
which way you want it to go. It would be highly inappropriate. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, I appreciate the fact that you 
were going to give me a ride again. I’m not prepared to travel 
with you, sir, because I know what happened to the member 
from Kelvington. And I’m not prepared to travel with you, Mr. 
Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 231 — The Fire-fighter 
Protection from Liability Act 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading 
of Bill No. 231, The Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Department of Agriculture 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
24, The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 2000 be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave that we move 
to second reading now. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 
The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Amalgamation of Municipalities 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today we have the opportunity I think to debate probably one of 
the most important things that could happen to towns, RMs, 
villages, hamlets, really the people all over Saskatchewan, with 
the restructuring that may be done if the minister and that 
government brings in forced amalgamation. And I will be 
bringing forward a motion at the end of my talk, Mr. Speaker, 
to deal with that. 
 
I’d like to talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, about the meeting that 
was in Yorkton last night, and I’d like to mention that the 
member, the Minister of Municipal Government was 
conspicuous by his absence. In fact on many occasions last 
night I had his constituents asking me where their representative 
was, and why he wasn’t out there to hear their concerns along 
with the probably 600 other people from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This same minister will not stand up in this House and give 
those people, local government people out there, the 
commitment that he won’t force amalgamation down their 
throats. He at the same time won’t give them the commitment 
that him and his government won’t go out and take every cent 
that they’ve saved by running their house and keeping it in 
order over the years, that he won’t come along and take that 
money away and dump it into general revenue for this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the biggest thing that people especially out 
in the towns and RMs in this province are going to lose, is their 
local autonomy. And by that I mean input into how they run 
their everyday lives, how efficiently they run the services that 
they supply for the people that they represent. 
 
And I believe by what Mr. Garcea, and for that matter what this 
minister are trying to push upon us, we will lose all that local 
autonomy. We will lose the services that we have become 
familiar with out there. 
 
We won’t be able to call your local councillor, your local 
alderman at any time of the night or day and have them 
respond. What we probably will have is some bureaucrat who’s 
probably making 60, $80,000 a year, who by the way will be 
surely probably unionized, and if it’s overtime you’ll pay 
probably for six hours for a half an hour’s work. And you won’t 
get the service that you’re getting from the volunteers that are 
running the show out there now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

(1430) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, why on earth would this 
government want to replace volunteers with an expensive 
bureaucratic nightmare that the people of rural Saskatchewan, 
number one, haven’t asked for, don’t want, and don’t need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has got to take time to listen to these 
people, get off his personal agenda, and listen to the people of 
rural Saskatchewan. Some of those people which helped elect 
him this time around, but certainly won’t be voting for him next 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The minister today, Mr. Speaker, talks 
about me bulldozing, bulldozing. And as I mentioned in 
question period, and I had made the comment that the only 
bulldozing I thought I would be doing is bulldozing him out of 
his seat come the next election if they get the intestinal fortitude 
to have the nerve to call the next election. Maybe we should call 
that election now on forced amalgamation, and we’ll see how 
popular that is to your government and especially to the 
Minister of Municipal Government. 
 
The Garcea report, Mr. Speaker . . . and I find some of the 
things in there very amazing and I believe probably the minister 
had a lot to do with these. Number one, they say, we should 
have deficit budgeting, financing, for these district municipal 
boards. 
 
Amazing, amazing comment for a minister that should be in 
touch with local municipalities who haven’t had that right to 
deficit finance, have kept their house in order, have not run up 
real big debts, and are not paying the price for that as past 
governments have in this province. Including yours — the 
Blakeney government before ’82 who also helped add to the 
debt we’re paying off right now to the tune of we don’t know 
what — 5 billion, 6 billion, 7 billion. We don’t know how big it 
was because he kept books just like this government keeps 
books. Nobody seems to know where we really stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Garcea will admit, will be the first to admit 
that he has done no costing. Is there a dollar saving in what he’s 
talking about? No, he says, we have done nothing to see if 
there’ll be a money saving when we bring in district municipal 
boards. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would guess that if you get large district 
municipal boards, cost saving has been neglected to be looked 
at for a reason. Because there won’t be a cost saving. In fact 
when the smoke clears, we’ll be paying a lot higher taxes. The 
problem being is that local people won’t be setting those taxes, 
it will be your bureaucrats that you put in place, probably 
appointed by you to run local governments out there — the ones 
where we used to have local governments and now have no 
representation at all, thanks to you and your government. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Garcea talks about is 
they said they have done . . . there is nothing to do with 
efficiency; they’re not looking at efficiency. 
 
Well now if you’re not looking at a dollar saving and you’re not 

looking at efficiency, that tells me one thing — that tells me this 
is an agenda of the NDP and that minister. Because what else is 
there? What other improvement? You know, like who pays for 
administration? They talk about there’s too much administration 
in rural Saskatchewan. Who pays for that? Not the government 
of the day. The local taxpayers pay for the local administration. 
 
Now if anyone wants to cut down administration locally, 
wouldn’t they be the ones — the local taxpayer — they would 
be the ones that should be asking for change. And yet they were 
the ones that were at the meeting in Yorkton last night. They 
were the ones that were at the meeting at Kipling yesterday. 
They are the people that are at all these task force meetings, and 
not one of them is asking for change. 
 
And yet we have a government that again knows better than 
anyone what’s good for the local people. And that minister 
didn’t have the intestinal fortitude to come out and listen to 
those people, a lot of which were his people, last night, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I was a reeve in my past life before I 
got elected. In fact that’s one of the reasons that I stand before 
you now — because of the downloading this government did 
after they were elected in 1991. And it got my dander up at that 
point and I ran, if I remember, against an NDP member at that 
time, and he got beat on some of these same issues, just like that 
Minister of Municipal Government’s going to get when the next 
election’s called. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say that 
administration is not the problem out there. The problem is with 
this minister and this government. The local taxpayers who pay 
the bill should be the ones to ask for what changes they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a bit of a disappointment with some of the 
members of the task force. Some of these members, these exact 
members, have sat on councils out there. And I can’t believe 
that they sit back and listen to what’s happening, like they did 
last night, like the members of the task force, hearing what 800 
people had to say. 
 
And out of that crowd, Mr. Minister, you might be interested to 
know that two people were in favour of forced amalgamation. 
Now that’s quite a ratio. I would say that works out to about 
750, 760 to 2. And you’re getting the feedback from Mr. Garcea 
that everything’s lovely out there. 
 
You’ve got to come out, Mr. Minister, pay attention to what 
people are saying. Remember that your government is supposed 
to be here for the people, not to do as much to the people as you 
possibly can in your short time in here. 
 
Mr. Garcea I also believe . . . You talked about consultation 
yesterday, Mr. Minister. And I agree with you. When task force 
groups like this go out, there should be consultation. But 
consultation, Mr. Minister, is two ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s consultation we have to hear from the 
task force on their views, but they have to listen to our views 
and I haven’t seen that happening anywhere at any of these task 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

force meetings. 
 
This government spent $750,000 to date on Mr. Garcea’s task 
force and haven’t listened to one word that people have been 
saying out in rural Saskatchewan. They didn’t stop there. They 
paid another $100,000 for the Stabler report and this one’s even 
wingier than the first one. This guy is a way off the chart. This 
isn’t anything to do with what rural people are asking. 
 
In fact Mr. Stabler told us that our problems out there are 
minuscule in our minds, that he understands what we need . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
is saying our problems are minuscule in our minds. A lot of 
people out there would be interested to hear that. 
 
You know again, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whose agenda, 
whose drummer are we beating to here? If people in this 
province aren’t asking for the changes that the government’s 
bringing in, whose agenda? To whose benefit are these changes 
for? 
 
You know, is it the minister’s personal agenda? I wonder. Is it 
an NDP agenda? Well I kind of think so. Is it the Premier’s 
agenda? Possibly. Whose agenda are we going to have to make 
all these changes out in rural Saskatchewan to make happy 
here? Just who is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Jim Melenchuk. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Good point. The member for Cannington 
says the Leader of the Liberal Party. The same leader who, by 
the way, who wouldn’t get up and tell us where that Liberal 
party stands on forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of the people last night were from the 
Melville constituency, Yorkton constituency, Saltcoats 
constituency, Canora-Pelly, Kelvington-Wadena, from a very 
large area. Some of those people, Mr. Speaker, have been past 
Liberal members and I reiterate past is the key word. 
 
We wonder where the leader, the member for North Battleford, 
the member for Wood River, where do these people stand on 
forced amalgamation? The member for Wood River is a good 
example. Here’s a member that represents rural people and I’ll 
be willing to bet, if you asked that member and he gave you an 
honest answer, that he would agree with us and the people of 
Saskatchewan. We don’t want forced amalgamation. It would 
be worth for someone to ask those people where they stand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I honestly believe there’s an ulterior motive here. 
We go out, we force amalgamation, we scoop up all the 
reserves, which I think is part of the program and the minister 
seems to want to deny at this point. 
 
But this will be nothing more than another form of downloading 
because, number one, they have said, suggested that these 
district municipal boards can deficit budget, so that means they 
can build up a big debt. When they can’t get enough money 
from the local taxpayers and the grants are cut off completely 
from government, they can run deficits. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve saw what happens to previous 

governments when they do their books and run their agenda like 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think also it’s a way of muting people. I think 
there’s a lot of flack has come to this government over the last 
number of years. Number one, for downloading. Number two, 
for the way they’ve treated agriculture in this province. And it’s 
one way by cutting municipal voices out there, that all they 
listen to now is probably appointed district municipal boards. 
 
It’s one way of putting a muzzle over people in Saskatchewan. 
A thing that this government seems to be famous for. Once 
again, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Minister of Municipal 
Government and also to Mr. Garcea and his task force, just for 
once, listen to what people are saying out there. At every 
meeting they’re telling them, we want no part of forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Amalgamation is happening on its own. Let’s take away the 
handicaps that are sitting there, some of which this government 
could change — remove those impediments from amalgamating 
even faster. 
 
And it’s happening. Shared fire services, shared garbage 
disposal. The list just goes on and on — things that we are 
doing already. If they remove some of the obstacles from 
amalgamating towns and RMs, I think you’d see it happen 
quicker. 
 
Why on earth do we have to shove this down people’s throats 
when they don’t want it. Why don’t we assist them, rather than 
be the driving force to have it happen when there’s absolutely 
no benefit for people out in Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that what we’re going to see if this plan 
goes through is, number one, we’re going to see less services 
for the people of Saskatchewan, whether you live in towns, 
villages, hamlets, RMs. But what we’re also going to see is that 
less services at more cost. Exactly the opposite of what people 
ask for and what people need in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Then we also hear now that the government is thinking — and 
again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll admit it’s rumour, but usually where 
there’s smoke, there’s fire — that this government is thinking of 
freezing capital funds that RMs and towns have built up, 
surpluses that the towns and RMs have built up, and reserve 
money that RMs and towns have built up. And the minister has 
been asked on two days in a row now, to make a commitment 
that they won’t do that. And he has come nowhere close to 
giving that commitment to municipalities and the local 
taxpayers out there in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move my motion. And I will 
read the motion: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
cancel any plans to legislate forced amalgamation for 
Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 

I move this motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone. I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. About seven 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

months ago, when a person . . . when I was elected as a new 
MLA, I kept in touch with a number of the issues that had been 
going on in my constituency for a long period of time, and 
leading up to that election, I’d heard the term used about 
arrogance and whether this government had lost touch. As I 
campaigned for the six or . . . the month or so, the four or five 
weeks of the election call in harvest, I found that yes, it was. 
That this is an arrogant government that has never been more 
arrogant in its nine years of office than it is being over this 
issue, this amalgamation issue. 
 
And certainly during the election campaign and after, we 
attended, all of us on our side of the House, attended a number 
of tax revolt meetings. Tax revolt meetings where people would 
get up and they would voice their opinion on how disgusted 
they were with the form of government that we have and how 
they were downloading onto the school divisions and things like 
that, and the RMs not really having any control over what the 
school divisions were charging for tax. But of course the RMs 
had to be the tax collector. 
 
(1445) 
 
And there was a lot of anger shown towards those RMs, but 
nothing compared to the anger that is being shown at these last 
round of task force meetings regarding rural amalgamation — 
not rural amalgamation but amalgamation of municipal 
governments. 
 
You know, the sound bite of a thousand governments for a 
million people sounds very good, and yes, maybe something 
should be done. But when you send out a person such as Mr. 
Garcea who has gone then and taken it so far down the road of 
saying we need about a hundred or a hundred and twenty RMs 
or districts, and if you look at the Stabler report, that’s even less 
— down to 11 to 17 — it just makes absolutely no sense at all. 
 
So when you see people at these task force meetings . . . And I 
would really invite, invite the members opposite to go to some 
of these task force meetings and feel the wrath, hear how people 
feel when government comes along and tries to take their local 
governance away. And they’re fighting mad over it and they’re 
going to continue to fight mad . . . be fighting mad over it. 
 
Not once in the last election did we hear anything about forced 
amalgamation from the NDP government, and nothing either 
from the Liberal government. You didn’t hear a darn word 
about amalgamation. 
 
And I really find it’s just another form of deception that the 
people in Saskatchewan and especially in the smaller villages, 
hamlets, and towns, and RMs are facing. Not a word mentioned 
about it and seven months later here comes a government with a 
new mandate, going to slam it down their throats. 
 
And they’re fighting mad over it. They don’t want to take it, 
and they won’t take it any longer. And that’s again, when you 
hear these task force meetings and people are literally hanging 
from the rafters because they’re fighting mad. They’ve got a 
very good reason. 
 
You know, I look at the government opposite and I don’t know 
how people in our province can feel comfortable with pretty 

much anything that’s going to happen over the next few 
months. The PST (provincial sales tax) off-reserve purchases, 
not a word mentioned. We were called all sorts of names for 
mentioning it during the election; not a word mentioned from 
the other side. Six to seven months later — bang — there it is. 
 
And not that I’m against it but I think it’s a deception that this 
government is showing, and the arrogance that this government 
is showing that is very, very hard for the people of 
Saskatchewan to stomach. And I think you’re going to be 
hearing more and more anti-government sentiment as this 
carries on. If it doesn’t get derailed before it gets to its landing 
station, I guess. 
 
We’re not only told this is going ahead come hell or high water, 
it is going ahead prior to the completion of the Garcea task 
force final report. And I question, you know, what is the point 
of spending $750,000, sending a professor and a number of 
board people out to hear what are the concerns with this. And 
then we hear the minister standing up and saying it doesn’t 
matter when they get done or what they say in the final report. 
I’ll be taking it to caucus in April and we’ll be deciding on the 
issue. 
 
Now what is the point of having these task force meetings? 
Every one of these task force meetings that were held, week 
prior and this week, have had representation from the 
Saskatchewan Party. At least one of our MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) sometimes 2, 3, and 4 of our MLAs will 
be at these task force meetings not only to present the position 
of the Saskatchewan Party, but maybe more importantly is to 
hear the position of the local governments — the municipalities, 
the villages, and the hamlets in that area. 
 
And we’re certainly hearing it — we’re hearing it loud and 
clear. And I think maybe that’s why you’ll notice during 
question period that the whole issue was centred around 
amalgamation and the arrogance of the government to force 
amalgamation, because that’s certainly what this report is 
looking to say. 
 
The minister has said the legislation will be in place before the 
Garcea report is issued. If those members on the hearing 
committee stay till the end of that hearing I really question why 
they would do that. When the government comes out and says 
they’ll be going to cabinet and making a decision, while these 
fellows go from community to community and catch the wrath 
and the anger of what’s out there, I really wonder why they’re 
even sitting on there. 
 
I mean as soon as I would have heard that I would have had to 
say to the minister, either you’re going to listen to what we 
report, or you go ahead and make the decision on your own and 
we’ll say goodbye. And that’s certainly the position of the 
minister. 
 
When the minister in . . . and when the minister in this House is 
asking . . . or denying any rumour that they are talking about 
freezing or confiscating municipal reserves — funds built up 
through sound management and leadership practices through 
the RMs or local villages — that should not even be an issue. It 
shouldn’t even be on the table. 
 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

I look in the paper today, Tuesday, April 11; SARM calls an 
emergency meeting. And it quotes the minister here. It says: 
 

There are many, many options you can look at. I’m not 
speculating at all (that) what we’re going to do with the 
reserves because (nowhere) we’re nowhere near (making) 
. . . those (decisions) . . . 

 
I would say to the minister, that’s not your decision. What is he 
doing saying, well don’t worry, we haven’t got to making that 
decision yet. If it was up to me, get out of the ball game — 
that’s not your decision. We’ll handle our money, where we 
collected it, how we want to, and when we want to. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I really question the minister when he talks that way. 
 
Still the government has not told us how this is going to save 
any money and how it is going to provide better service. Yet, 
they are going to force it on the people outside the cities in both 
rural and small urban municipalities whether they want to or 
not. 
 
And I often think when I think of that whole theory about 
forcing it and not knowing if there’s any economic savings, Mr. 
Minister . . . I’ve started up a number of businesses, a couple of 
businesses on my own, as I’ve mentioned before, through the 
traffic safety industry more than anything else. But I know if I 
had to . . . and on the farm, I mean I’m currently farming. If I 
went to a bank and said, you know I need $100,000 to get this 
thing going, to get this thing on the road to working. The bank 
would first of all say what is your business plan? Does it make 
economic sense? Because I’ll guarantee there isn’t a bank in the 
province that is going to give me money to set this thing on the 
road when I’ve got no business plan. 
 
And that’s exactly what this task force is travelling around 
saying: we’ve got to go down to 100 RMs or local governance 
with no business plan. 
 
The member from Saltcoats mentioned earlier that, is there 
going to be any savings? And, of course, I really believe that 
this task force nor this government wants to touch that issue. 
They don’t want to touch that issue because I would hazard a 
guess that they know what that answer is going to be. And it’s 
not going to be in their favour. 
 
They’re going to go through this whole episode of creating 100 
municipal governments, and then realizing and having to go to 
the taxpayer and say: yeah, well it does cost a little bit more but 
we never thought of studying that before. And I would think 
that that would be the very first thing I would study if I was 
going to go to a model like that. 
 
They have not shown the benefits, yet the government seems 
intent on dictating from Regina how these people govern 
themselves. It’s the height of central planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people in rural Saskatchewan and in 
these villages . . . I can think of a village that I’ve been to — a 
couple of meetings that they’ve had over this very issue, the 
village of Odessa — who is extremely upset with the way 
things are going and the whole intent of this amalgamation. 
 
They have gone and they have raised money for their local rink; 

they have raised money in their community for everything that 
they have wanted in their community. They feel quite 
comfortable with their tax rate, with their mill rate. They feel 
comfortable with the services that their local government has to 
offer, and yet they may not have control of that. It seems like 
it’s a central planning thing to be eaten up or absorbed by the 
bigger communities around. And I think it’s a real shame. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to second the 
motion put forward by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
cancel any plans to legislate forced amalgamation for 
Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I want to start out by quoting the 1992 report “A 
Call to Action — Reforming and Revitalizing Urban 
Government in Saskatchewan”. Now that report was written by 
the members’ opposite chief of staff Reg Downs. And what 
does Reg say? Change is inevitable, is what Reggie says. 
 
Now I note that the member from Saltcoats and also the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley would like to offer a ride 
to the Minister of Municipal Government. It seems to me they 
should be giving Reggie a ride. 
 
I’d like to give this House a few statistics so that you can put 
into context Mr. Downs’ statement that change is inevitable. 
 
In 1936, Mr. Speaker, this province had 143,000 farms; in 1996 
down to 57,000 farms. Change is inevitable. That was a 40 per 
cent reduction. 
 
In 1951, Mr. Speaker, 50 per cent of the labour force in this 
province was employed in agriculture; in 1996, 16 per cent of 
the labour force employed in agriculture. 
 
We have today, Mr. Speaker, 836 municipalities serving a 
population of a little over 1 million people. That works out to 
one municipal government for every 1,225 people. Contrast that 
with Manitoba that did municipal restructuring some 30 years 
ago. They have one municipality for every 5,665 people. 
 
Now what does the party opposite say when we decide to 
consult with the people through the Garcea task force and talk 
about restructuring? What they do is fearmongering. They use 
inflammatory language and they go out, they create a rumour, 
and then they repeat the rumour. And they repeat it and repeat it 
until it becomes propaganda. And they figure if they repeat it 
often enough people will start to believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that reminds me very much of the woman who 
wrote the world’s dirtiest limerick and won a contest. Mr. 
Speaker, that woman was phoned up by CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio and was asked to read her dirty 
limerick for the people of Saskatchewan. And she said oh no, 
Mr. Speaker, couldn’t possibly do that because it’s so dirty. I’ve 
only written it; I can’t say it out loud. 
 
They prevailed upon her to read out this dirty limerick. So she 
said, I’ll tell you what I’ll do — I’ll substitute the word duh for 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

every dirty word in my limerick. So then she started, and she 
read: 
 

duh duh duh, duh duh duh, duh duh duh, 
duh duh duh, duh duh duh, duh duh duh, 
duh duh duh duh duh, 
duh duh duh duh duh, 
duh duh duh duh duh duh, forced amalgamation. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, in the words of a former premier of 
this province, there is so much more we can be. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there is so much more that the rural municipalities can 
be as well. 
 
I sincerely hope that at SARM’s emergency meeting on 
Monday, that they come up with some proposals to voluntarily 
manage change. I wish they were meeting in Saskatoon, by the 
way, so that the city of Saskatoon could get the benefit of the 
hotel rooms and the meals and so forth. But I appreciate that 
they’re meeting here in Regina. 
 
But it is important for those RM people to understand that 
change, as Mr. Downs says, change is inevitable. There are 
problems in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it would be 
my hope that they will voluntarily recognize the problems, the 
challenges, and the opportunities. 
 
Now I don’t know if they will voluntarily recognize this 
because I know in 1993, the government introduced the 
intercommunity co-operation program. We provided over a 
million dollars over three years to foster inter-municipal 
co-operation in service delivery. This resulted in the voluntary 
consolidation of a rural municipality with two adjoining RMs. 
 
In 1996, again aware of the need to recognize that change is 
inevitable and it is important for people to manage change, the 
government introduced the service district Act. That provided 
for the voluntary creation of district boards to assist 
municipalities with the delivery of regional services. 
 
(1500) 
 
In May, 1996, the province, SUMA, and SARM voluntarily 
signed a memorandum of understanding to prepare a plan to 
build strong municipalities. The municipal restructuring 
assistance program was introduced in 1997 to facilitate 
amalgamation and this program resulted in the dissolution of 
four villages and the amalgamation of one RM, and was 
subsequently discontinued last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have said well why 
would anybody be interested in restructuring. I’m going to give 
you some good solid reasons why you might be interested in 
restructuring. 
 
Administrative duplication. Look at the fact that you have RM 
offices side by side with town offices. Look at the fact that there 
is little emergency planning and little emergency planning 
capabilities within this province in the RMs. 
 
Look at the fact that the legislation requires that all of those 

RMs have to have individual separate audits rather than being 
able to pool together and have audits for like-minded and 
regionally situated RMs. Look at the fact that land use and 
planning and development activities are difficult if not 
impossible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t care about any of those things, 
which I would think that the member from Saltcoats, a former 
reeve, certainly does care about, take a drive through rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to drive out into rural Saskatchewan 
and to see the change in the landscape. Mr. Speaker, by the end 
of this year almost 300 wooden elevators will have disappeared 
from the prairie landscape. They’re going to be replaced by 40 
concrete, inland grain terminals. 
 
Now those concrete structures might be very good, but consider 
the implication to the municipalities. The one RM that has that 
inland grain terminal does very well from a taxation point of 
view. But what happens to all the other RMs surrounding that 
inland grain terminal? I’ll tell you what happens, Mr. Speaker. 
Where it used to be that farmers would drive 8 to 10 miles to 
that wonderful symbol of Saskatchewan, the wooden elevator, 
to deliver their grain, now they’re driving up to 100 kilometres 
to be able to deliver their grain. And the impact, the impact, Mr. 
Speaker is that all those roads are taking a pounding. 
 
In the meantime though, because that inland grain terminal is 
located in only one municipality, all the municipalities that are 
on that hub have no taxation abilities. They are becoming 
have-not RMs and this is something, it seems to me, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking us to understand and be 
aware of — to be aware of the changing economic 
circumstances and the eroding population in our rural 
communities and our towns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, having listened to the debate from 
the members opposite, I have to tell you I will not be supporting 
their motion. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, 
seconded by the member for Regina Northeast. And my 
amendment would be to: 
 

Delete all words after government and insert the following: 
 

To continue its consultative process and to work together 
with SUMA and with SARM to identify areas of needed 
change. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s truly 
a pleasure for me to enter into this very timely and very 
important debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the member from Saltcoats 
indicated that he has served some time on municipal council as 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

a reeve. And I must admit, last night, Mr. Speaker, I attempted 
to go through the bios of all the opposition members to try to 
establish if any of them had spent any previous time on 
municipal government. And I’ll quite freely admit, Mr. 
Speaker, that the reading was so boring I fell asleep, so I didn’t 
get through it all. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I did also have the opportunity from 1980 to 
1990 to serve for 10 consecutive years as a municipal councillor 
for division 5 of the RM of Clayton 333, an RM from which at 
that time, Mr. Speaker, I had the dubious honour of retiring 
after 10 consecutive years in municipal politics without a 
defeat. 
 
But it was . . . As an RM, Mr. Speaker, that’s located in 
northeastern part of Saskatchewan, an area that primarily was 
developed — or opened up I suppose is the right term to use — 
after the Second World War, basically, Mr. Speaker, because 
it’s a heavily wooded area. And the event I guess of the Second 
World War and from that the addition of heavy duty caterpillar 
tractors much facilitated the opening up of that land and the 
settling of it. So much of that land was settled by returned 
veterans from the Second World War and my dad was one of 
them. 
 
So it is a relatively newly developed part of Saskatchewan. And 
remembering the stories that were told by my grandfather and 
my father of the days of the various contractors that would 
move through the area toward the purposes of contracting the 
opening up, clearing of land, it seems to me — and I could be 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, so don’t hold me to this — but it seems to 
me I remember a story in the back of my mind, they talked 
about a contractor that called himself Bulldoze Bob. Apparently 
he could only bulldoze downhill. 
 
I’m not sure of that story, Mr. Speaker, but during that period of 
time on municipal council, I found it very interesting because if 
you look at some of the facts that surround the time, having got 
on council in 1980 — and I’m working from memory here — 
but I believe at that time the population of the RM of Clayton 
was somewhere in the area of 1,450 people. Some 10 years later 
that population had dropped to just over a thousand, I think it 
was a thousand and fifteen, a thousand and seventeen if I 
remember correctly. 
 
And in, oh a few weeks back, I talked to the secretary-treasurer 
or administrator, as he’s known now, in the same RM who was 
there when I served, and he tells me the population is just 
slightly over 800. 
 
So you can see over that period of time there’s been a 
significant drop in the population of the RM as it is right across 
this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. It’s just a clear 
indication of the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan that has 
been going on since the 1930s. With that of course will come 
change. 
 
And when this issue has . . . I’ve had the opportunity to spend 
countless hours on the telephone talking to some of my former 
councillors that served the same time I did. I’ve also had the 
opportunity to speak to some individuals who are councillors 
now in the RM of Clayton as well as some of my farm friends 
out there, some retired, some still active on the farm. 

The interesting part, Mr. Speaker, that of the nearly two dozen 
different people I’ve spoke to over the last couple of weeks on 
this particular issue, none of them — not one of them — has 
suggested there isn’t need for change. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they 
have all agreed there is need for change. 
 
So the need for change is not the debate, Mr. Speaker, the need 
for change is not the debate — that is a generally accepted rule. 
What the debate is, is what form will this change take. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say, that is exactly what our 
government is doing. Our government is out there seeking 
consultation from the general public as to what that change will 
take. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We listen. We listen. 
 
Mr. Harper: — We listen, we listen, Mr. Speaker, not like the 
members opposite who spend most of their time — most of 
their time — with their heads buried in the sand; not listening to 
the people but rather trying to dictate to them. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is quite clearly indicated in the writings of their chief 
of staff which has . . . in abbreviated language would say that 
there is no opportunity for the consultation process. 
 
It’s a time for action, a time for thrusting their way upon 
Saskatchewan people rather than listening to what 
Saskatchewan people want and what Saskatchewan people 
need. Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, there is nobody better 
in determining the future of this province than the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — At the same time, Mr. Speaker, in talking to 
over two dozen people who are directly involved in local 
government, either formerly or presently, or live out there 
full-time, they have not only suggested that there is need for 
change to address the fact that governance of this province — 
rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan — governance of 
this province has not been changed, has not been updated to 
meet the changing times, to meet the challenges that face us. 
 
But what they’re saying is that we also have to be forward 
looking when we’re putting together that change and that 
proposal for change. We cannot base that on the past. We 
cannot base those solutions and suggestions and ideas on the 
present. We have to have a combination of the experience that 
we’ve learned from the past, the realities of the present, and 
what the future holds. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the direction that we have to look at it 
collectively in this province by all people in Saskatchewan. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say, is what our 
government is doing. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the only province in 
Canada to have more local governance than Saskatchewan is 
the province of Quebec. But Quebec, Mr. Speaker, has a 
population of seven million people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the 
opportunity to participate in this debate, and I hope from my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, you will have ascertained that my 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

support will not be for their motion but will be for our 
amendment. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My past life has been 
municipal government. I spent eight years on the SARM board 
so I can identify. And they’re out of touch. I’m sorry — totally 
out of touch. 
 
When they talk about a consultative approach and this amended 
motion, Clay just said . . . Mr. Serby, the hon. member said that 
he was going to go ahead with it without more consultative 
approach. I wish the hon. member from North Battleford had 
had the courage to attend the meeting in . . . the Garcea meeting 
in North Battleford and would have seen how his councils in his 
area felt about amalgamations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he would have . . . if he was a true . . . if he wants 
support in the Battlefords again, he should have been there and 
should have listened to what the people were saying . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, when you talk about 
aluminum pots, the hon. member has had it over his head most 
of his life. So, I would suggest he . . . And I’m not about to 
share the pot with him. 
 
When we talk about amalgamation and forced amalgamation, I 
personally don’t . . . there’s nothing wrong with amalgamation. 
The word forced is what’s bothering us in Saskatchewan. That’s 
the word. It’s to take the word forced out of it and it all flies. 
 
The mover of the resolution also suggested that our population, 
our farmers have dropped in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I 
agree with that. But the RMs in Saskatchewan are not 
governing people but are governing property. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that since we have the most roads, or 
next to the most roads in Canada, we in rural Saskatchewan 
have to be concerned about where we are going with that road 
project because those people need services to their land not, as 
the minister or the hon. member suggests, it’s based on 
population. Population in rural Saskatchewan has very little to 
do with government right now. 
 
I found it very interesting today that in question period when it 
was suggested that a number of businesses in the Regina area 
were closing, or could possibly be closing on account of the 
taxation thing, the Premier said it was a good idea if those 
businesses closed. Here we are in Saskatchewan fighting to 
enhance business, and there is the Premier in his wisdom saying 
it’s all right if the businesses close, it’s fine. That’s what he 
said, I’m sorry. That’s what he said. 
 
Those members across invented the word arrogant. I mean they 
have no idea what is going on in Saskatchewan. I have to think 
that they don’t even know what’s going on in their 
constituencies. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But their constituencies are Regina and 

Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Well, I’m not sure that they even know what’s 
going on in there, Mr. Speaker. They’re quite lost I would say 
— extremely lost I would say. 
 
The words forced amalgamation also has a tendency to . . . that 
precede the vision in rural-urban thing and that is an issue that 
is a concern to us as a party. It doesn’t seem to bother the 
members across that that split is there. It’s a concern because 
they . . . well they’ve sort of given up in rural Saskatchewan I 
would have to say. They’ve given up totally on what’s going on 
in there. 
 
To think that big is better is an ill-conceived conception, I 
would say. It’s not reasonable. We did that in ’91 and ’92. We 
amalgamated a number of health boards and created a monster 
in Saskatchewan — major monster. And if we talk and think 
that this amalgamation or this forced amalgamation is going to 
be any different, it will only be worse. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan are extremely tired of being told 
how it shall be in Saskatchewan by a government that has 
totally lost touch with reality. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The gates are down, the lights are 
flashing, but the train isn’t coming. 
 
Mr. Peters: — You wouldn’t know, hon. member. You 
wouldn’t know. You wouldn’t recognize a flashing light if you 
saw it. 
 
The seizure, or the suggested fact that they are going to seize 
the reserves of municipalities in Saskatchewan — and the 
minister of course denied that he was going to seize them — but 
the bigger . . . I look at the bigger picture. I see these 
amalgamations happening and those reserves being put into that 
pot and wasted. The money will be wasted there because of 
inefficiencies. 
 
I also find it very difficult and almost impossible to understand 
that the government has not done a feasibility study. Everything 
else we do in business has to have a feasibility study, and here 
we are suggesting that we’re going to amalgamate and go to 
125 municipalities; and if we go to the Stabler report, which is 
even more devastating to the province and we haven’t done a 
study. Nobody says . . . nobody has any idea what that cost 
might be, that amalgamation cost might be, or the costs that 
happen after . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We get it. We’ve got 
it. We’re hearing it every day. 
 
When SARM calls an emergency meeting, and that has never, 
ever happened in its history, 95 years of history, and we don’t 
. . . and we have an emergency debate in regards to 
amalgamation, I think we have some really major concerns with 
that amalgamation. 
 
We have no problem with the word amalgamation. Our concern 
and RMs and villages’ concern is the word, forced 
amalgamation. We would live with amalgamation, but forced 
amalgamation isn’t an option in rural Saskatchewan. And when 
I talk about rural Saskatchewan, I talk about everything but 
Saskatoon and Regina. 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

I would like to . . . What I see in this amalgamation is a simple 
move to increase the provincial power and reduce the voice of 
Saskatchewan. And I will be supporting the motion presented 
by the member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to enter this 
debate and talk a little bit about what the content of this debate 
is about. 
 
The issue of need for change in rural Saskatchewan is not being 
questioned by anybody. SARM, SUMA, in fact rural reeves, 
rural councillors, understand that there is a need for change. 
Change is inevitable. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about going out and seeking input 
from the public. Mr. Speaker, this government has hired an 
independent body, a review committee, to go out and seek input 
from the people of Saskatchewan without putting politics into 
it. I challenge the members opposite to take the same view. 
They attend the meetings; they’re putting forward their party 
position. We’re not doing that. 
 
We want to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We don’t 
want to tell them what’s best for them. We are not taking the 
opportunity to play politics. This is about listening to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now unfortunately the members opposite don’t believe in 
letting people listen to the people of Saskatchewan. They want 
to go out and make political points. It’s not about doing the 
right thing — it’s about politics. And that’s a sad world we live 
in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the words of Mr. Fred Suttor, 
who served for many years as . . . in the municipal field for over 
40 years. He’s a municipal administrator in various locations 
and also served as a municipal adviser for the Department of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
He points out that rural municipalities had more responsibilities 
in the 1920s, ’30s, and ’40s than they do now; that they have 
changed, not necessarily for the good over the last number of 
years. 
 
He also goes on to point out that the municipal system appears 
today much as it did in 1914 — just as it did in 1914. Most of 
the rural municipalities were formed with an area of nine 
townships 18 miles by 18 miles . . . or more than 85 years ago, 
Mr. Speaker, more than 85 years ago. 
 
The typical rural municipality of the pre-1930s had a population 
of 3,000; has now been reduced to 400, yet the makeup of rural 
municipalities remains unchanged despite depopulation and 
fewer responsibilities and computerization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Suttor who spent many, many years as a 
municipal adviser and in municipal politics, sees the need for 
change. Further, Mr. Suttor talks about a number of reports 
from the 1950s and ’60s that recommended consolidation due to 
changes in demographics and in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about that there are many, many 
reasons to examine the restructure of our municipalities, both 

urban and rural. 
 
Now the one difficulty you have talking about this issue with 
people that are directly involved is it’s very difficult to ask 
4,500 municipal officials to voluntarily amalgamate or to look 
at an issue that really deals with their own sense of security and 
their job security. This is like asking employees in a company 
to cut their own job — something that’s very difficult to do. 
 
We must take a much broader look at the issue of municipal 
amalgamation and move forward in a way that meets the needs 
of the people of rural Saskatchewan, and in fact meets the needs 
of people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s without doubt that there are many things that 
are driving change in our province, both rural and urban, many 
of them outside the individual control, outside municipal 
control; in fact, outside provincial control. We now have an 
economy that’s largely controlled by large multinational 
corporations from outside this country’s boundaries. 
 
In the last 30 years, Saskatchewan population has shifted. Our 
rural population has decreased by 25 per cent in the last 30 
years; the urban population has increased by 29 per cent. It’s 
occurring. Change is inevitable. 
 
The current system of local government was established about a 
hundred years ago. Local governments were established to 
provide local services in a very different environment than 
exists today. They were established when automobiles travelled 
at one-tenth the speed they’re capable of travelling today, and 
computers were just a thing of the future. 
 
Municipal structure hasn’t kept pace, so I think those things 
alone indicate the need for some changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our world is changing. We need to keep pace with 
that change. Mr. Speaker, the people who live in the 
municipalities in rural Saskatchewan are no different than the 
people who live in urban municipalities. We’re faced with 
change that is largely outside our control and we need to look at 
what needs to be done to meet those needs. 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, cities are spending 11 per cent of 
their revenue on governance while villages spend 31 per cent. 
Are they getting their bang for their buck in delivering the 
services that need to be delivered in those communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this government is doing is consulting the 
people of Saskatchewan. We’re not out there fearmongering. 
We’re not predetermining what the outcomes are going to be. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that report comes in, this government 
will debate, will debate openly with the people what we are 
looking at doing regarding changes to legislation for municipal 
and rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to clearly indicate to you that I support the 
amendment and not the original motion. I’d like to thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

the member from Regina Dewdney for his sudden interest in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of legislative renewal or municipal 
amalgamation should not be to serve the best interests of the 
provincial government or municipal governments. Any change 
in structure at the municipal level must be driven by what’s in 
the best interests of the taxpayer. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
that means delivery of the best possible services and economic 
development opportunities at the lowest possible cost to the 
taxpayer. 
 
This government has commissioned two studies into municipal 
amalgamation: the Garcea task force on municipal legislative 
renewal and the Functional Economic Areas in Saskatchewan: 
A Framework for Municipal Restructuring by Jack Stabler and 
Rose Olfert. 
 
Between the two studies, Mr. Speaker, the cost to the taxpayer 
of this province is already approaching a million dollars, and 
the meter is still running. Clear evidence, Mr. Speaker, that the 
interests of the taxpayer are not the main concern of this 
government. 
 
The Garcea interim report recommends a reduction from about 
850 urban and rural municipalities to about 125. And the 
Stabler report, which has been completed without public 
consultations, recommends a reduction to either 11 or 17 
municipal districts in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, neither the Garcea or Stabler reports contain any 
cost-benefit analysis to back up their recommendations. And 
this is the fatal flaw that severely undermines the credibility of 
both reports and exposes them for just what they are — 
academic conclusions bought and paid for by this coalition 
government to justify their long-term desire to gain more 
control over all municipal governments in this province, be they 
rural or urban. 
 
Is the status quo the only reasonable option, Mr. Speaker? Of 
course not. 
 
(1530) 
 
Municipalities should always be searching for ways to improve 
and or share responsibilities and authority if it is in the best 
interest of the taxpayer. In other words, Mr. Speaker, service 
delivery should be organized to deliver the best possible service 
at the lowest possible cost to the taxpayer. 
 
A principle lost on this government, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced 
by their commissioning of not one but two reports which will 
end up costing in excess of a million dollars, while the minister 
boasts that he will decide what will be in the Garcea final 
report. And he will do that and take his recommendation to 
cabinet in April, Mr. Speaker — some four months before the 
completion of the Garcea report. 
 
In some cases, Mr. Speaker, the best way to achieve this goal of 
best and cheapest service delivery may be municipal 
amalgamation. But this should only happen when it is in the 
best interests of the taxpayer, not because it is imposed upon 
them by the provincial government. Almost everyone agrees, 

Mr. Speaker, that municipal amalgamation forced from the top 
down by the provincial government is the wrong approach to 
municipal renewal and will not work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever I see a government that is intent on 
doing something that is opposed by almost everyone who is 
familiar with the issue, I ask myself, what is the real agenda? 
 
It’s clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that their agenda is twofold. With 
the present number of municipalities it’s just too difficult for 
the provincial government to maintain absolute control over 
local government. Mr. Speaker, most people would tell you 
that’s a good thing. But this government doesn’t like it. 
 
It’s no coincidence that Garcea’s interim report recommends 
granting the right to deficit finance to these large municipal 
governments. Because, Mr. Speaker, this government’s main 
agenda is to create municipal districts large enough that the 
provincial government can download more of the cost of health, 
education, and highways as well as lesser items too numerous to 
mention onto municipal taxpayers. 
 
Of course, local taxes would skyrocket and the new larger 
municipalities would soon be deeply in debt. But this 
government believes that with a smooth selling job they could 
come out smelling like a rose. 
 
Of course, all the blame for higher taxes and deficit financing 
and poor services would be placed squarely on the shoulders of 
the municipal governments. Meanwhile without the financial 
burden of the services now downloaded onto municipal 
government, the provincial government thinks it would appear 
to be the very picture of fiscal responsibility and good 
management. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have some bad news for the members 
opposite. The people of Saskatchewan are a lot smarter than 
you give them credit for. If you do this, they will punish you at 
election time for as long as any of you show the poor judgment 
to let your name stand. 
 
The members opposite like to talk about this document that I 
have in my hand, “A Call to Action — Reforming and 
Revitalizing Urban Government in Saskatchewan.” This is a 
meeting . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who wrote that? Who wrote that . . . 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’m going to tell you, I’m going to tell you who 
wrote it. This is a meeting, this is a meeting of 98 municipalities 
in 1992. Mr. Reg Downs was a staff member who recorded the 
results. 
 
The findings of which meeting are as follows, and they’re 
organized into 10 points. The word amalgamation, and 
especially enforced amalgamation, do not appear in the findings 
of this. 
 
Number one . . . here’s the findings. Listen up: 
 

We need to immediately begin the process of urban 
government reform. We need to clearly define the role and 
the responsibilities of each level of government. We need 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

to give urban government a level of authority equal to its 
level of responsibility. The need for greater local 
autonomy. The need for municipalities to co-operate more 
with one another and share services, facilities, and ideas. 
The need for urban government structure that’s able to 
adapt to change quickly and effectively . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The time for debate has 
expired. We’ve come to the time for the questions and answers 
— question and answer. And just to remind hon. members in 
the interest of time to keep your questions very brief and 
concise, to those that participate in the debates. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the member from Saskatoon Southeast. Madam Member, you 
quoted from that document. I wonder if you could tell us 
whether or not a person writing the report is the author, or the 
persons commissioning and directing are the author. Such as the 
SUMA president, Ted Cholod; the mayor Lloyd Hock of 
Biggar; Mayor Terry Haggart of Eastend; Mayor Morris Taylor 
of Tisdale, city commissioner Jim Penrod of Moose Jaw. Is the 
staff person the author, or is the authority that commissioned, 
outlined, debated and decided on the report that author? 
 
Further, Madam, it says in here that the Crown corporations be 
required to pay property taxes. That was one of the 
recommendations from this report. Madam, why has your 
government not followed through on these recommendations? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Well, first of all, answering the second question, 
I would say that the member opposite knows full well that this 
government has moved on giving grants in lieu of taxes for 
Crown corporations. He knows that and he should not be trying 
to persuade this House that the opposite is true. 
 
Now secondly he asks about whether or not a staff person is the 
author of the report or is it the people who put their names to 
the report. I was not involved in the process of the drafting of 
that 1992 report, so I have no idea just how much of Mr. 
Downs’s fingerprints are on that report, though I would suggest 
that they probably are very considerable. And I would say it’s a 
tricky question to answer. He might ask that same question of 
another process, the Channel Lake process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question for the hon. member from Battleford-Cut Knife. You 
know it seems to me this whole resolution before the House this 
afternoon is based on a false premise. It’s based on a false 
premise that there’s some plan for forced amalgamation. It 
seems to me the hon. member is saying that they repeat that 
there’s a plan for forced amalgamation, they repeat it enough 
times someone will actually believe them. 
 
And so . . . but the fact is there is no plan for forced 
amalgamation. There is no plan to confiscate reserves. The 
Liberal party last fall campaigned on a platform and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Liberals are absolutely committed to 
ensuring any changes to municipal structure be driven at 
the grassroots level. We will foster an atmosphere of 
dialogue but emphasize changes must be approved at the 
municipal level. 
 

Now my question for the member for Battleford-Cut Knife: was 
he in the House today when the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
said we’re going to consult with the people, we’re listening to 
the people, we’re going to act on what we hear from the people, 
there will be no confiscation of reserves? 
 
The Speaker: — All right, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I did hear, and I 
did hear the minister, but I have . . . he hasn’t answered 
questions this week so why would I start to think that he 
answered that question right. 
 
I would also . . . and it’s very definite in Garcea’s report, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is something going to happen and I guess . . . 
and whether it’s forced amalgamation . . . we’re suggesting it 
will be forced amalgamation and . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast. She talked about grants 
in lieu and the whole issue of property tax. And I will agree that 
government does offer grants in lieu, but just in the city of 
Regina alone they asked for $12 million. And when you look at 
last year, this past year’s budget, the total budget for all of the 
province was 9 million. 
 
So it’s easy to give grants in lieu when you give them to the 
amount that you want to give and not proportionate to the 
property tax. And I wonder if that’s what that member means is 
that that’s just perfectly fine if grants are in lieu to the amount 
that you feel is correct? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat again that the 
Crown corporations do provide grants in lieu of taxes to the 
municipalities. And I would also like to point out that if the 
member opposite truly believes what he says and the position 
he’s taking, perhaps he could join with us and talk to the federal 
government about their grants and their structure and the 
sufficiency thereof. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I should preface this by 
saying, I’m only a cabinet minister — I’m only a member of 
Executive Council — but nonetheless I have not seen any plan, 
any government report for forced amalgamation. I am not aware 
of any government report for forced amalgamation. I’m not 
aware of any government report for confiscation of reserves. 
 
I challenge, and I ask the minister . . . the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, you say there’s a government report for 
forced amalgamation; I’m not aware of any such thing. Will 
you file it with the House now? Will you file what you say is a 
government report for forced amalgamation, a government 
report for confiscation of reserves? I’ve never seen any such 
thing and I challenge you that no such thing exists. 
 
Mr. Peters: — If the hon. minister had had the courage and 
foresight to appear at the North Battleford meeting he would 
have recognized that. It’s in the Garcea report. You don’t have 
to read very good to see what’s in that report. And I’m sorry, 
125 municipalities, 125 municipalities in Saskatchewan — 
that’s what they’re suggesting. 
 
So that’s what’s in Garcea report . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . $750,000 worth of money put 
in . . . 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone. In his remarks he was 
talking about that he was told that there would be amalgamation 
and confiscation. And I was wondering if he could reveal to the 
House who it was that did the telling. By whom were you told? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you go 
through the Garcea report and the interim Garcea report it talks 
about directive, consultative approach which is really . . . seems 
an awful lot like forced amalgamation. 
 
And I really think the whole Garcea report is what got people, 
and has got people so incensed, and that’s why you’re having 
800 and 500 and 600 showing up at these task force meetings 
day in and day out. 
 
So it’s nothing that we’re trying to do as far as fearmongering. 
They simply read the report that your government 
commissioned for $750,000. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The 
member is unable to say who it was that told them. Would the 
member then not admit that he’s rather drawing a long bow 
talking about amalgamation — that he’s just making that up? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I disagree totally that we’re drawing any 
sort of a long bow conclusion from a report that the government 
has commissioned. There is not a person from one of the RMs 
— whether it’s a RM in my constituency, out of my 
constituency, whether it’s a town, village, or hamlet — that 
haven’t assumed, and they’re the ones that are talking about 
forced amalgamation. It didn’t start on this side. 
 
I am being told by so many of them that when you look at the 
Garcea report and you read the Garcea report, that that’s what 
they’re saying, is forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard 
quite a bit in the last while about forced amalgamation. And I’m 
quoting from a document called “A Call to Action — 
Reforming and Revitalizing Urban Government in 
Saskatchewan”. It says: 
 

It is vital that this process begin immediately. Too often 
when important changes are necessary, people wait for the 
perfect moment to begin — when they have enough 
money, when everyone’s in complete agreement, when 
they are certain they will have all the answers. All these 
conditions will never exist. The perfect moment to begin is 
now. 

 
What I want to know is, we’ve been accused for the last two 
weeks of offering forced amalgamation, yet here’s a document 
that says, from the chief of staff of the Sask Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The time for the 
75-minute debate has expired. 
 
(1545) 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Research and Development 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the end 
of my remarks today, I will be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the partnership of 
government, universities, research institutes, and private 
organizations in their continuing investment in and 
commitment to research and development in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday last I was pleased to rise in this 
House and inform members about our government’s 
commitment to research and development. Our government 
recently approved a $25 million investment in the Canadian 
Light Source Synchrotron through the Department of Economic 
and Co-operative Development. I’ll say more about that later in 
my remarks, Mr. Speaker, but I’d like to outline some of our 
other investments in this very important area. 
 
Introduced as part of the 2000-2001 provincial budget, a $10 
million innovation and science fund will help renew and build 
research infrastructure at this province’s universities and 
research institutions, and perhaps more importantly will help to 
lever new federal research spending in Saskatchewan through 
matched funding programs. 
 
It is anticipated that the fund will lever a R&D (research and 
development) pool of up to a hundred million dollars over the 
next four years. The fund will act as the province’s source of 
funding for Saskatchewan-based projects submitted to the 
Canada Foundation for Innovation, in addition to research 
initiatives of strategic importance to the province. 
 
Research and development is key to our future prosperity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — If you look at it in an illustrated sort of a way, 
you can think of it as a wheel of fortune or perhaps the 
ever-expanding circles that you observe when you drop one 
small pebble in a pond. 
 
R&D produces knowledge and technology used to enhance our 
productivity. Productivity enhancements generate economic 
growth. Economic growth attracts more investment. More 
investment allows further innovation, creating new programs 
and services, and forming new partnerships. So you can see, 
Mr. Speaker, that one small investment from the province can 
help create ever-widening circles of activity. 
 
Traditionally, Saskatchewan spends less on research and 
development than most other Canadian provinces. In addition, 
based on Statistics Canada figures from 1995, federal spending 
on R&D in Saskatchewan is only 80 per cent of the national 
average. Furthermore, Saskatchewan universities only receive 
about 2.8 per cent of National Research Council’s grants and 
funding — 20 per cent below the national average and seventh 
among the provinces. 
 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

But, Mr. Speaker, that was then and this is now. Recent and 
anticipated initiatives by the federal government have provided 
provinces with a unique opportunity to promote research and 
development. A prime example of this is the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation which will be investing $1.9 billion 
in research infrastructure across the country. 
 
While the CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation) will fund up 
to 40 per cent of a project’s capital cost, the remaining 60 per 
cent must come from other sources. Due to the public nature of 
many of these projects, matching provincial government 
funding is generally required. In May of 1999, the Medical 
Research Council of Canada and the province of Saskatchewan 
agreed to a cost-shared regional partnership program designed 
to increase the level of medical research expenditure in the 
province. This initiative, which is cost-shared 50/50, levered $5 
million in new federal funding for research in this province. 
 
Another example of this collaborative approach is the efforts 
between the province, the National Research Council, and other 
stakeholders in the development of the Saskatchewan 
innovation blueprint. It is anticipated that the implementation of 
recommendations in the blueprint will lead to important 
cost-shared initiatives with federal agencies. 
 
Further initiatives in this vein include the creation of the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research which replaces the 
Medical Research Council of Canada this month. The institutes 
will consist of networks drawing together top researchers from 
across the country, and will focus on a full spectrum of research 
activities. 
 
It is imperative for the province to support Saskatchewan 
researchers and research programs to help ensure that these 
individuals and these programs are key elements in the health 
institutes being established, and that a significant portion of 
CIHR (Canadian Institutes of Health Research) activity will be 
constructed in Saskatchewan. 
 
So why establish a science and innovation fund? It’s simple, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to keep those circles in the pond growing 
ever wider. Given the federal government’s clear direction in 
increasing research expenditures and partnering with 
stakeholders and other governments, Saskatchewan needs a 
mechanism to capitalize on such opportunities. 
 
The innovation and science fund will help renew and build the 
research infrastructure at the province’s universities and 
research institutions, and help lever new federal research 
spending in Saskatchewan. 
 
GenServe Laboratories officially opened last week at 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon. Money from the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Agri-Food Innovation Fund — funded 
two-thirds by federal government and one-third by the province 
— was used to buy equipment while the Saskatchewan 
Research Council will pay GenServe’s $140,000 annual 
operating costs for the first three years. 
 
To quote from Agriculture Minister Lyle Vanclief: “Research is 
a key to the future strength of Saskatchewan’s farmers and its 
farm economy.” 
 

Work done at the new Saskatoon lab will create opportunities 
for farmers down the road. At the same time as we are creating 
opportunities for farmers, Mr. Speaker, this type of project 
creates high-paying, high-tech jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And Saskatchewan is doing very well in the area of creating 
jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker; in fact, very well. In fact information 
released by StatsCanada on Friday showed that Saskatchewan 
led Western Canada in job growth over the last 12 months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Fifteen thousand more people were employed last 
month than in March of 1999. More good news for the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — The economic impact of agricultural 
biotechnology research and development in Saskatchewan is of 
great importance. There are approximately 25 R&D 
organizations located in the province. The sector now employs 
1,240 workers with salaries totalling $43 million. 
 
Innovation Place — located in Saskatoon in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Meewasin and right next to the University of 
Saskatchewan — is recognized as one of the most successful 
research and development parks in North America. The primary 
focus of this research park was to create a science and 
technology incubator to foster the growth of the advanced 
technology industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, research and development is of major 
importance to our universities, and early last week we 
announced funding for key research and development projects 
at Saskatchewan’s two universities. 
 
This funding is provided through the provincial strategic 
initiative fund and the Canada Foundation for Innovation, and 
provides money for a specialized electron microscope at the 
University of Saskatchewan, a toxicity laboratory at the 
University of Saskatchewan, an information laboratory at the U 
of S (University of Saskatchewan) department of computer 
science, and an electron microscope for energy and 
environmental research at the University of Regina. Didn’t want 
to leave them out. 
 
The provincial government is also providing $50,000 for the 
purchase of a lab scale dryer at the U of S bioprocessing lab. 
The strategic investment fund, renamed from the strategic 
initiative funds in the recent budget, complements the new $10 
million innovation and science fund. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said at the beginning of my remarks 
today that I would have more to say about the Canadian Light 
Source Synchrotron. The Synchrotron is the largest scientific 
project in Canadian history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — This project is going to put Saskatchewan on the 
scientific map. Researchers and scientists from all over Canada 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

— indeed from all over the world — will recognize the work 
being done there as leading edge. 
 
As I explained in my member’s statement, the Synchrotron 
represents unprecedented opportunities for Saskatoon and for 
the province as a whole — 2,000 person-years of employment 
in the construction phase alone plus 200 permanent positions 
when completed. It will generate $35 million per year in new 
research and development spending, and greatly increase 
Saskatchewan’s ability to make value-added products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — As you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rings of 
economic opportunity are continuing to widen. The facility at 
the University of Saskatchewan will be used by researchers in 
the fields of agriculture, biotechnology, mining, petrochemicals, 
and medicine, to name just a few. It will attract research 
projects from across Canada and around the world. Who knows, 
perhaps someone will figure out how to prevent coyotes from 
scavenging a dead cow so that we can reduce firearms needed 
to shoot them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — But seriously, Mr. Speaker, the Synchrotron 
project is a fine example of our co-operative approach to 
economic development in this province. I guess when you 
throw a stone, sometimes you hit a coyote. 
 
The Synchrotron project is a fine example of our co-operative 
approach to economic development in this province — 
government, the private sector, the universities, and the 
community all working together. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Regina South: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the partnership of 
government, universities, research institutes, and private 
organizations in their continuing investment in and 
commitment to research and development in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to follow the member for Saskatoon Meewasin who 
has outlined in some detail as to why the universities, why the 
research facilities are so important, not only to the economy of 
Saskatoon and the economy of Regina, but in fact all of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. And in fact this afternoon I want to 
spend some time talking about what these research centres do. 
 
Some of the importance as to what they mean for 
Saskatchewan’s new economy, and some of the bright lights 
that I think we have to look forward to over the coming years as 
these research centres really hit their stride. 
 
As we know, and I think the member from Meewasin stated, the 
first research centre — the real true research park that we saw 

here in Saskatchewan — was the Innovation Place park which 
is attached to the University of Saskatchewan, started in 
1996-97, conceptually started then. The first tenants, of course, 
moved in in about 1980. 
 
This park, as I understand, is largely modelled on some of the 
redevelopment that was being done down in Denver, Colorado. 
I don’t know if anybody has been down to Denver from this 
Assembly, but it’s very interesting to see how they’ve started 
to, back in the mid ‘70s, started to see how they could work on 
commercializing more of the knowledge and research which 
was being done in their institutions. 
 
I was down in Denver, Colorado about six years ago. And it is 
in fact a truly impressive thing to go and take a look at the 
redevelopment that is happening in the south part of that city, 
almost all of it directly attached to the knowledge-based 
industries. 
 
Saskatoon has seen many of these same benefits. And in fact 
Innovation Place is really a place that all Saskatchewan people 
can be extremely proud of. It is architecturally beautiful, it is 
extremely important economically in the attachment that it has 
to universities. The fact that it attracts in the kind of world-class 
researchers that it does, and the fact that we have been able to 
incubate some very good technological companies on this site 
is, I think, testament to the good work that’s been done over the 
last 20-some years. 
 
We need not go into a great deal of detail talking about some of 
the companies up there, but obviously we look at POS, we look 
at SED Systems, some of the very important work that’s being 
done in all sorts of fields. Everything from biotechnology 
through to space science research. 
 
In fact, Saskatoon has really benefited from this, as has 
Saskatchewan. It’s helped put us, I think, on the map 
technologically. 
 
In terms of Saskatoon’s success and the University of 
Saskatchewan . . . And I want to spend a couple of minutes 
talking about this. It may seem strange for a Regina member to 
do so, but the success that Saskatoon’s Innovation Place has, in 
fact, is felt throughout the province. 
 
And I like the analogy that the member from Meewasin used 
about dropping the pebble and the ripples ever expanding. 
Because it’s very much what has happened through these 
research centres. 
 
(1600) 
 
Take, for example, the work that has been done by a small 
company called Biostar. Now Biostar in fact was a 
commercialized venture. It was spun off — and I think it was 
1994, 1993-94 — spun off really to commercialize a lot of the 
research that was being done by VIDO, which was the 
Veterinary Infectious Disease Organization at the university. 
 
What the university was finding, and what the researchers were 
finding, is that there was a lot of good research happening. But 
there was a problem with getting it from the researchers’ 
notebooks and tables and concepts and theories into production 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

so it could, in fact, help people involved in animal husbandry. 
 
Biostar was set up largely to do this and really in many ways, it 
was one of our first . . . what you would call now dot-com type 
companies. This is the first of our real technological companies 
that started to spin off from the research that had been done at 
the universities. 
 
Biostar has been a real success in terms of not only what it is 
highlighting for Saskatoon’s researchers at the University of 
Saskatchewan, but also the impact it’s having in the cattle 
industry both here in Saskatchewan and throughout North 
America. 
 
VIDO and the work that the researchers do there is excellent 
work, but the difficulty is in commercializing it. And this is 
really one of the tough pieces that our researchers are facing 
these days, is how to get that information out, how do we 
commercialize it, and how do we get it into the hands of people 
who really need it. 
 
The first speech I gave in this House in 1995, I spent some time 
talking about our need as a government and our need as a 
legislature to focus in very sincerely on how we move more 
work from simply being on the microscope to being in the 
marketplace. And this continues to be a very important part of 
our potential for economic development in this province. 
 
I think that the examples in Saskatoon at Innovation Place — 
and whether it’s through Biostar or whether it’s through other 
examples of what’s going on up there — are in fact very telling. 
I want to say for example, in the area of agriculture, one of the 
other very important initiatives which has come out of that 
research park and come out of what is happening in Saskatoon 
at Innovation Place is their work on new plants and in fact a 
planned biotechnology. 
 
It’s interesting to note that 35 years ago there was no canola 
grown in this province, which is really quite amazing if you 
think about it. Canola, as we all know, is a huge crop now in 
terms of both the overall value of it and also just in terms of the 
number of acres that are seeded. Thirty-five years ago there was 
no canola planted in this province, and so it is in fact a 
testament I think to the work which was done at the university, 
the work which has been done by our researchers, that we are 
now a world leader in canola growth and production. 
 
Canola is an interesting example because it also, I think, points 
to the debate that over 35 years we have seen the introduction 
of this new crop. We’ve seen it go through various 
improvements, various enhancements, various modifications, 
and various names. 
 
It leads us now today to a new set of issues that I think we need 
to grapple with and that is the question of genetic modification 
of foods — GM foods or GMOs, whichever you want to call 
them — genetic modified organisms. This is the next generation 
of issues which the researchers in our knowledge centres are 
going to have to grapple with. And in fact I believe that 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon is extremely well positioned to 
deal with this. 
 
I received an e-mail — as I assume most members did — a few 

days ago from Mr. Peter McCann. And he was talking about . . . 
It’s entitled simply April 2000 issue of the AgBiotech Bulletin. 
I don’t know if members take much chance to read these issues, 
but I found it very interesting in terms of what Mr. McCann had 
to say. 
 
He was talking particularly about genetic modification of food, 
and of the work which is being done at the universities. And he 
says, and I quote here from his e-mail: 
 

Its impact (this is agriculture genomics) on agriculture, 
nutrition and human health could be of similar magnitude 
to the impact of the computer on other spheres of activity. 

 
I thought that was kind of an interesting thought. I had not 
really thought about this before. But the work which is being 
done in Saskatoon could have that kind of magnitude. 
 
If you think about it in terms of canola and you go back and talk 
about what is happening there, here we have a $3 billion 
industry — a $3 billion industry based on canola, largely 
worked on here in Saskatchewan — and the changes are 
continuing to happen. 
 
The debate though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an important one, 
and I found that this was the most interesting part of the balance 
of the e-mail, that it talks about the debate that we are seeing 
throughout North America, throughout Europe, and in much of 
Asia about the impact of genetic modified foods. 
 
As the member for Kindersley mentioned earlier today, he and I 
spent two weeks in Germany this summer on a parliamentary 
exchange. As part of that, it was interesting to listen to the 
dialogue that was happening among German legislators over the 
question of genetically modified crops. There is a huge concern, 
particularly in Europe, that GMOs and GM foods are in fact 
going to be a . . . are not . . . are going to be a harm. 
 
This is an issue I think many of us here do not spend enough 
time contemplating; which we do not spend enough time 
contemplating in our universities, and I dare say that we do not 
spend enough time contemplating here in the legislature. 
 
There is a move on in Europe which would require canola 
which is genetically modified to be sold separate from canola 
which is not genetically modified. Now for those members 
opposite who are farmers, they will know the problems that you 
have by combining these two sets of seeds. 
 
Can you imagine having to keep track of the genetic modified 
crop and keep it separate from the other. Today most of it is 
simply meshed together. And it’s, as I understand, virtually 
impossible to tell apart. 
 
But in Europe, the contemplation by European Parliament and 
particularly led by France, is that they want to see a separation 
of these kind of food products. This is an important issue and is 
something that, if you think about its implications for 
Saskatchewan farmers, could have some very potential adverse 
effects. 
 
Most of us when we think about the genetic modified foods, we 
may have heard the fact that McCains has decided not to accept 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

genetically modified potatoes. This is not an issue which 
particular affects Saskatchewan, but I think it does show the 
fact that there is a large Canadian company — Canada being 
one of the leaders in genetic modified food products and the 
development of it — a major Canadian company that is refusing 
to accept them not on scientific grounds, not on scientific 
grounds, but on the ground that the public is not accepting of it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you don’t have to worry about it 
because the marketplace will take care of it. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well now this is an interesting comment. 
The member for Humboldt says we don’t need to worry about it 
because the marketplace will take care of it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. The argument is that the 
cost of it is just too high. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well this is exactly the problem you’ve got 
and if you . . . let me retrace my steps for a minute. 
 
The problem we have in Europe is that the European Parliament 
may very well, particularly driven by France which is 
attempting to protect its own markets, may very well poison the 
atmosphere for genetically modified food products. 
 
Not out of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the members 
opposite find this to be a laughing matter, I’m not sure their 
constituents would share the humour in this. But what we’ve 
got is a situation here where we may very well be having to deal 
with this on a very quick basis. The marketplace is in fact not 
accepting, not accepting of genetic modified food. And this is a 
real problem for us. 
 
Fine, in potatoes it may not be a big issue because at this point 
we don’t have a great deal of potato production. But when we 
. . . if we translate that through to what France is looking at 
doing in terms of genetic modified canola, imagine what the 
impact is on farmers in your riding. Imagine what the impact is 
if all of a sudden the switch is going to have to be away from 
genetic modified canola, which has been grown — I think I’ve 
got the number here in terms of the number of bushels. I think 
it’s 75 per cent, one the member said — 75 percentage is 
modified. 
 
Now we’re fortunate in Saskatchewan that people have had 
some time to adjust to this. I think because of our close 
connection to the growth of these products, that we have a 
better understanding in many ways of what in fact 
biotechnology — agricultural biotechnology means. 
 
In fact is says here in this newsletter that I’m reading, an Angus 
Reid poll was conducted. And the Angus Reid poll says 87 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people know about genetically modified 
food products. 
 
This is in fact the highest in Canada, with the exception of 
Vancouver which also had 87 per cent noting awareness. The 
difficulty we have is that fully two-thirds of people either said 
that there would be no benefits, were uncertain of the benefits, 
or believe that there would be a detrimental effect of having 
genetically modified products. 
 

This is a fairly major concern if you think about it and the 
potential impact it has for us. Certainly a third of people were 
able to identify the fact it improves yields; certainly people 
were able to say it may reduce the amount of reliance upon 
pesticides; people believe that it may provide better food 
quality. But there is an underlying concern among many people 
that these foods are not . . . that they are somehow foreign, and 
as such are not what we should be dedicating ourselves to. 
 
I say this not because it is the number one problem, but because 
it is obviously an issue we need to deal with to make sure that 
the marketplace does not get too far out of sync with what we 
are doing in the science labs and under the microscope. 
 
And I think that this is a very important issue for our 
researchers to deal with. The University of Saskatchewan is in 
fact aware of this and they note that they are looking at ways to 
deal with this very issue. 
 
For instance, there is an increased focus at our university and 
across . . . the University of Saskatchewan and across the nation 
on the need to focus in on the ethics, the environmental 
concern, the science of it, of growing these various products. 
And I think that this is a real positive to see that they are 
starting to move into these other directions, because this is an 
extremely important area for all us. 
 
I think it’s also very interesting to note the important scientific 
work which is being outside of agriculture in other areas. For 
instance, I note that the Royal University Hospital has 
developed a . . . I don’t want to say a vaccine, but they have 
developed a treatment for cold sores. This is of course . . . the 
University of Saskatchewan’s medical research as we know in 
the past has certainly . . . when Sylvia Fedoruk was Lieutenant 
Governor I think she was a symbol in many ways of some of 
the great scientific research that had been done in this province 
around cobalt medicine. 
 
We are now moving, and we see this happening with our 
researchers, a movement towards dealing with other issues. The 
fact that they are being able to deal with the virus that causes 
cold sores is, I think, a very important part of what’s happening 
at the university in terms of medical research. 
 
Saskatoon does not have a monopoly on all the good news and 
all the good research though — I hate to tell my Saskatoon 
colleagues. There is some dissension I notice among our ranks 
that they may have, but Regina is only a step or two behind I 
think in terms of the work that we are seeing down here, that we 
are seeing being done here by our researchers. 
 
I’m very proud to talk about the new research park which is 
being built adjacent to my riding. Over at the University of 
Regina, on the south part of the campus in what is becoming 
known as the knowledge corridor, there are two new buildings 
under construction. These two new buildings will focus . . . in 
many ways they will mirror what has happened up at 
Innovation Place and they will serve as an incubator for many 
new businesses and new technological advances. 
 
The two areas that the researchers at the University of Regina 
have identified that they want to focus in on are changes around 
petroleum, both the technological: how do we extract more 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

petroleum; how do we add value to the petroleum; how do we 
deal with Saskatchewan’s heavy oil resources; how do we make 
that more profitable for companies to extract. 
 
At the same time the Petroleum Technology Research Centre is 
also dealing with some of the environmental issues. So for 
instance, we know that there is a partnership going on with the 
federal government to deal with the greenhouse gas issue. I 
think most members in this House were shocked when we 
found that the Prime Minister had signed the Kyoto Agreement 
without any real knowledge as to what its impact would be on 
our western economy, but nevertheless we are stepping up to 
the plate in an attempt to deal with our commitments under that. 
 
(1615) 
 
The Technology Research Centre will have, as a large part of it, 
research dedicated to deal with climate change and the 
mitigation of the problem the greenhouse gas has caused. There 
was an article certainly in The Globe and Mail a few weeks ago 
that members probably did see showing that Saskatchewan has 
in fact seen an increase in its greenhouse gas production. 
 
This is problematic but not completely unexpected. Obviously 
most of our electrical production comes from burning fossil 
fuels, burning coal in particular, and unless we scrub the carbon 
dioxide it’s exercised out into the environment. As we know the 
economic growth, particularly in north central Saskatchewan, 
has facilitated and required the addition of more coal-fired 
plants and we have increased the amount of power production 
down in the Estevan area in order to produce more electrical 
energy. The result is that we have increased the amount of CO2 
that we are dumping into the atmosphere. Now that in itself 
may be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Venting. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Sorry, yes, venting into the atmosphere . . . 
may be of some concern, but I am pleased that Saskatchewan is 
also partnering with the federal government and with industry 
to provide research to deal with how to mitigate some of those 
impacts. 
 
And I think that this is one of the things that in the next decade 
that we will see great advances on that will stand the members 
. . . successive members from Regina will have the ability to 
stand and talk about the great things that are happening only a 
few blocks from here in terms of dealing with climate change 
and new technology around it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t spend too 
much longer today talking, extolling the virtues of what is 
happening in our province. But I do want to say that the work 
which is happening along the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre, I want to highlight for just a couple of minutes. 
 
This centre is something I’m very proud of. It is something that 
this government has worked very hard on and it is something 
the university really I think shows the partnership and the great 
things that can happen when we work together. But the initial 
idea for it came about probably some eight years ago when 

professor, I believe it was Amit Chakma, brought forward the 
suggestion that he wanted to do a world centre for petroleum 
research here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think at the time a lot of people, you know, thought, oh that’s 
kind of an interesting idea; that’s a nice idea. I don’t know what 
that means but shouldn’t it be in some OPEC (Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries) nation? Why are we doing it 
here? 
 
And maybe the members opposite I think at the time would 
think, why would we not do it in Alberta? But we do it here 
because in fact the people that have the idea and the person in 
this very particular case that had the vision, makes his home 
here; was attracted to work at the University of Regina and in 
fact is one of the great minds in Canadian science today and is 
recognized as such. 
 
Out of that idea some eight years ago, we have been able to 
now get to the point where Petroleum Technology Research 
Institute has been established, a research centre has been 
established, with a series of very practical objectives. I think 
people often think what R&D work is all, you know, kind of out 
there; that there is not in fact the practical applications that there 
are to it. 
 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre is a very practical, 
down to earth, grounded, perhaps undergrounded, you might 
say, an issue. Its purpose first and foremost is to enhance the 
production and value of Saskatchewan oil and natural gas 
resources with an emphasis on heavy oil. One of the difficulties 
we have in this province, as you know, is the fact that we do not 
have a great amount of sweet light crude oil. We have a great 
deal of heavy oil and, of course as members from oil producing 
ridings will know, it is in fact more expensive to pull out and 
refine. 
 
We have certainly seem some advantages . . . or some 
advancements rather, in the past years in Weyburn where we 
have seen the new CO2 initiative which will greatly enhance 
heavy oil recovery out of the existing wells. We have certainly 
seen some enhancements here in Regina as we deal with the 
heavy oil upgrader which has, despite some concerns over the 
way it was financed, nevertheless is a boon to our economy. 
 
This technological centre though at the university which is 
located not many blocks from this Legislative Building is also 
aimed at developing new technology to improve the economic 
health of the oil industry, expand employment, and reduce 
industry costs. 
 
It is interesting to note this is not a partnership we are doing 
solely by ourselves. Nor is this a partnership we’re doing solely 
. . . or in a simple partnership with government. This is a 
partnership that involves industry as well, as well as our 
universities. It is showing great co-operation I think among 
these various groups. 
 
It is also going to have the added benefit of allowing a spinoff 
within the university of a more academic group of petroleum 
engineers which will hopefully focus even further in on how we 
can continue to make better use of our oil resources. 
 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

Saskatchewan’s oil sector, as you know, is extremely important, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this province’s economic growth. It is 
extremely important to the fiscal position that this province 
finds itself in, and it is something that we need to turn our 
attention to making sure that we are able to maximize the value 
while mitigating the adverse effects of it. This is exactly what 
the PTRC, the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, is 
envisioned to do and what I believe it will do. 
 
I find it very interesting that within this belt of lands around us 
that’s Wascana Park, we have within it such a venerable 
institution as the Legislative Assembly that speaks to the vision 
that the leaders a hundred years ago had — nearly a hundred 
years now — had about what they thought this province would 
be and the vision of a democracy and the ability to move this 
province forward. 
 
A few kilometres down the park, we have now a new centre 
which is looking at how we preserve and enhance the economic 
benefits that we’ve inherited in this province. And I think that 
this really does say a great deal about the testament of 
Saskatchewan people and the foresight of our governments, 
both the governments of old, the government of today, and 
governments that may come down the road. 
 
The partnerships that we’ve established in our universities, the 
partnerships we’ve established with academics, the partnerships 
we’ve established with industry are today, and will tomorrow, 
continue to provide benefits to ordinary Saskatchewan people 
— whether you’re the farmer growing canola on your field or 
you’re the young guy out working in the oil rigs. These things 
have a very real impact on your life, and it’s something that I 
think we are all very proud of. 
 
We need to remember that in order to farm smart, in order to 
work smart, we need to make sure that we are fully integrated 
right from the microscope through to the marketplace. And that 
is what these funds are doing, that is what the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin spoke for, and that is what this 
government believes in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased to second the motion 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin and to follow 
her excellent comments in support of this. And with that, I’ll 
take my seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to begin speaking to the motion 
put forward by the member from Saskatoon Meewasin and I’ll 
end with an amendment that I would like to put forward. 
 
The motion as it begins is that it says that this Assembly 
encourage the partnership of government and universities, 
research institutes and so on and so forth. I find that rather 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, because what exactly does it mean to 
have a partnership with the government? And if this means 
assistance with funding, I’m not so sure that the partnership in 
many cases will work because the government has cut back on 
many aspects of funding for education and research. 
 
And, more likely, I feel that partnership would mean that the 
government would have some facet of control, which means 

that they’d control what would be researched, they’d control 
who would research it, they would control where it would be 
researched, they would control how it would be researched. 
And historically, Mr. Speaker, that’s what a partnership with an 
NDP government is all about. 
 
But if the partnership does mean funding, then I suggest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that those research areas that will get the 
government funds will be those that will give the results that the 
government has pre-decided that they want to get. 
 
And if the members opposite want examples of this, we need 
only mention the Garcea report and the Stabler report. They 
were both paid research papers and they were told prior to 
doing their work and prior to being paid, what the mandate was 
and what the results were supposed to tell. 
 
Anyone that might have an innovative or original idea . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Anyone with an original or innovative idea, I 
suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would find out that there 
would be no funds available. 
 
Another question that needs answering on this motion is in the 
terms, partnership — I’ve lost my place. It’s interesting that the 
members opposite bring about all the sorts of research that has 
been done, and in addition, they keep bragging about the 
Synchrotron to the University of Saskatchewan. And I don’t 
question that that was an excellent project. It’s a great asset for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But the other member opposite was bragging and went on for 
some length about the development of canola. Interestingly 
enough, canola was developed by Dr. Keith Downey, and it was 
financed not by this government, it wasn’t financed by the 
Saskatchewan government — it was financed by Agriculture 
Canada. So although it has been a great development, 
Saskatchewan cannot run with the fame for that. 
 
I also find it’s rather interesting when they talk about research and 
all the money and interest that the government has in research, but 
then in today’s Leader Post there’s an article that states, and I 
quote: 
 

The University of Saskatchewan is behind a $100-million 
eight ball when it comes to looking after its billion dollars 
worth of facilities, according to the senior university official. 
 
Becker estimates the U of S needs to spend 10 to 11 per cent 
of the total value of its facilities to catch up on maintenance 
that’s been put of for lack of . . . (funding). 
 
Unless the problem is addressed, the university could end up 
with more problems, like closing entire buildings. It has 
already shut down the College building, and the Physical . . . 
Building was torn down after an emergency evacuation. 
 
The people who used the buildings had to find new space but 
that’s not easy . . . 

 
So I suggest that if this government is backing research, the U of S 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

is the facility where a lot of research is done, so somehow I think 
we should keep the buildings standing so that we could have 
research in the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have three school-age children — three 
daughters — and all of them, in my beliefs, are exceptional, but 
the eldest, Crystal, is very close to completing her grade 12 and 
she has some direction now of where she wants her future to go, 
what she wants to do. Her marks are exceptional. She’s very 
focused, she’s very self-disciplined, and she is a very diligent 
student. 
 
She will complete her grade 12. She’ll have four level 30 maths, 
she’s going to have four level 30 sciences, and two level 30 
socials. And I have no doubts that she’ll pursue her education 
and career in the scientific field. So access to research facilities 
and research data will really assist her, Mr. Speaker, in 
furthering her education. And I think that’s great. 
 
The sad thing is, at the end of the day, I really truly fear that 
she’ll have to leave the province to seek employment in her 
scientific field. And I will read all about her successes that 
she’ll achieve somewhere out of the province rather than within 
it. 
 
We can talk about partnerships all we want, but if we do 
nothing to provide the environment to encourage people and 
industries to stay here in Saskatchewan who are going to time 
and time watch our young people be trained here to work 
elsewhere. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Meewasin mentioned that we 
have created jobs, that we’re doing very well in creative jobs. 
But how many of those jobs are high-tech jobs? That’s not 
included in the statistics that she’s been giving us. Or how 
many of them were just minimum wage jobs? 
 
And that’s not to say that we don’t need minimum wage jobs — 
we do. But we also need to keep our youngest and our brightest 
here. We need to give the environment that will encourage them 
to stay here. 
 
Another point in the private members’ motion is partnership for 
development, and again, I find that very, very interesting. This 
government has stifled development and they mentioned 
economic development more than any other government has 
before it. It doesn’t supply the tax breaks, it doesn’t supply the 
infrastructure, it doesn’t supply the incentives, it doesn’t supply 
enough freedom from restrictions to encourage any economic 
development. Any development that takes place in this province 
is in spite of this government; it is not because of it. 
 
(1630) 
 
And in the member’s motion, they want to drag in private 
organization into their partnership agreement. Why is that not 
surprising? I find it rather ironic that the members opposite 
want to draw private organizations into the partnership since 
we’ve seen an exodus of private businesses from this province 
since this government was in power in 1991. And a good 
example of that is the Canadian Bible College which has just 
announced that it too will be leaving. 
 

The government’s policies and so-called initiatives have stifled 
growth and productivity in Saskatchewan, and this recent 
budget, which some businesses had hoped would be the lifeline, 
has in fact turned out to be another reason for businesses to 
leave the province. 
 
So we can form partnerships all we want, but with this 
government we’ll still be contending with a massive brain 
drain, and it concerns me that my daughter will be one of them. 
Real economic development needs people; and with this 
province’s tax system, they’re leaving the province. 
 
The government has shown no initiative in supporting 
education in the last budget, and in fact, they’ve implemented a 
few cuts to post-secondary students. So because of that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to move the following amendment, 
seconded by the member from Redberry: 
 

That the following words after “Assembly” be deleted and 
substituted with: 
 
regrets that the provincial government’s recent decisions 
that affect students negatively, such as the claw back of 
millennium scholarships, the cancellation of the provincial 
student job program with no warning, and the ending of the 
six-month interest-free period of student loans. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
speak to the motion to begin with, and I will speak to the 
amendment later. 
 
The private members’ motion really is too little. The 
government really has given too little too late for a partnership 
with government, and too little too late with the universities, 
and too little too late with the research institutes and private 
organizations. 
 
And I’d like to just speak on a bit concerning research and 
development. It is an extremely important aspect in this 
province. And we have entered a technological-based society — 
a global village — and over the years, we have seen many 
benefits from this research and development. But before we go 
on to that, we have to use these technologies in research and 
development to the benefit of our province and of our people. 
 
And in many places in rural Saskatchewan, these research and 
development innovations and initiatives can be used to create 
businesses and economic development in rural areas. The only 
problem with that is we have to have the infrastructure in place 
in rural Saskatchewan and small-town Saskatchewan to take 
advantage of these developments. 
 
And the first thing a company does when it goes to look at 
building a plant or making an investment in a community, it 
looks at the roads. You have to have good roads to get your 
equipment and materials in and out and your finished product 
. . . produce of course. If you have a manufacturing capacity, 
you’ll have families that are living and working in the 
community, and you’ll need proper schooling for the students 
of the employees of these . . . 
 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for a ruling as to 
whether or not the amendment is in order. As from what I heard 
of the amendment and your explanation of it, it doesn’t seem to 
speak to any of the subject matter that was contained in the 
original motion. So I would therefore ask for a ruling. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On the 
point of order as raised by the member opposite, this 
amendment deals directly with education which is part of the 
amendment put forward by that member, Mr. Speaker. So it is 
very relevant and very cogent to the arguments being presented. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin for raising the point of order, and I thank 
the Government House Leader for addressing the said point of 
order. 
 
The Chair made a choice or a decision when the amendment 
was presented that in fact the amendment is in order in that in 
private members’ day motions, amendments have to be clearly 
off target or off of the subject to be deemed to be out of order. 
We have a tradition in this Assembly of motions and 
amendments being considered to be in order. 
 
And I’ll further point out as the Opposition House Leader said, 
both tend to surround education and the amendment clearly 
does, so the amendment is in order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. I 
will continue to speak to the motion and to the amendment. As I 
was saying, in order to take advantage of these new innovations 
with research and development in rural towns and areas, we 
need to have a good basis for economic development. 
 
And when you have factories, you need people to work at those 
factories. And the companies that are setting up these factories 
look at the community involved and see if they have proper 
roads to get material in and out and getting their finished 
product out to markets, also schools for the children of the 
people that work at the factories, and of course hospitals and 
proper health care. 
 
And in too many cases we have seen that companies take a look 
at many areas in Saskatchewan and they’ve seen that the 
government has not kept up the standards and the infrastructure 
to warrant investments in areas. And I believe the government 
has made a big deal about their support of research and 
development and the partnership with universities. But they also 
have to take a look at what we’re going to do with those 
innovations, and put in the infrastructure that will allow the 
people of Saskatchewan to take advantage of all the things 
coming out of the innovations. 
 
Also the other problem that we have, in the past 10 years we’ve 
seen our best and brightest leaving Saskatchewan because of the 
government’s lack of commitment to our youth. And it is rather 
ironic that the member opposite draws private organizations 
into the debate since we have seen an exodus of business since 
this government came into power in 1991. 
 

The government’s policy and so-called initiatives have stifled 
growth and productivity in Saskatchewan and this budget — 
which some businesses hope would be a lifeline — has in fact 
turned out to be more of a deterrent. 
 
As Saskatchewan is dealing with the brain drain, this 
government has done little to nothing to address this very 
serious problem. Students have left our province in droves and 
all we have left is reading about their successes elsewhere. 
 
It’s commonly said that Saskatchewan people have built many 
economies in this world. They’ve built the economy of Alberta 
and built many areas in the United States. And our youth and 
our graduates have gone around the world to develop and better 
the economies in the areas that they’ve lived in. It’s up to this 
government to keep these people in Saskatchewan to better the 
province that they were born in. 
 
It is typical of the NDP to talk about their commitment to 
students and the future of our province when actually they have 
done more to hold back our youth. 
 
A recent example is the cancellation of the student summer 
employment program. This is a plan that many students and 
businesses have counted on in the past, and it’s . . . many 
students have relied on this program to assist in paying for their 
education and pay down some of their student loan debt. The 
private businesses that the member opposite brings into debate 
also counted on this program as a means to hire local students 
and give them some real world experience. 
 
And it’s very important that our young people have this 
experience, not only in the financial resources that are very 
important, but to give the young people experience and 
experience of working in Saskatchewan. Unfortunately this 
government has taken that away from them. 
 
But all that they have to . . . have done to students does not end 
there. They have cancelled the interest-free portion of the 
student loan repayment program. Now this interest-free status 
allowed students a six-month grace period to find gainful 
employment before they had to begin repayment on their loans. 
 
To make matters worse, this is . . . that our graduating students 
will have to leave Saskatchewan because of the lack of 
professional opportunity here at home. 
 
Now I’d just like to read a bit of comments from our leader and 
our party concerning these various announcements. 
 
As our news release said, the NDP targets students in the latest 
tax. Saskatchewan post-secondary students are the latest victim 
of the NDP tax grab. And on April 4th our leader, Mr. Elwin 
Hermanson, blasted the NDP-Liberal . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I wish to remind the hon. 
member for Redberry Lake that it is not proper to use the proper 
names of currently sitting members of the Legislative 
Assembly. To be more specific, you did so in naming your 
party leader. So I’d just ask that you be aware of the prohibition 
on using proper names. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I thought I was in 



April 11, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

order because I was quoting from a document but I will 
certainly name the member. He’s the Saskatchewan Party leader 
and the Leader of the Official Opposition. 
 
Now he blasted the NDP-Liberal coalition government for 
cancelling the six-month interest free grace period on the 
Saskatchewan student loans following graduation. And the 
minister . . . NDP-Liberal Finance minister was bragging about 
a $350 a year tax benefit for graduating students. 
 
Now what really happened is the government were doing a bit 
of a shell game. In an example, if a graduating student has 
$10,000 Saskatchewan student loan at the current interest rate 
of 9.5 per cent, the latest tax grab would cost him $475. That’s 
$125 more than your so-called tax cut. 
 
And that’s I guess another example of the student loan tax grab 
by the NDP-Liberal government. Both the NDP and the 
Liberals promised to make post-secondary education more 
accessible and now both are inflicting a massive tax grab on 
Saskatchewan students. 
 
Also a recent announcement was concerning the millennium 
scholarship fund. Now the government confiscated this 
millennium scholarship fund from almost 4,000 students. And 
it’s just an example of what the government has been doing. 
 
And what kind of a message does that give to our young 
people? When our young people go out and apply for these 
loans and scholarships and after they’ve been accepted, they 
must have felt terrible when they realized that they weren’t 
going to receive any benefit from it. 
 
And the NDP government was keeping $9.8 million in 
millennium scholarship funds that should have gone to 
thousands of Saskatchewan students. Now this money should 
have been returned immediately to the students, but 
unfortunately haven’t. As was said, that Mr. Romanow was 
acting like a confused Robin Hood, stealing from the poor to 
give to the rich. The millennium scholarships were supposed to 
help students, not Mr. Romanow’s NDP government. 
 
Now the federal government set up the millennium scholarship 
fund in 1999 to increase access to post-secondary education to 
low- and middle-income students as a complement to existing 
provincial program. This year 3,870 Saskatchewan students 
won millennium scholarships averaging $2,500 each. 
 
And that money should have went to the students, but instead 
the NDP government decided to confiscate the millennium 
scholarships from needy students . . . from needy students 
neither increases accessibility to post-secondary education nor 
complement provincial aid programs. And the government is 
simply reducing provincial student bursaries by the amount of 
each student’s federal millennium scholarship and then using 
the windfall money to backfill provincial operating grants to the 
university. 
 
(1645) 
 
It goes on to say that the big losers in this scholarship 
confiscation scheme are the very students the millennium 
scholarship fund was intended to help. And I think it’s very 

poor judgment on the part of the provincial government to have 
this happen. 
 
But it’s not only the post-secondary students that have been hurt 
by this government. K to 12 education has been grossly 
underfunded by this government to the tune of $380 million. 
School boards have seen increased dependency on local 
taxpayers. Education portion of property taxes in many areas 
pay more than 40 per cent of the local school boards. In several 
school districts the local taxes account for over 7 per cent of the 
funding. 
 
Throughout this winter I attended many, many tax revolt 
meetings, and that was the biggest problem that the people of 
Redberry Lake had. They were very upset of the high portion of 
the tax that they had to pay on their property tax bill. And this 
government just never, never got the hint and are not helping 
the Saskatchewan people, especially in rural Saskatchewan, 
with this problem. 
 
And this goes to the very heart of other issues that come up. 
The amalgamation situation — the forced amalgamation — and 
what effect it has . . . it will have on rural Saskatchewan and the 
dampening effect it will have on economic activity. And it goes 
on and on. 
 
Of course the biggest problem for businesses in Saskatchewan 
after they’ve had the research and development and they’ve had 
the innovations and the products to bring forward, if they want 
to set up a shop in Saskatchewan, there’s a high tax rate that 
they have to pay in the province. And the recent expanded PST 
is just another dampening effect on businesses in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to second the amendment 
put forward by the member from Watrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, today we’re talking about a Bill 
to promote research and development. But what has this 
government done for post-secondary education? I guess we’d 
have to say there’s a lot of problems in post-secondary 
education as there is in all education in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
We believe that we should promote our youth, but let’s look at 
the facts of the government. 
 
I had a girl in my constituency, a young lady actually, who was 
attending the University of Saskatchewan. She applied . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no, she probably will be now though. 
She applied in September. She received a student loan. This 
young lady got married in October. Upon getting married, she 
had to file a new form and was then informed that she would 
not be now eligible for the student loan. 
 
So now, not only is she not eligible for a student loan next year 
to complete her education, but she has to pay back the money 
that she received this year. This girl has found this a great 
hardship. A new young married couple and now they have to 
pay back the student loan that she has already used and now 
will not be eligible. 
 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2000 

And this is the government that believes in students and wants 
to keep our children in Saskatchewan and educate them in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the same old story. This government puts the people of 
Saskatchewan last, and all their talk about the belief in 
education and keeping our young people here is just empty 
rhetoric. 
 
Another issue is the student loans. Many, many students depend 
on a loan to go to school. They need to get a job when they get 
out of school so that they can start paying back their student 
loans in good faith, and many of them want to and believe that 
they should pay back their student loans, Mr. Speaker. 
However, this government has decided that the minute that they 
get out of university they should be able to start paying back the 
interest on their loans. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how can a student start paying back the 
interest on a loan before they even have had a chance to access 
a job? Yet this government does not care. 
 
The next legislation that this government is bringing in is to 
hinder students from getting summer jobs. Students of 
Saskatchewan need summer jobs, especially this year when 
many of the students are sons and daughters of farmers and the 
dollars are very, very tight. They were depending on these 
student jobs to help them go back to university next fall. But 
what does this government do? They cancel the partnership 
program for students. 
 
So how many jobs are there going to be for students there? How 
many Crown corporations are going to hire students this 
summer? Many of those Crowns depended on the partnership 
program. I’d like the government to answer how many students 
is SaskTel going to hire. In my constituency I understand 
they’re not hiring anyone this summer. Is this a direct result of 
the partnership program cancellation? 
 
And this is the government who drove the Canadian Bible 
College out of Saskatchewan. No, no, we can’t make any room 
for change in Saskatchewan. We’ll just keep the rules the same 
way they’ve always been. 
 
Doesn’t matter if we have a Bible college or not. We’ll let it go 
to Alberta rather than get out of the mud and find a way for 
them to stay so they can use their credits. Oh no, we wouldn’t 
want to do that. That would be too easy. We’ll let them leave. 
We’ll let the 500 students leave and all the faculty and all the 
spin-off benefits. We’ll let them leave the province of 
Saskatchewan. That would be easier. 
 
This is a government that says that they believe in the young 
and in a higher education, yet they do everything to make 
access to higher education more difficult. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our young people have a choice and many 
are choosing to leave. Some of them are opting to leave and get 
a job in Alberta where they can make good dollars and they 
could actually keep more of their dollars in their pockets, rather 
than stay in Saskatchewan and get an education. 
 
This government is all talk and no action, and what is more 

ironic is that the government says they want to work with 
business when they are the government that works diligently 
every day to drive business out of this province. 
 
I move this debate be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


