





























































Hansard: April 19, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 807 
 April 19, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today on behalf of citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan who are opposed to forced amalgamation in 
municipalities. The prayer on this petition reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today with a petition 
that is opposed to forced amalgamation of municipalities. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Watson. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and this one has to do with the gas tax. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced . . . pardon me 
. . . amalgamation, forced amalgamation of the 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Fleming and Moosomin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on the 
price of gas, not on amalgamation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents per litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
I so present. And they’re from Swift Current. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand today to 
present petitions on behalf of the Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed from folks at Macoun and Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people in Swift Current concerned with the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer can be 
summarized as follows: 
 

That the provincial government assist in the regeneration 
plan for the Swift Current Regional Hospital in the 
provincial budget by providing approximately 7.54 million, 
thereby allowing the Swift Current District Health Board 
the opportunity to provide improved health care services. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am also 
presenting petitions on behalf of citizens of this province 
regarding the fuel tax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens from the Cabri, Waldeck, and 
Swift Current areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition to reduce fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signed by the people from Swift Current. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
in regards to the fuel tax. 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Swift Current and 
Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present upon 
behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned about the high tax 
on fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens of Saskatoon and Melfort. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding fuel tax. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 
 

And the petitioners are from Bateman and Swift Current. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a 
petition regarding forced municipal amalgamation, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from Chaplin and 
Morse community. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 

To cause the government to provide funding for the Swift 
Current hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; and 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And in addition, the following petitions for private Bills have 
been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

Of the Regina Golf Club in the province of Saskatchewan, 
praying for an Act to rename the Regina Golf Club; 

 
Of the Mennonite Central Committee Saskatchewan Inc. in 
the province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to 
provide for the continuance of the Mennonite Central 
Committee; 

 
Of the Archiepiscopal Corporation of Regina and the 
Episcopal Corporation of Saskatoon in the province, 
praying for an Act to provide for the reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Roman Catholic dioceses. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all the members of the House, I’d like to 
introduce a grade 12 basic adult education class from SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 
They are the Social Studies 30 class and they’re seated in your 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re accompanied here by their instructor, Warren Gervais, 
and I understand that they have toured the legislature and they 
are here to take in part of the proceedings. I hope they enjoy the 
visit here. 
 
I ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you some 
guests we have with us today who are actually actively involved 
with working on behalf of the people in Saskatchewan who 
suffer from Alzheimer’s. 
 
D.J. Rodie is a student at Campbell Collegiate in Regina. He 
assists his family in their home to provide care for his 
grandmother who suffers from Alzheimer’s disease. We also 
have Bob and Edie Laidlaw who are members of the 
Alzheimer’s society — and Bob himself suffers from the 
Alzheimer’s disease — and Donnalyne Mackie, who is the fund 
development and media coordinator at the Alzheimer’s society 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like all 
members to help me welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour today to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

Assembly, a group of 12 people from Swift Current — I should 
say 11 from Swift Current, I think one from Herbert — with the 
McKerracher Support Services in Swift Current. And they are 
here today with Bill Colquohoun who is a coordinator of that 
particular initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you I had an opportunity to meet with 
the group prior to the proceedings today, and they had many 
good questions and we enjoyed our visit. I would just ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them here to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and to the members of the 
Assembly, a delegation from Albania seated in your gallery. 
The personal property registry of the Department of Justice 
invited a delegation from Albania to come to Saskatchewan to 
attend a training program on April 17 and 18. 
 
As you know, the purpose of the registry is to provide notice of 
third party interests in personal property and protection of those 
interests by providing a means of determining priority between 
competing claimants. I’m sure you knew that, Mr. Speaker. The 
participants were hired under a foreign aid project administered 
by World Learning Inc. of Washington, DC (District of 
Columbia) and USAid. 
 
Deanna Koskie is also here. She’s the former director of the 
Saskatchewan personal property registry and she was hired to 
facilitate the training tour of two North American registries, in 
Texas and here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Professor Ron Cuming of the University of Saskatchewan 
worked with Albania to develop the personal property security 
legislation based on our own legislation, Mr. Speaker, which he 
drafted. 
 
The focus of the training is on the design and operation of a 
modern registry for secured transactions; and ideas and 
concepts that come from this tour will be utilized to finalize the 
moveable property securing charge regulations of Albania and 
to develop a technical solution for the national state system for 
the registry of security charges in Albania. 
 
Upon their return, Mr. Speaker, to Albania the delegates will 
operate a new registry patterned in large part after Canadian 
systems and functions under a law drafted principally, as I say, 
by Canadian experts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are proud and have a right to 
be proud to have the reputation as being leaders in the world 
market in this area. We welcome the opportunity to share our 
systems and expertise. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to welcome Yair 
Baranes,director of the program, Aida Hasanpapaj, Rezarta 
Vukatana, Majlinda Sulstarova, Sheptim Spahija, and Deanna 
and Morley Kuski. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to welcome them to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all colleagues in the 
Assembly a group of students seated in your gallery. They are a 
part of the Aboriginal student mentoring program. 
 
And we have with us today, co-ordinator of the program Dave 
Abbey, who works with Highways and Transportation; from the 
Public Service Commission, an employment equity 
co-ordinator, Lily Tingley; from Saskatchewan Justice, Lynda 
Bankley. And they have with them students who are part of the 
mentoring program. 
 
There’s Nadine Carter, from Saskatchewan Property 
Management, and her mentoring student, Pat Watson is in the 
gallery . . . Pam Watson. And then there’s Charity Lerat from 
Robert Usher Collegiate, and Scott Sangwais from Robert 
Usher Collegiate, as well. 
 
I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of notes here about 
the program and the students involved. It’s an excellent time for 
them to see the activities of the government departments and 
their workplaces, but also to be here to see the proceedings 
today. 
 
And I ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
a constituent in the west gallery. 
 
Because he’s very modest about his background, people 
wouldn’t know this. But having had experiences in his lifetime 
with areas of the world where war was the norm, this man is 
probably more committed to democracy than many people that 
you will find. But probably for the same reasons that people 
who have had experience in war areas. 
 
So I congratulate Paul Meid for his long-time commitment to 
democracy, and I’m glad that he’s one of my constituents. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

North Battleford North Stars Win Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — It is with some hesitation that I rise 
today, Mr. Speaker. As you know, it is not in my character to 
gloat. 
 
Last night before a capacity crowd of 2,700 people in North 
Battleford, some hanging from the rafters, North Battleford won 
the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Last week it was looking pretty bleak. 
North Battleford was down three to nothing, and down two 
goals in the fourth game. The Weyburn-Big Muddy MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) said I’d lost hold of my 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

good sense by betting on the North Stars. But I hung in there — 
and so did they. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — After offering up the historic Weyburn 
court house, we finally agreed that if North Battleford won, she 
would wear a North Stars’ jersey in the House. And if Weyburn 
won, I would wear a torn-off cover of the Weyburn phone book. 
I know our viewers will be relieved that North Battleford won. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a little known fact is that Weyburn has never won 
an SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) championship 
while represented by a Saskatchewan Party MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re all winners today. 
The member for Weyburn-Big Muddy has a really classy new 
jersey, the North Stars have again proven that Battlefords is the 
home of the winners and I live in a great community, and all the 
best to the North Stars and the Anavet Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I knew I was in 
trouble last week when the Red Wings were up three to nothing 
and I heard CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
reporting that they had pretty much locked up the series. We all 
know CBC’s record of declaring winners just a little too early. 
And I’ve lost track of how many times, how many times 
Weyburn Red Wings have actually won, but it has been many, 
many times they’ve won . . . (inaudible) . . . winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the players and coaches of 
the Weyburn Red Wings on an excellent season and I’d also 
like to congratulate the SJHL champion, North Battleford North 
Stars. I’d like to congratulate their players, their coaches, and 
their fans, and their MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation 
Presentation 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
Canada enjoys a solid reputation as a world leader in the area of 
global justice and development. This reputation is not only by 
accident. We have some of the most compassionate and humane 
people living in Canada and indeed, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Council for International Co-operation is presenting Linking 
Saskatchewan With the World. It is an opportunity for us to 
learn about Saskatchewan’s own contributions to international 
development. 
 
Both the government and the people of Saskatchewan have 
shown that they have strongly supported international 
development. Through the matching grants program, the 
matching grants-in-aid program, the Government of 
Saskatchewan supports development projects. And the people 
of Saskatchewan have also shown their commitment to global 

development by donating almost $8 million annually to 
international development organizations. 
 
I urge all members and their staffs to attend this event. It begins 
at 4 o’clock this afternoon in room 218. There will be three 
presentations given by international development program 
participants from Saskatchewan. 
 
All of us should take the opportunity to learn more about what 
the people of our province are doing to make the world a better 
place to live in. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Non-Language 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, during 
the election campaign the Liberal platform called for measures 
which would provide education property tax relief to taxpayers. 
Then last week the Liberal Education minister was telling 
school boards as they felt the need for more funding, they 
should just raise the mill rate. He followed that up yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, by bragging about the fact that mill rates are in 
fact going up. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as a former teacher, I noticed something even 
more disturbing in the minister’s comments. The use of a word 
that doesn’t even exist — the word unzero. Mr. Speaker, you 
have expressed concern over unparliamentary language in the 
House, but I want to express my concern about the use of this 
non-language, this so-called un-English in the House, 
particularly in the presence of an impressionable un-old and 
un-adult students sitting in the visitor’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are few enough positive role models in our 
world today from our province’s Education minister to think 
that he can lapse into un-language without un-positively 
affecting our children’s attitude to education. 
 
I can already hear the conversation between children and their 
parents taking place around the province. “But Mom, he didn’t 
have to know how to speak properly to become the Minister of 
Education.” “While that may be true, little Johnny, but he did 
have to sell his soul to the devil.” 
 
Fortunately there is a word in the English language which 
describes what will happen to our Liberal Education minister. 
It’s the word unelected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Student Mentoring Program 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m proud to 
recognize and speak about the Aboriginal student mentoring 
program sponsored by the Public Service Commission. This 
program’s main objective is to bridge the gap between 
Aboriginal students and the workplace. 
 
As many of us know, Aboriginals are underrepresented in 
Saskatchewan’s labour force. This program goes a long way to 
addressing this problem. It builds valuable skills that will 
increase hiring opportunities for Aboriginal people. Students 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

from Balfour, Martin, Thom, and Usher Collegiate from Regina 
in grades 9 through 12 will work with mentors in executive 
government every Wednesday afternoon. 
 
This interaction will bring positive experiences and exposure to 
both government employees and Aboriginal people. It will also 
help the students develop effective strategies for career 
opportunities and assist in helping the students to develop a 
network system in the labour market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that we have some of the students 
from the mentoring program here with us today; and I want to 
welcome you to the legislature and wish you well in your 
participation in the program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1999 Tourism Ambassador Award Winner 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand to recognize a great ambassador for Humboldt 
and winner of the 1999 Tourism Ambassador Award, Ruth 
Wilson. 
 
The Tourism Ambassador Award is presented to an individual 
who makes a major contribution to the promotion of 
Saskatchewan as a tourism destination and who has a 
significant impact on increased visitation to the province in 
1999, and Ruth Wilson of Humboldt is that person. Wherever 
she goes, whether it is at a tourism banquet or visiting her 
family in Germany, Ms. Wilson promotes Humboldt and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ruth’s involvement with Humboldt tourism began in 1990 
when she was hired as a special events festival co-ordinator to 
promote a German theme and develop a weekend event called 
Summerfest. Later she took on the job of tourism and special 
events director and represented Humboldt at consumer shows in 
North Dakota, Alberta, and Manitoba. 
 
Ms. Wilson worked at bringing bus tours into Humboldt; she 
converted the old CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce) bank building into the Willkommen Centre, a 
German museum. 
 
Due to Ruth’s efforts, many visitors from Germany, United 
States, Europe, England, Japan, and other countries have come 
to visit Humboldt. Officially retired, Ruth still works as 
Humboldt’s German theme ambassador and is employed by the 
town in the summer. She is also involved with several other 
committees that promote Humboldt, like the mural committee 
and the water tower committee. 
 
Ruth’s energy is endless and she is to be highly commended for 
her excellent work. Congratulations, Ruth Wilson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Wild Rice Industry 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good 
news. There is a lot going on in the North these days, and that 
bodes well for the economy. And this is a gradual development 

of Saskatchewan’s lake-grown wild rice industry is certainly a 
prime example. 
 
The 14th annual Saskatchewan wild rice conference being held 
today in La Ronge. Two industry awards will be presented by 
the Saskatchewan Wild Rice Council for outstanding 
contribution to the development of this industry. The team of 
Dennis and June Christianson of Denare Beach and Kaz Parada 
of La Ronge are this year’s recipients. 
 
About 260 growers are involved in producing wild rice in 
Saskatchewan. In the past year, the processed value of the crop 
was estimated to be at $6.75 million. Much of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, stayed in the region to create spinoff jobs and 
economic activity. 
 
In addition, marketing efforts have been increased and 
considerable quantities of Saskatchewan wild rice are now sold 
outside traditional North American markets. One very 
important aspect of the wild rice business that fits in extremely 
well with this government’s overall strategy to promote 
value-added production. 
 
These Saskatchewan-owned companies are well integrated and 
include the facets of production, processing, and marketing. 
Another key aspect to the wild rice business is the strong 
involvement of the Aboriginal community in all phases of that 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that Saskatchewan will continue to be the leading 
producer of lake wild rice and that product . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Elementary School Announced for Melfort 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the pleasure to be in attendance at a very happy announcement 
in my community of Melfort this morning. And, without 
incriminating myself, I hurried back to Regina in order to share 
the good news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the Minister of Education was in 
Melfort to announce the building and the approval of a new 
elementary school in our community. It is very much 
appreciated. The application for this school has been on the 
table for a good number of years. 
 
And it really is a tribute to boards past and present for their 
perseverance in bringing and explaining this project to the 
Department of Education. I have to also say it’s a tribute to the 
Department of Education who have evaluated the project 
appropriately. And it was a pleasure to welcome the minister to 
Melfort this morning where he made the announcement that that 
school was approved. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in Melfort and our 
constituency, thank you to the department, thank you to the 
school board and officials, and thank you to the minister for a 
good news announcement this morning. 
 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Minister, the verdict is in. SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) is saying no to the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) plan of forced amalgamation. SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) is saying 
no to the NDP’s plan of forced municipal amalgamation. And 
the vast majority of Saskatchewan people, over 80 per cent, are 
saying no to the NDP’s plan for forced municipal 
amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you do that? Will you, without wavering, 
without changing your story, will you today agree to remove the 
NDP threat of forced amalgamation from any discussions with 
municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government to say as I did yesterday 
to the legislature, I am meeting later today, some time after 
question period — I think it’s in mid-afternoon — with the 
president of SARM and the president of SUMA, with respective 
officials, in order to get from them their first-hand report of the 
outcome of their deliberations on Monday and Tuesday. We 
have not yet received that. There have been press reports. 
 
We believe that that is important and I look forward to 
receiving their reports and having an open dialogue with the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs being present as well. 
 
And I simply would say that I hope that where we end up at 
some point or other is The StarPhoenix opinion editorial of 
today which says, quote: 
 

Premier Roy Romanow is correct in calling for a 
roundtable discussion among representatives of 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 
government (on this issue). 

 
And that is our approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope the 
Premier read the entire article which called for no forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should look at the government’s record in 
regard to dealing with municipal government, and I’m glad the 
Premier’s here and answering on behalf of his government. 
 
Mr. Premier, the only contribution that the NDP has made to 
municipal restructuring is to build barriers, not break them 
down. First you blame the municipalities for not considering 

amalgamation on a voluntary basis, but then you turn around 
and refuse to amend the municipal legislation so that voluntary 
amalgamation can take place. 
 
On one hand you say you favour voluntary amalgamation and 
then you go in and pose an artificial and totally unnecessary 
May 15 deadline for municipalities to come up with an 
amalgamation plan or you will then force them to amalgamate. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you finally agree to take some constructive 
action? Will you remove your unnecessary May 15 deadline for 
municipal amalgamation and will you agree to amend 
municipal legislation to remove barriers to voluntary . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely 
nothing new in this question today. It was asked yesterday and 
asked previously. 
 
I said yesterday, and I’ll repeat again to the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, the position of the government is — and I’ve 
indicated this to Mr. Harrison and to Mr. Badham — that in any 
project there should be timetables and timelines and goals to be 
strived for, but that the date of May 15 is not written in stone. I 
said that and I think all the participants will confirm that to be 
the case. 
 
I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition before I take my 
seat, that way back in 1996 an MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) was signed involving SUMA and SARM, which 
MOU set out a detailed work plan and set out a date of 
December 1, 1996 as a deadline. Signed by Mr. Harrison and 
signed by Mr. Westby, presidents at that time. 
 
So the precedent has been established and I think it’s a laudable 
one in that regard. We’re open on the May 15 situation. We 
want to go back to the table. And may I add, not only that, but 
the newspaper editorialists in this regard also share the same 
objective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I 
wish when the Premier quoted articles from the newspaper, he 
would quote them in context and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the whole story. 
 
I happen to have that editorial and it says: 
 

The provincial government must make it absolutely clear 
that the future of rural Saskatchewan will be decided by the 
people who live there. 
 

He forgot to quote that part of the editorial. Instead, Mr. 
Speaker, he brings an artificial deadline of May 15 which now 
he says he’s open to, but will not reject outright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question to the Premier. Municipalities are 
not buying your plan of forced amalgamation because they 
haven’t seen any evidence that massive amalgamation will 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

really benefit local taxpayers. The NDP has no evidence that 
amalgamation will save money or improve services. There’s no 
evidence. You haven’t shown them. 
 
SUMA has proposed that the government co-operate in 
voluntary pilot projects . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would ask the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition to go directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to 
the Premier is: will you agree to work with municipalities on a 
voluntary basis to implement pilot projects to evaluate the 
potential benefits of municipal restructuring? Will you follow 
SUMA’s advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s patently clear 
to the members of the House, to the journalists, to anybody 
interested in this debate, what we’ve been saying right from day 
one. We want a voluntary, consensual agreement. The 
editorialists are saying the same thing. That is a position that I 
have set out in writing to both the president of SARM and 
SUMA. 
 
And while we’re at the question of being faithful in the 
quotations of editorials, I note that the Leader of the Opposition 
failed to put this sentence in that same editorial: 
 

There is no urban conspiracy to destroy rural 
Saskatchewan, and politicians who play the card are being 
more than disingenuous, they are being destructive. 
 

You’re playing the card and you’re being destructive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll tell the 
Premier who’s destructive. The people who are destructive are 
the people who will not go to the meetings; the people who will 
not be consistent in their message, who one day say forced 
amalgamation and the other day retract, and then come back to 
forced amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is proposing a five-point 
plan to end the deadlock over this forced amalgamation issue. 
 
Number one, remove the unnecessary May 15 deadline that you 
imposed. Number two, remove the threat of forced 
amalgamation from discussions with municipalities. Number 
three, work with Saskatchewan cities to expand their legislative 
authority — you could do that. Number four, amend municipal 
Acts to remove legislative barriers to voluntary amalgamation. 
And number five, work with municipalities on voluntary pilot 
projects to assess the potential benefits of amalgamation. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. This proposal is a 
positive first step in fixing the mess that your government has 
made. Will you support the Saskatchewan Party’s five-point 
plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question is will the 
government support the Saskatchewan Party’s five — what he 
forgot to mention — very old five-point plan. 
 
Ever since 1996, since 1996 there are exactly . . . more than five 
points. There are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 points involving all of the 
issues that the member talked about, the memorandum . . . It’s a 
MOU; the MOU of 1996. The one that you referred to in 
question period yesterday. It’s the MOU that was signed in 
1996 by the then minister, and by SARM and the SUMA 
presidents. 
 
And this person gets up and he says would I support the 
Saskatchewan Party plan. We signed it over four years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treatment for Alzheimer’s 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. 
 
We have guests with us today, Mr. Speaker, who have first . . . 
who know first-hand how devastating Alzheimer’s disease is to 
a family. But they also know hope, given to them in the form of 
Aricept, the only drug approved in Canada to treat Alzheimer’s. 
 
Bob and Edie Laidlaw have experienced the positive effects of 
Aricept. In November, Bob was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s 
and has been taking Aricept since Christmas Day. Since he has 
been taking the drug, his performance on the mental abilities 
examination improved by six points. His family and friends 
have noticed dramatic improvement in Bob’s day-to-day 
participation and enjoyment of life. 
 
Madam Minister, we know the formulary committee is 
considering Aricept for coverage under the provincial drug 
plan. When do you expect to make an announcement on this 
issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I also 
welcome the guests from the Alzheimer society and their 
supporters today. 
 
Saskatchewan health officials met with the Alzheimer society 
on March 16 and outlined the process, the studies, and the 
research projects that led to their decision and their review of 
the drug. 
 
We asked the Alzheimer society to bring forward any new 
information they had that would contribute to the 
decision-making process of the drug committees. They have 
brought some — the society has brought some new information 
forward — and the drug committee is reviewing that. And we 
do expect an answer very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a young man in the 
gallery today named D.J. Rodie, a high school student in 
Regina. D.J. helps care for his grandmother who suffers from 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

Alzheimer’s. She has been able to remain in her home because 
she has been taking Aricept for two and a half years. 
 
At a hundred and fifty dollars per month, this drug has cost her 
$4,800, but she has been able to remain in her home. If she 
were to have been placed in long-term care for that time, it 
would have cost the health care system approximately $25,000. 
 
Madam Minister, it is very important for Alzheimer’s patients 
to have as much quality of life as possible. Are you encouraging 
the formulary committee to look at all aspects of improving this 
drug including the potential cost saving to the health care 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do have two 
drug review committees in the province that do exactly that. 
They review all the information, the research, the clinical 
studies. They base their evaluation on those clinical reviews and 
they give their best advice to us to make the decision on 
whether we cover the drug or not. We are now waiting for that 
advice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Aricept is approved under the 
provincial drug programs in Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta. 
The company which makes the drug also has a trial prescription 
program for a two-year period. In this program, if a patient does 
not show improvement after 12 weeks on Aricept, the patient 
comes off of the program and it costs the government nothing. 
The company covers the whole cost. The company which 
makes the drug formally presented this program to you in May 
of 1999 and have not yet received a response. 
 
Madam Minister, why have you not responded to the 
presentation and will you now consider entering into this trial 
prescription program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said the 
drug review committees that we have in place to look at all the 
evidence that is available on the drugs that come to us is now 
looking at Aricept with the new information that was presented, 
and we are waiting their recommendation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, right now Aricept is the only drug 
on the market for Alzheimer sufferers. It is their only chance for 
hope, their only chance of prolonging a quality of life and 
holding back the symptoms of this disease. Sadly it is not a 
cure, but it does serve to keep Alzheimer’s victims at home 
longer. 
 
The cost of Aricept is prohibitive for many patients and their 
families and yet for those people who are benefiting from its 
use it is a lifeline. Covering it under the provincial drug plan 
would cause far less than providing long-term care for 
Alzheimer’s sufferers. You have a plan from the drug company 
that subsidizes its cost and only keeps patients on it if they 

show improvement. 
 
Madam Minister, will you commit today to giving Alzheimer’s 
patients some relief and enter into the Aricept trial prescription 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
process in place in Health that allows two drug committees to 
review all the drugs that are referred by Health Canada. We rely 
on their information. They have the expertise to tell us the 
benefits of the drug. We don’t ask them to look at hope, we ask 
them to look at clinical research studies to give us their best 
advice — the scientific advice on the benefit of the drug to 
society as a whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser Self-generation Project 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, once again your 
colleagues appear to be confused. They’ve given a number of 
different answers about the city of Prince Albert’s plan to slap a 
$1.8 million tax on Weyerhaeuser. 
 
First, the Minister of Energy and Mines refuses to even answer 
the question; then the Minister of Municipal Government says 
there are no plans to introduce legislation. Then he goes outside 
the House and says yes, the government is considering 
legislation. Then the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton 
phones the Prince Albert Daily Herald newspaper and says 
there is no plan to introduce legislation. 
 
So we’ve heard three different answers. We hadn’t even asked 
the Minister of Education yet. 
 
Mr. Premier, is your government considering legislation to 
allow the Prince Albert city council to slap this unfair tax on 
Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to say to the member opposite that unusual to the 
performance of some of the other members on his side of the 
House, I want to say this. 
 
The member opposite from Saskatchewan Rivers could have 
come to me and could have said, I hear something happening in 
Saskatchewan today, unlike what happened to the member from 
Swift Current. Unlike what happened to the member from Swift 
Current, unlike what happened to the member from Kelvington. 
Both of those two members who had an individual issue in their 
own community came to me and said, can we resolve some of 
these issues. And the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Hon. Minister of 
Municipal Affairs to answer the question please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member from Swift Current did that. 
He called me to the back of the bar, we had a discussion about 
what was happening in Swift Current. And the member from 
Kelvington came up to my office and we talked about an issue 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

in her community. 
 
But not the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. The member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers wants to play politics with an issue 
that’s important to the community and to the business world. 
And I say to the member opposite, shame on you. Why didn’t 
you come to my office and have that discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will keep asking the 
question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs because he’s the 
only one who’s going to get up. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have stated that we are playing politics over 
here. How can we be playing politics? The letter that came to 
this government on your side came from the mayor of Prince 
Albert. He’s the one playing politics with your side of the 
government. He is not playing politics with this side. 
 
He is requesting that you stand up and say you’re going to 
support his private members’ Bill that he’s trying to get 
someone over there to sponsor. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you willing to penalize Weyerhaeuser for 
generating its own power and reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I said in this 
Assembly, and I said to the media yesterday that when a piece 
of information . . . and yesterday I did finally receive the letter 
from the city of Prince Albert. And the letter that came to me, 
Mr. Speaker, addresses the kind of issue that the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers asked. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, now, that this is what I’ve done. When 
we’re asked to examine legislation in the province we look at 
three different issues. We look at whether or not change in 
legislation provides good public policy, whether or not it has an 
impact on community or industry. 
 
And now I’ve had a chance to take a look at the legislation or 
that request on the bylaw, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the member 
opposite and to the people from Prince Albert, that I’m not 
going to be amending the legislation, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
going to be amending the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Implications of Workers’ Compensation One-time Payment 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Labour. Mr. Speaker, last year the provincial government and 
your department did the right thing. You authorized the 
Workers’ Compensation Board to make a one-time payment to 
the widows whose benefits had been terminated during 
remarriage prior to 1985. 
 
These women received a one-time payment of $80,000 from the 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board), which was to be 
tax-free. But now to the dismay of the widows over age 65, 

Revenue Canada is asking for repayment of their old age 
pension benefits for the last year. 
 
Madam Minister, were you or your department aware that 
Revenue Canada would expect this repayment at the time you 
settled with the widows last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We were very 
pleased to be able to provide the settlement we did last year. 
And as we said last year, the $80,000 lump sum payment was 
and continues to be tax-free. 
 
What the member is talking about is how income affects 
pension entitlement. And Revenue Canada has, as part of their 
rules, from all kinds of compensation and benefit programs — 
not just this one — that this is the rule that it’s included as 
income for the purposes of calculation. 
 
That being said . . . That being said, we certainly sympathize 
with the circumstance here. And I’ve asked the WCB to meet 
with the appropriate federal officials to see whether there might 
be some mechanism — including income averaging or 
something — that would enable them to not have to declare this 
income all in one year. And we’re working with them to resolve 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the women who are facing this 
tax grab from the Revenue Canada are pensioners. Coming up 
with the money to pay back one year’s worth of pension 
benefits will not only be difficult, it is fundamentally unfair. 
 
They say at no time did you or your department or the WCB 
indicate the federal government may request any portion of this 
payment or that their old age pension be compromised. 
 
Madam Minister, have you contacted Revenue Canada? And 
what steps are you taking to rectify the situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we’ve 
contacted . . . begun the contacts with appropriate federal 
officials. We’ve also contacted the federal . . . some of the 
federal MPs (Member of Parliament) for this area to assist in 
this. And certainly the opposition could be very helpful if they 
would also contact federal representatives in this matter. 
 
But I do ask them to appreciate that these are federal rules, not 
provincial rules, and certainly we’ll do everything we can to 
assist in resolving this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from a senior in Saskatoon who has 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

lived in Saskatchewan for over 80 years. He talks about how his 
contributions have helped build this province, how he has paid 
his own way through the Depression to obtain a degree of 
agriculture in the U of S. (University of Saskatchewan). He says 
he and his wife have paid provincial taxes for 70 years and he 
thought they had a plan for retirement. That was until the 
government changed the rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this man’s wife is now in a long-term care home 
and he has been told the monthly rate will be going up by $500. 
He also maintains his own home, is struggling with property 
and school tax increases, utility rate increases, and medical 
costs. 
 
To the Minister of Health, how can you justify increasing the 
burden on our senior citizens by increasing the fees for 
long-term care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Long-term care 
in this province is a service that gives people room and board, 
medical care, personal care. It’s a service that many people need 
at near the . . . in the end of their lives, or near the end of their 
lives when they need extra service. That service has been 
provided in this province for many years, subsidized by this 
government considerably. 
 
Now we’re looking at raising the maximum rate of long-term 
care fees that haven’t been raised for several years. This will 
affect 20 per cent of the 9,000 long-term care residents in the 
province. Eighty per cent of the residents in long-term care will 
not see an increase. 
 
The districts are working together with people to help them 
adjust to this and determine what, if any, effect it will have on 
people. And that will take effect October 1 of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This sounds like 
something from two-tier Harvey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote more from this letter: “The 
government is trying to justify these increases, but is it at an 
expense of human misery.” 
 
He says the government is hurting a group that, because of their 
age, are not able to fight back. He says this NDP government is 
turning the golden years into devastating years. Mr. Speaker, 
the impact of this NDP budget on senior citizens in this 
province is devastating. 
 
This man, and many other seniors, have worked hard; planned 
for their retirement; and now are facing day-to-day worries of 
how they will get by. 
 
How will they care for their spouses in long-term care? How 
will they pay for their own care if it is needed? They are 
uncertain if they are able to pay for their monthly bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: what hope can you 
offer senior citizens on fixed incomes struggling to cope with 

expensive NDP taxation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The long-term 
care fee increases . . . There’s 9,000 long-term care residents in 
this province; 80 per cent of them will not see any change in 
their long-term care fee. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eighty per cent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Eighty per cent. But of the 20 per cent that 
it will affect, they will see an increase from a dollar to four 
hundred and about sixty-seven dollars. This is no change — 
there’ll be no change in how it’s determined. There’ll still be no 
property taken into account or capital investments; just the 
interest on their investments. 
 
But interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, our maximum is still 
way below many of the provinces in this country. Ontario, a 
Tory province, 1,827 is their maximum; Prince Edward Island, 
a Tory province, $3,257; Newfoundland, $2,837; Nova Scotia, 
4,481; New Brunswick, four thousand . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday, April 18, the Opposition House 
Leader raised a point of order concerning a document quoted by 
the Premier during question period on Monday, April 17, 2000. 
The member alleged that the Premier misquoted the document 
and misrepresented its origin. Having reviewed the record and 
the commentary of parliamentary authorities with respect to 
rules governing the citation of documents, I am prepared to rule 
on this matter. 
 
In debate or in posing or responding to questions, members are 
at liberty to interpret facts as they see fit and by doing so they 
. . . order . . . members are at liberty to interpret facts as they see 
fit and in doing so they are free to use a document to support an 
argument. 
 
The only prohibition is that the quote cannot contain 
unparliamentary words. However, when a member indicates 
that he or she is quoting from a document, the accuracy of that 
quote is wholly the responsibility of the member. It has never 
been as a practice nor is it the duty of the Speaker to 
authenticate anything said in debate or in question period. 
When a member prefaces a comment with the word quote, it is 
taken at face value and Hansard includes the portion of the 
commentary in quotation marks. 
 
It is the nature of debate that anything said should not be 
considered in terms of irrefutable fact. The rules take this into 
account. For instance, rule 34(1) permits a member to explain 
any part of a speech misquoted or misunderstood. The 
accountability for the veracity of comments made in this 
Assembly is a matter for debate and as such is not a matter of 
order. 
 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

I draw members to the attention, to page 480 of the Australian 
House of Representative Practice which in plain terms outlines 
parliamentary practice in this regard. And I quote: 
 

The Chair has always maintained that Members themselves 
must accept responsibility for material they use in debate, 
and there is no need for them to vouch for its authenticity. 
Whether the material is true or false will be judged 
according to events and if a Member uses the material, the 
origin of which he or she is unsure, the responsibility rests 
with the Member. 
 

Therefore, in conclusion, let me say that it is up to the good 
sense and discretion of members to determine how to present 
information and use documents in debate or in question period. 
It is not necessarily a matter of order. While I cannot rule in 
favour of this particular point of order, I do want to caution all 
hon. members to use good sense and discretion when quoting 
from and characterizing documents. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Tabling of Documents 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Tabling of 
Documents Amendment Act, 2000. Enacting the amendments 
in this Bill will provide the Assembly and the public with more 
timely information thereby improving public accountability. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, allows documents to be submitted to the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly when the Assembly is not 
sitting. It considers the documents submitted to the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly as having been tabled and allows the 
document to be made public. 
 
Under the existing Act, Mr. Speaker, documents can only be 
tabled in the Assembly when it’s sitting and this requirement 
has delayed the release of documents and hindered the 
government’s ability to provide increased accountability to the 
members and to the public. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will over the next four years provide for 
a gradual reduction in the amount of time allowed for the 
preparation and tabling of documents. At the end of the 
four-year phase-in period, documents will be required to be 
tabled within 120 days regardless of whether or not the 
Assembly is sitting. This will result in the timely release of 
documents and improved accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will come into force on assent. And I’m 
pleased to move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments regarding the current Bill, Bill No. 26, The Tabling 
of Documents Amendment Act. 
 

As I understood, and I realize we’re getting close to the Easter 
weekend break and it was somewhat difficult to hear everything 
that the minister was saying, but I gathered from the comments 
the minister was saying, this piece of legislation is supposed to 
simplify how documents are tabled and how they’re recognized 
and come forward with a manner in which they can be 
presented and addressed a lot more quickly than they have been 
in the past. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it would certainly be appropriate 
to give . . . that the opposition take the time to review the piece 
of legislation and indeed see to it that the reasons for the piece 
of legislation are certainly are applied and followed through 
with what the minister was indicating to us earlier this 
afternoon. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be 
appropriate for us to take a few more days and a bit more time 
to review this piece of legislation to make sure that it indeed 
accomplishes the goals that the government intends through the 
Bill. 
 
Therefore at this time, I move adjournment of Bill 26, The 
Tabling of Documents Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, behind the bar on the 
government side of the House here, we have two very special 
guests, people with whom many of us have worked with over 
several years. And I’m speaking of the member — former 
member — from Carrot River, Andy Renaud. And the former 
member from Lloydminster, who served this Assembly 
honourably. And we’re very glad to see them come and visit us 
again. And the guest, Vi Stanger from Lloydminster. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are also 
honoured to have with us another former member who is seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Larry Birkbeck who represented the 
Moosomin constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 27 — The Certified Management Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

move second reading of Bill No. 27, The Certified Management 
Accountants Act. This is a new Bill, Mr. Speaker. The original 
Act governing certified management accountants was called 
The Management Accountants Act and was introduced in 1978. 
 
We’re pleased to provide a service to the accounting profession 
and the general public, Mr. Speaker, by introducing an 
up-to-date version of the Act. Since there have been no 
substantive amendments to the legislation since 1978, The 
Management Accountants Act is now seriously outdated. 
Evidence of this is in the name of the Act itself. The Certified 
Management Accountants Act better reflects the current nature 
of the profession. 
 
The current Act provides the society with broadly defined 
powers and the provision to make bylaws to carry out the 
objectives of the society. The bylaws currently enacted clarify 
powers of the society with regard to composition, election, 
remuneration, and meetings of the council; membership and 
education requirements, member fees, and the discipline 
process. 
 
This Bill incorporates the current provisions included in the 
bylaws. While many of the existing provisions have been 
retained, this Bill makes substantial improvements by providing 
further protection and accountability to the profession and the 
general public. 
 
For example, included in the Bill is a provision for 
representatives of the public to be included on the institute’s 
council and disciplinary committee. These appointees represent 
the interests of the general public. The Act will also require the 
institute to file an annual report. And in addition, bylaws that 
affect the public will require approval by government. 
 
The Bill reflects general government policy regarding 
professional legislation. The majority of the sections in the Bill 
are standard sections that appear in all new professional 
legislation and were prepared using guidelines provided by the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Over the last eight or nine years, we’ve been gradually updating 
professional legislation in Saskatchewan to bring it up to date, 
to make professions more accountable, to include public 
representation, and to try to promote consumer protection. 
 
Through this Bill, the society’s legislation will be brought up to 
date. Its legislation will also be comparable to that of the 
association of certified general accountants of Saskatchewan, 
which is sort of a sister organization to the management 
accountants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These changes that are represented in the new law will come 
into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation of the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting 
Certified Management Accountants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was 
listening to the minister giving his reasons for the upcoming 

piece of legislation, I can appreciate the fact that certainly there 
is periods of time when we need to review legislation, pass 
legislation; and certain Acts, to update those Acts and make 
sure those Acts certainly conform and reflect the realities of the 
day. 
 
And what the minister has been indicating that there’s certainly 
a number of areas that the former Act needed to be updated. I 
think, as I recall, the minister indicated that a fair portion of the 
former legislation is going to be left intact. 
 
It would appear, Mr. Speaker, that it would be appropriate as 
well to take the time to call the professional association and 
seek some input from the accounting profession in regards to 
this legislation so that we have a clear understanding of their 
views and their ideas to indeed determine whether or not all of 
the concerns have been brought forward, whether they are truly 
reflected in the legislation, or whether or not the legislation 
certainly may go beyond what the accounting profession has 
been asking for. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, my colleagues and I would 
certainly like to take a little more time to review the legislation 
and certainly take a closer look at it, give it further scrutiny. 
And therefore at this time, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 9 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great deal 
of pleasure that I rise today to speak about something that is 
very near and dear — certainly to everyone in this province — 
and that’s our children and the protection of our children. 
 
And I want to spend quite a bit of time talking about this Act 
and certainly how it reflects upon our children in society and 
how it’s going to reflect upon the needs of parents and the need 
for parenting. 
 
One of the great concerns of course that we always have is that 
far too often governments in this day and age are starting to 
become far too involved in the raising of children and taking a 
great deal of responsibility away from parents. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the raising of children is a very responsible 
activity and a very trustworthy opportunity and something not 
to be taken lightly. Mr. Speaker, there is nothing more 
important in this world than our children, preparing them for the 
future. And certainly for many of us who now have 
grandchildren, it is certainly a great honour to be able to say 
that our children have progressed to that time in their life where 
they can start to reap the rewards of seeing their own children 
grow to maturity and the mischief that they can get into, and 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

certainly the deeds that they will accomplish as they reach 
school age and through school; and hopefully they’ll all be able 
to achieve the straight A’s that their parents did, or somewhat 
close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the responsibility for raising children and looking 
after children should be and always needs to remain the primary 
responsibility of the parent. There is a great deal of concern that 
in today’s society that children nowadays are being pushed 
more and more into a state-run system for parenting. In today’s 
society, with the taxation limits that are being pressed upon 
young people, in many cases both parents are being forced to 
rise everyday and be gainfully employed just so that they can 
provide the necessities of life — good food, good clothing, 
good shelter. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, then the opportunity to have . . . to 
bear children, to watch them being raised in a responsible 
manner becomes very tough on those young parents. And so 
more and more now young parents are being forced to seek 
opportunities where someone else is taking on the responsibility 
for raising their children. 
 
And I think that is a great misdeed that is being placed upon our 
society. It is certainly being proven over and over again that 
those children who spend fewer and fewer hours with their 
primary parents in the long run suffer at a far greater rate by the 
time they reach adulthood than those children that are allowed 
on a day-to-day basis to spend quality time and quantity time 
with those people that gave them life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important then to touch upon 
something here that is near and dear to all of us who are 
parents, who have taken the chore of raising children far more 
seriously than maybe the state, or certainly the state-run 
institutions are willing to admit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been proven time and time again that by the 
time a child who has spent a great deal of his early childhood — 
specifically starting from the age of 18 months — and spending 
everyday, five days a week, up to 10 hours a day with a child 
care deliverer who is not their primary parent, through the 
period of early childhood and then, as they reach school age 
becoming latchkey kids, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, that by the 
time those children reach high school, the statistics are starting 
to prove over and over and over again that those children start 
to regress as they reach maturity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it has certainly been pointed out that 
children who spend time in state-run and state facilities that set 
guidelines for how children should be raised, when they start 
kindergarten, the state always seems to step forward and say, 
oh, these children are a little more advanced. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been noted that we’re going to accept that fact. 
They certainly are. 
 
But one of the things also must be remembered at any given 
time, that as we prepare our children for school, we must let 
them be children. It’s a proven fact, Mr. Speaker, that anyone 
can teach a child to read. But, Mr. Speaker, have they learned 
what they have read? And, Mr. Speaker, we know that it’s an 
absolute truth that no, they have not learned what they have 
read — they just know the words. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

unfortunate. 
 
Children need to grow up at a progressive rate that they are able 
to handle and not at a rate that is pressed upon them by state 
institutions or state government and their own agendas for 
taking over the responsibility of parenthood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those children who by the time they get into high 
school and have spent a considerable amount of time — much 
more so with their parents than those parents who are forced 
because of economic situations not to be able to provide 
24-hour care for their children — those children that have 
received the quality and quantity time with their primary 
parents are certainly far more advanced in their social 
development, in their behavioural development, and are far 
more prepared by the time they finish high school to move on, 
Mr. Speaker, to post-secondary education; or as in the case of 
by far the largest majority of children these days, Mr. Speaker, 
to move into the workforce. 
 
Those children who have been raised by someone other than the 
primary parent, by the time they reach the end of high school, 
Mr. Speaker, they are lacking something that can only be 
achieved by spending time with their parents. 
 
And we’re finding out more and more, Mr. Speaker, as we 
observe children specifically through the educational system, 
Mr. Speaker, that those children who have not had that quantity 
and quality time with their parents, by the time they finish high 
school, Mr. Speaker, they are not prepared emotionally, 
socially, behaviourally, to move forward and become active 
participants in today’s society. 
 
In fact what’s been shown on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, is 
that these children, as they leave high school, are probably far 
more dependent upon their parents at the end of high school 
than they were prior to entering kindergarten. And that’s very 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This puts a great deal of stress upon the governments of the day. 
It puts a great deal of stress upon society, whether it’s in the 
Department of Social Services who have to then start to look 
after these children because they’re not prepared to take on 
society head-on, or whether it’s the Department of Justice 
because these children are not prepared emotionally and 
behaviourally to accept the responsibilities of society and start 
to perform acts of crime. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that is a 
great disservice to us all. 
 
But certainly what it does, Mr. Speaker, is that it puts a great 
deal of burden on an already overtaxed society. Mr. Speaker, it 
is important that as we examine the pieces of legislation that 
look at enhancing . . . or looking at family services that the Bills 
relate to the fact that the primary caregiver are the parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we find too often that when the government 
becomes involved in child rearing that what happens is that the 
. . . some person, generally someone in the bureaucracy who has 
very little knowledge of your children, tries to impose, through 
legislation, clauses that are generally regressive to child rearing 
in this province. And certainly whether it’s in this province or 
in this country . . . And we’re certainly finding that in many 
parts of the world. 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important then for us to sit back 
and take a look at Bills that are brought forward such as this. 
Are they being brought forward to benefit the child? Are they 
being brought forward so that the parents of these children are 
going to have the opportunity to be able to actively participate 
on a 24-hour basis the rearing of their children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is more and likely needed in the long term is 
a plan by this government. And certainly with the co-operation 
of the opposition party, we would certainly be more willing to 
look at legislation that would ease the tax burden on parents so 
that both parents would not be forced on a day-to-day basis to 
have to rise out of bed early in the day, take their small children 
off to child care centres, some of them state-run — they’re 
state-operated; certainly driven by the state in their desire for 
having two working parents — and try to look at a process 
where we can keep one of those parents at home on a full-time 
basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll probably hear throughout many parts of this 
debate that this might be a little pie in the sky, but, Mr. Speaker, 
sometimes we have to raise the bar a little bit. But are we 
raising the bar too high for the children? Well I say not. 
 
If we’re going to be able to come forth on a day-to-day basis 
and think about the future of this province so that we can grow 
economically, that we can grow socially, then, Mr. Speaker, 
those people that we have to look at that are going to carry the 
burden far into the future — our children and our grandchildren 
— and does this Bill enact upon us the opportunity that those 
children will have the benefits of the future that I’ve spoken 
about already? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to remind ourselves that, in the future, 
that nothing is more important than the children. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to remind ourselves of the gift of having . . . 
bringing children into this world. And too often we get driven 
by the needs of government — the government’s own need and 
greed to finance itself; it’s forcing young parents to work, both 
of them having to work, and sometimes one of them being 
forced to work two jobs — that, Mr. Speaker, the children often 
get left out of this. 
 
And as we see, Mr. Speaker, in certainly our larger centres, and 
having a lot of familiarity with the city of Prince Albert that I 
live very close to, is that one of the great problems that arising 
now is, and has been I guess for quite a few years, Mr. Speaker; 
is that because of both parents working with their need to try to 
finance the operation of the family — trying to provide food 
and clothing and shelter — is that the children are the ones that 
are being left out of the picture. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, of course I mentioned earlier the 
latchkey situation where your children as they reach a 
somewhat more responsible age — that people think they’re 
more responsible — simply come and go as they please, 
without the opportunity of having the guidance of good 
parenting. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is putting a great deal of 
pressure upon society. Because as children will be children, 
what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that these children have a 
tendency not to get the opportunity to be involved in good 

community organizations that provide them with the 
opportunity to expend energy. They simply don’t have . . . the 
parents don’t have the time to get them into dance lessons or 
into Scouts and Guides or singing lessons or hockey or baseball. 
 
Instead what happens, Mr. Speaker, because of the financial 
pressures upon these families being unable to afford the time to 
get these children into these opportunities and unable to afford 
the financial pressures to get these children into these 
opportunities, what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that these children 
soon start to make their own opportunities as they go about their 
after-school lives. 
 
And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, when that happens children 
can have a tendency to get into mischief. We know that they are 
certainly enthusiastic in our society nowadays, and they seek to, 
they seek to find their own, their own thrills in society, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is where we start to run into trouble with 
children. And it is at this point that children start to actually 
regress from their earlier progresses that sociologists have 
pointed out are achieved by children being involved in daycare 
centres at a very early age. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, it’s at this time that many 
children then start to become involved with the government 
departments that then need the financial resources in order to 
deal with them into the future and to deal with them properly. 
And those departments, Mr. Speaker, certainly two of them that 
are paying the biggest price for this are departments of Social 
Services and the Department of Justice. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when we stop and think about 
the pressures that are being brought upon these two 
departments, if we just had a little bit of vision for this province 
. . . Now that’s one thing we’ve certainly heard a lot of 
comments about in the last few weeks here, is vision for this 
province or lack of vision. 
 
If we had a sense of vision for the province, Mr. Speaker, that 
would pertain to children we could greatly reduce the pressure 
upon government departments — more specifically departments 
of Social Services and the Department of Justice — in having to 
deal with children if they had the opportunity to spend more 
quality and quantity time with their parents. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the great unfortunes of the budget is 
that we had to take a look at departments that were under a 
great deal of pressure because of the stresses of society and the 
pressure society is putting on them, and the government 
inability to be able to meet those pressures because of financial 
restriction. 
 
Well I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that if this government had 
some sense of vision for the future of this province past the next 
budget we wouldn’t have to worry about those problems. 
 
If we would have had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of 
providing a progressive sales tax reduction, a sense of vision for 
a progressive income tax reduction, Mr. Speaker, it would 
provide the opportunity for young families then to be able to 
look at the opportunities of maybe one of the parents being able 
to stay home with those children. 
 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has been proven by 
sociologists time and time again is that when one of the primary 
parents, either the mother or the father, is allowed the 
opportunity to spend quantity and quality time with those 
children, we reduce significantly the pressures upon the 
Department of Social Services and the Department of Justice. 
 
Well that’s two areas that child care certainly could benefit 
from . . . by bringing forth progressive tax reduction measures 
in this province. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a third area. 
 
Child care in many cases nowadays is starting to become a great 
deal of concern to educators in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
if we don’t stand forward now and start to help the primary 
educators of this province, who every day are being faced with 
extensive pressures in order to educate the children as we try 
our best as a society to get them ready for the future, whether 
they continue past secondary education to post-secondary 
education, or whether they continue past secondary education 
and go directly into the work force. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the pressures that are being put upon the 
education system by having these children in the system 
nowadays that do not get the quality and quantity time of 
primary parenting . . . it’s putting a great deal more pressure 
upon the education system. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s important for us to step back for a few minutes and really 
think about what’s important for the future. 
 
Now is it important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the state to be 
looking at legislation that looks at enhancing the powers of the 
department? Or is it important for the Department of Social 
Services to be making recommendations, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Department of Finance and saying, look, what’s important for 
the future of this province? Do we have a vision? 
 
And does this vision include the children . . . our children, Mr. 
Speaker, and our grandchildren? Is the vision clear enough for 
the future? But even, Mr. Speaker, our grandchildren — Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, pardon me — even our grandchildren are 
included in this vision. And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we need 
to stop and think about. 
 
Education is of significant importance; we’ve talked about it 
many times in this hallowed Chamber. But for some reason or 
other it always seems to get quite a bit of lip service but it 
seems to end right there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now if we’re 
going to continue to provide quality education in our classroom, 
providing educators the opportunity to provide first-class 
education in the classrooms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And is it important that child care remain the primary 
responsibility of the parents, or do we continue to continue 
down the road, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that primary child care 
being brought forth and tied up by the province? 
 
So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we need to start 
looking at this Bill a little more closer as to what we may want 
to be able to do with it, and so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
ask that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a great 
privilege to stand today to talk about . . . talk to Bill No. 17, The 
Child Care Amendment Act, 2000. This for the most part, is a 
housekeeping in nature, this Bill. But it is important that we look 
into the amendments very carefully since this Act will affect the 
care of children by those outside their home. 
 
And as I was sitting here thinking of the different things that I was 
going to discuss during my speech, I got looking up and down the 
rows and I believe every one of us on our side of the House is a 
parent. We have one or two or three children on our side of the 
House and it’s a responsibility that we must take very, very 
seriously. 
 
I know our two sons are quite young and we’ve gone through this 
process of trying to decide whether they should be going out to 
daycare, to child care, or whether we have somebody in, the whole 
responsibility of whether we need to have both parents working. 
Because I think in an ideal world there are very few of us on this 
side of the House, and perhaps on that side of the House, that 
doesn’t realize that it would be better . . . maybe the children 
would be better met if one of the parents was to stay at home. 
 
Unfortunately that’s not always the case. Because of economic 
reasons, because of taxation reasons, because of a lot of reasons, I 
think that’s what forces a lot of families into both parents working, 
and then leaving the kids to either have a babysitter come in or 
take them out to child care, daycare facilities, and things like that. 
 
So there are a number of things in this Act, the amendments, that 
really need to carefully be looked at because, as I mentioned 
before, it’s a very serious issue. In my own personal life, I guess 
that I could speak a little bit about, is Cindy, my wife, went 
back to work part-time and we had a person coming in. It 
wasn’t always a solution. We went through different people 
coming in and they wanted full-time work, part-time work, and 
it was a real, real juggling act. 
 
But we also found it very, very frequently that it wasn’t the 
easiest thing to get them into daycare facilities, either. When I 
would be busy at the farm or when I was travelling on the road 
in my previous occupation, I would be gone for two or three 
days at a time. And if my wife had to go to work, it would be 
leaving well before 7 o’clock because of the shift work and 
there is a lot of facilities that weren’t able to accommodate the 
needs that we needed for daycare. 
 
And so it’s an extremely tough issue. And I think if there’s one 
thing that will stir up people’s emotions is when you start 
dealing with your kids and who’s going to be looking after your 
kids. 
 
(1500) 
 
So it’s an area that we just don’t take lightly because it is an 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

area that . . . as I’ve talked to many people and I’ve watched 
parents raise their kids and I don’t think there isn’t one parent 
that says you only get one shot at it. You only have one chance. 
Very seldom do you get to turn the cycle of the clock back and 
you start all over again and you learn from maybe some of the 
mistakes you might have made, not knowing that they were 
mistakes at the time. You just don’t get a second shot very 
often. 
 
And so I think that’s when issues like this arise in the House 
and we start talking about the amendment Act, this Child Care 
Amendment Act, 2000, we have to really take it seriously and 
look at: is it best, as the speaker prior to me from Saskatchewan 
Rivers mentioned, is it the best thing for the children? And I 
think that’s what we have to look at at the end of the day. 
 
There are a number of things. We were pleased to see that this 
government is amending portions of the Act that restrict those 
from providing daycare services other than the primary 
residence. In other words, if it’s not the primary residence, 
they’re not in their primary residence, about whether they can 
operate in other areas and things like that. And I think those are 
things that really seriously have to be looked at. 
 
Again, as a parent — and most of us in this House probably are 
parents — there have been some real horror stories of some of 
the daycares, some of the child care services that have operated 
in our province. And I don’t have to go too many years back to 
look at a situation just outside of Saskatoon. And I mean, every 
parent’s nightmare that would have to have been. 
 
And so again, as we deal with this issue, it’s not something to 
pass over quickly and say oh, we think it’s in the best interests 
until we know for sure that it’s in the best interests. 
 
In the minister’s second reading speech, he brought up a very 
good point of farm families which are extremely busy during 
the seeding time, making it very difficult to provide adequate 
child care. And it is. 
 
I mean we sometimes in this House talk about rural-urban 
issues and the difference between rural-urban issues, but it is 
really quite a struggle for parents in rural Saskatchewan, with 
very few farms now that don’t need all hands on board when it 
comes to seeding. And especially all hands on board when it 
comes to harvest. 
 
With the crops that we’re growing now, they have to . . . seem 
to have to be in in about a two-day period even though it takes 
you five days to get them seeded. So when that two-day period 
hits, we all have to be on board. And quite often it would be, 
you know, the husband running 12, 20, 18-hour days, 16-hour 
days, and the wife, his wife working side by side with him for 
that whole length of time. 
 
And I think in harvest we all know that, with the crops again, 
how valuable they are sitting in the field. The sooner you get 
them off when they’re ready to be taken off, the better off you 
are. And it really is just pure economics. That if you don’t do it, 
you’re in trouble. 
 
And so, you know, again, as you get both the husband and wife 
working long, long hours — working well into the night — the 

need for daycare services in rural Saskatchewan is a definite 
need. And I think quite often they are lacking out there. Talking 
to a number of friends of mine that are going through this, they 
really have trouble finding adequate facilities to take up the gap, 
I guess. 
 
I think some other things. When we talk about the agriculture 
sector in rural Saskatchewan with daycare and that type of 
thing, just the whole situation that we’re facing in this province 
with the ag crisis, and there’s so many more stresses put on the 
family due to it. 
 
I have a couple of newspaper clippings here that talk about: 
“Farm crisis may hurt children.” And I was very interested to 
read it. It was from a former colleague of mine from the 
Avonlea High School. She is now the director of education. But 
when I taught in the high school system, I worked side by side 
with Georgia for a long time and I know her passion and 
compassion for the kids. And it says, “The effects of the 
agricultural crisis on farm children may be showing up in 
disruptive behaviour in small-town schools,” a rural educator 
says, director says. 
 
And I think it’s definitely the case. And, you know, sometimes 
it’s because the parents haven’t been there to perhaps, after they 
get home from school, to look after the homework needs and 
things like that because they are busy out on the combine; 
they’re busy trucking. And then that all translates the next day 
into maybe some disruptive behaviour back in the school 
system. 
 
So this Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 does have some very 
good amendments in it, but there are also some real concerns. 
And one of those concerns definitely comes in rural 
Saskatchewan through the agriculture and the stresses and the 
demands put on people in agriculture today. 
 
These amendments will take some of the pressure off the parent 
so they not will be concerned with the well-being of their 
children while they’re out farming, and as I touched on, that 
they’re out for many hours. In some of those cases . . . I mean, 
we really look at this as being a good thing. 
 
These amendments are also looked at . . . look at the number of 
children being cared for in group family child-care homes. And 
I understand that this legislation will continue to enforce the 
limit of eight children with further limits by age. And I mean 
that’s certainly . . . And again in rural Saskatchewan with more 
and more people moving away from rural Saskatchewan, it’s 
tougher and tougher to find the facilities. So there’s fewer 
facilities and we start grouping more and more kids and then 
what is the quality of care? 
 
As the member that spoke before me said, I think that is the 
most important issue and can we assure and insure that the 
quality of care is sufficient? Although we do not disagree with 
any of these changes in principal, we certainly have concerns 
with the government’s ability to care for our children, 
particularly with the tabling of the Child Advocate report a 
number of days ago. 
 
And that just brings up a whole other issue. Of course we would 
like to see that it would . . . the Social Services and that whole 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

department would work without a problem. But just hearing day 
in and day out since that Child Advocate’s report came out of 
some of the different problems — I was listening to the news 
before we came into the House and how some of the Social 
Services workers were saying they just don’t have enough 
people. The caseload is far too great. 
 
And I guess when you get a caseload that is that great and then 
you hear of the horror stories like, boy, we’re sure glad that 
you’d phoned so we knew where that child was because we had 
lost track of him. You know? And it really makes you wonder 
and it really makes you question when we start giving up our 
children or allowing other people to look after them — are they 
competent, are they qualified? And issues that were raised with 
the Child Advocate’s report last week really heightens our 
concern. 
 
And I mean, as I said before, it’s our most precious resource, 
and as parents, we get one shot at it — we want to make sure 
it’s done properly. And it just makes me shudder when I hear of 
horror stories like what we heard through the Child Advocate’s 
report. 
 
And as I mentioned it’s ongoing. I mean again, today in the 
news we heard people from the Social Services area speaking of 
some real concerns and these concerns need to be addressed. 
 
There is much to be said about the NDP’s track record on child 
care. Unfortunately not too much of it are positive things, i.e., 
the latest thing is the advocate’s report. But I think if we went 
back in years prior, there are concerns on a number of issues. 
 
As legislators and parents, it our duty to ensure that the most 
valuable members of our society are protected — and it is of 
course our children. And, you know, so often that we are . . . 
we’re the ones making the decisions as they’re growing up, 
making the decisions for them. And we really have to make 
sure that those decisions are made with as much thought and as 
much information as we possibly can. We don’t want to rush 
into any of these things because the ramifications down the road 
are quite often unchangeable. 
 
And, you know, as I mentioned earlier in my speech, we’ve all 
talked to parents that after they look back, they say, well I 
would have done this different or I would have done that 
different. Well as legislators, I don’t want to have to look back 
and say in this amendment we should have done this different, 
and we should have done that different. You know, we want to 
make sure that we do things the proper way, the best way, the 
most intelligent way, with as much information as we can 
possibly garner when it comes to this amendment, this Child 
Care Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Since the budget was released we have heard this government 
talk about their renewed commitment to children and the future 
of our province. Well, the budget and the future of our 
province, it almost seems to be a bit of an oxymoron, especially 
if we’re looking at a positive future for our province. Because, I 
mean, we’ve had the budget debate, and we’ve talked about it, 
and we’ve talked about it. But I do look at when it’s a renewed 
commitment, do you know what I mean? 
 
I would hate to as a parent say well, I’m going to renew my 

commitment now to my children as if I’ve let it lapse for the 
last 8 or 10 years. Personally, my way of thinking is when 
we’re raising children and when we go into the deal of raising 
children and we make the agreement that we are going to have 
children and raise them, it’s a full-time commitment. Not 
halfway through do we decide to renew our commitment. It is a 
commitment from day one to I guess the end of us as parents. 
It’s a lifetime commitment; it’s not a renewed commitment. It’s 
nothing like that. It’s a lifetime commitment. And it just 
concerns me when I hear the government opposite, the 
members opposite talking about a renewed commitment. 
 
As you’re saying, perhaps a renewed commitment to the future 
of our province, because I think over the last number of years 
we’ve seen the commitment to our province and the future of 
our province not as bright as what we’d like to see it. And I 
think that’s what the budget tried to address and perhaps — 
from our side of the House — and I really feel got off track in a 
number of areas. 
 
And that all sounds well and good, but it is one thing to be 
providing our children with a safe environment in which to 
grow up in and foster, but it is another to be giving them any 
hope for the future. 
 
And I mean I think everyone of us, we see our children grow 
and we’d like to see them continue on through the high school, 
university and go on to work in our province. But unfortunately 
far too many of us — and I haven’t got to that point, in fact, I’m 
a long, long time before I get to that point, but I’m talking to 
some of our colleagues and I know the member from Swift 
Current has a long road ahead too, a long time. But I know 
some of the people in our caucus that have had children, have 
gone through the school system, high school system, and 
nothing more than you’d love to see them working in our 
province, but they’re not. 
 
And you just have to look at the numbers. I mean our province 
just has really had a hard time growing in population. And why 
is it? Is it because we don’t produce as many people as die off 
in a year? Well that’s not the case at all. I mean, we’re on a 
positive side of that ratio, but we’re not growing in population. 
And far too often it’s because . . . we on this side often say that 
maybe the grass is greener on the other side of the pasture. 
 
But it’s just not something that is said, it’s something that is 
proven. And far too many people have voted with their feet by 
crossing the border. And it’s a sad, sad thing. And it’s not 
necessarily again the production issue, if I can use it that way, 
it’s a case of where the opportunities are. And I would love to 
see those opportunities in our province as opposed to other 
provinces. 
 
And I think, again talking to some of the members on the 
western side of the province — our member from Lloydminster 
talks about it on a regular basis — and we through the rest of 
province and myself in Indian Head-Milestone maybe don’t see 
the effects of it quite as obviously as what a member from 
Lloydminster who just looks across Main Street and sees the 
other provinces, Alberta. And so it’s just a continual thing for 
them. And it’s brought to their attention over and over and over 
again. And sometimes, perhaps us in the other parts of the 
province are maybe a little sheltered. 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

And because of that I remember going through the budget 
speech and hearing a member opposite say, well just don’t tell 
them that it’s greener over there. Just keep them in the dark. It 
doesn’t matter if they know that it’s better somewhere else, just 
don’t tell them. 
 
And I think that’s far too often been the attitude and the 
response of the government that we’ve been under for the 
majority of the last 30 and 40 years, is don’t tell them what’s 
going on outside of our borders. Let’s build walls around our 
province so people, you know, don’t see what we could have 
been or what we should be doing. 
 
Unfortunately most kids, as they go through the school system 
and the university system, university tells them to broaden their 
mind, and unfortunately all the walls we want to build to keep 
them in won’t hold in those broadened minds, and that’s where 
they move on to other areas. 
 
I find it rather disconcerning that the members opposite talk 
about this commitment to our youth as if they are doing 
something wonderful, some wonderful thing by acknowledging 
the needs of children. And I touched on it earlier, is that 
renewing is not the word that I’d never want to be . . . would 
ever want to be discussing because it’s a lifetime commitment. 
It’s not a renewal of a commitment, it’s not a change of gear, as 
in now we’re going to pay more attention to it; it’s something 
that needs to be paid attention to through a lifetime, through a 
lifetime of parenting. 
 
(1515) 
 
Over the years we have heard some horror stories of how 
children have been treated in care homes. And I touched on 
some of the issues that have come up in the news over the last 
number of years, 10 to 15 years. And I think of the incident 
north of Saskatoon which, as I mentioned before, would just 
send shivers down my spine and I’m sure every parent that’s 
ever . . . that has been a parent, scares the daylights out of them. 
 
So, you know, the needs of children in care homes cannot be 
overlooked. I mean it is the most important issue to any parent. 
It doesn’t matter, wages, dollars and cents, or anything else, it’s 
the protection of our youth and our children, and that’s by far 
the most important. 
 
I am pleased to see that this legislation recognizes this and will 
ensure that none of the children being cared for in group family 
homes will be neglected. And I mean that is by far the most 
important issue. And for that I will have no problem moving 
this Bill on eventually. But it’s very important to look at 
making sure that there will be no neglect of the children. 
 
There are some concerns regarding the licensing aspect of the 
legislation. For example, section 3.2, paragraph, states that: 
 

A person may operate a family child care home either with 
or without a family child care . . . licence. 
 

That “with or without” really does concern me. You know, I 
think they are able to operate a child care home either with or 
without a child care licence. So what’s the point of having a 
licence if you need it or you don’t need it? 

Unfortunately, we heard after the debate, after the debate on the 
budget that you can’t go fishing with or without a licence. But 
for some reason in this Act, we can operate a child care home 
with either or without a family child care licence. And that 
gives me some concern. 
 
And I would think that, you know, being so into raising fees on 
licensing fees and things like that, they would just automatically 
think, boy that would be a great way to raise a little more 
revenue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Surprising they missed 
that, is right. I guess maybe we hope that they didn’t hear this 
and won’t then review and then say, boy there’s another place 
we could add some taxes. 
 
This concerns me in light of the fact, as I mentioned earlier, that 
some children have been abused in some of these homes. And if 
the operators of these facilities are not permitted to carry a 
licence, there may be some difficulty in holding them 
accountable. 
 
But those are questions that I have no doubt the minister will be 
more than happy to respond to when we get into the Committee 
of the Whole — the whole issue of whether you do or you do 
not have to be licensed. It is a bit of a concern. 
 
All in all, this is a good piece of legislation. As the official 
opposition that represents the majority of rural communities 
across Saskatchewan, I’m pleased to see that the government is 
finally acknowledging the needs of farm families and some of 
the constraints that they are living under. 
 
And I touched on it earlier, but I mean we’re getting fewer and 
fewer farmers out there because it’s tougher and tougher, and 
it’s glad to see that maybe they’re acknowledging some of those 
pressures. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to move that I 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 19 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2000 
be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In reading 
over the Bill I realize that coming under CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) 
regulation will make SaskTel unique among Saskatchewan’s 
Crown owned utilities. 
 
SaskTel will actually be under a watch of a regulatory agency 
and that would . . . the agency would have the power to say yes 
or no to rate hikes. And I believe that this is a very positive 
step, considering that to date all of the Saskatchewan Crowns 
only have to state their rate hikes one day and they’re 
rubber-stamped the next day. 
 
There has been up to date no accountability to the very 
customers that the Crowns are supposed to serve. So there is a 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

positive viewpoint of going under CRTC regulations. 
 
But while we welcome the rate review mechanisms brought 
about by the CRTC regulations, there are some serious issues 
that need to be addressed before we proceed too quickly on this 
Bill. Ultimately this Bill will affect the real people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and their concerns must be our first and foremost 
consideration when we look at this. 
 
The people that it has the potential to impact in a very negative 
manner are those that live the farthest away from the major 
centres such as Saskatoon and Regina. While CRTC seems to 
recognize the concept of remote services, it doesn’t seem to 
recognize rural areas of Saskatchewan as being such remote 
areas. This has generated a real fear out there, and quite 
rightfully so. 
 
At present rural customers are already paying more than their 
phone . . . for their phone services than their urban counterparts. 
I know my own phone at home I pay $9 per month rural 
mileage fees. And I pay an additional 18.65 per month for 
having a second rural line. And that comes to a total of 27.65 a 
month. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because my home is in a 
rural location in Saskatchewan I pay an additional $331.80 per 
year for my phone service. 
 
The problem arises in that there has been no assurances from 
this government that these inequities will not become even 
greater under the jurisdiction of CRTC. There has been talk that 
the base price per telephone line may go as high as $130 per 
line per month, and this just simply will not be realistic. It will 
not be affordable to many of the people of this province, and 
nor will it be affordable for the non-profit facilities in our towns 
such as their rinks and their community halls. 
 
I’ve even heard some people say that if SaskTel rates go up that 
high they will simply have their phones re moved from their 
home and they will rely solely on their cell phones. And won’t 
that be a real claim to fame for Saskatchewan technology. 
 
I sincerely hope this piece of legislation will ensure that the 
basic telephone service rates, long-distance rates, and the 
Internet rates remain realistic and affordable for all of the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
CRTC does not seem to recognize the vast rural areas that are 
part of what makes up our province, and I strongly urge all 
members in this Assembly to fight for this oversight. We must 
remain united and firm that the people of Saskatchewan are 
entitled to have equal access to equal services. 
 
Besides the possibility of increased costs to the customers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would also like to address the problems of 
the transition period of moving into using CRTC regulations. 
 
The hon. member of the Crown corporations mentioned in his 
speech on this Bill that SaskTel employees have worked 
diligently to help ensure that the transition is a smooth one. He 
went on to say that they have been working to ensure that 
SaskTel customers see little difference in how quickly SaskTel 
provides them with products and services, and that SaskTel’s 
goal was to ensure that they could continue to quickly and 
adequately respond to market demands and pressures. 

Now I have a constituent, Mr. Speaker, who I can quite assure 
you does not agree with our minister of Crowns. His name is 
Charles Smith and he has a business named Combine Salvage 
in my constituency. He’s written me a letter and I would like to 
that the opportunity to read this letter. And I think then more 
members in the House will realize that this transition period 
isn’t going as smoothly as perhaps the minister has suggested. 
 
The letter was dated February 15, and it goes on to say: 
 

I’ve been encountering a ridiculous situation with SaskTel. 
Here is a summary of what has taken place so far. 
 
This letter is compilation of phone conversations and events 
which have led me to where I am today in a dispute with 
SaskTel over line activation charges. In the early ’90s my 
wife and I decided to move our business, Combine Salvage 
Incorporated, from our farm location south of Allan, 
Saskatchewan, to a location at Elstow, Saskatchewan, which 
has Highway 16 running past it. I indicated to the people at 
SaskTel that there was a good possibility of our business 
expanding, and they might want to consider this when 
plowing in new lines. After the lines had been plowed in I 
asked the SaskTel technician, Mr. Brian Fisher, if they would 
need to plow more lines in. His reply was that they would 
never be plowing in my yard again and they said they had 
plowed in excess of 20 . . . lines to our location. We started 
with three lines in 1993, and continued to add lines as 
required until the last activated line in December 31 of 1998. 
And that left us with a total of six activated lines. 
 
On July 6th 1999 I realized our phone system was 
backlogged as we were going into our busy season. I 
telephoned SaskTel and requested another line activation and 
a meridian phone. The cost of the line to be approximately 
$500, and the Norstar meridian phone to be approximately 
$250. I was prepared to pay between $800 and $1000.00, 
once all the incidental charges, GST, etc., were added. On 
July 9th, SaskTel contacted me to tell me that the line 
connection fee would be $3,095. Needless to say, I was 
shocked. I had a lengthy discussion with a SaskTel 
representative by the name of Rene who indicated to me that 
they would need to plow in new lines. I informed her that I 
had ample lines in my building already, no plowing would be 
necessary. She asked me how I knew that. I told her that I 
asked Brian Fisher, who was SaskTel’s technician and he 
said I had (20) pairs of lines. 
 
At this point, I really wonder if SaskTel could give me a 
correct answer on anything. She then said that even if I have 
available lines in my building, they would likely have to 
plow in more lines to activate my lines further back in the 
system. My reply to this statement was that 7 months earlier, 
SaskTel activated a telephone line for me and there was no 
problem. Also, on July 6th, 3 days earlier, there did not seem 
to be a problem, until the price went from 400-and-some-odd 
dollars to $3,095. She said that she would check with the 
engineers and get back to me. I did not hear from her, so I 
called her on July 11 and she had left for holidays. 

 
On July 12 I called SaskTel and talked to a woman by the 
name of Chris. She put me in contact with Byron Bergren. At 
this point in time, the situation took a fundamental turn. 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

Byron . . . informed me that yes, I had ample lines in my 
building, and yes, they could activate them, no problem. The 
problem was that CRTC regulations came in force on March 
1, 1999 and SaskTel had to charge me the full cost of 
plowing lines to our business. End of discussion. I pressed on 
asking why SaskTel did not notify customers as to these 
changes. He said that an announcement had been made on the 
news. I found it hard to fathom that SaskTel would reach 
their customers on such an issue in the form of a news 
release. When I suggested that it would have been 
appropriate for SaskTel to have contacted all their customers 
personally, his reply was: “how in the world could our 
business and other customers expect SaskTel to personally 
contact us all”. My question to him was, how many of 
SaskTel’s customers do you send bills to? There was a long 
silence at the end of the line, followed by a curt response that 
a Muriel Gareau from Prince Albert would get back in 
contact with me. 

 
This is a real letter from a constituent: 
 

On July 14, Gord Marsh from SaskTel called and reaffirmed 
SaskTel’s position. At this point, it seemed obvious to me 
that SaskTel was entrenched in their position. And I had a 
business to run so I decided to pick up the matter on a later 
date. 
 
On February 14, the year 2000, I spoke to a woman by the 
name of Jan at SaskTel. I inquired about getting another line 
activated. She said the cost would be $3,082 for the new line 
activation. The price had gone down a few dollars. I then 
asked what it would cost a new rural business to have a 
phone put in. She said the first line would be $492. I asked 
her what I had to do to start up another business on my 
property and get a new line. She said I had to get a legal 
subdivision done, and they would plow in a new line. I asked 
her if she could give me this in writing. She then said that she 
would need to consult an engineer and see what the details 
might be. 
 
(1530) 
 
On February 7, the year 2000, I received a call from a woman 
by the name of Dawn-Marie from SaskTel who informed me 
that to get a new line for $492, all I had to do was to get a 
legal subdivision done on my very own property, and 
SaskTel would plow in the new line. In essence, I could get 
my parking lot next to my building subdivided for a couple of 
hundred dollars, SaskTel would plow in a new line for $492 
— from however many kilometres away — when all they had 
to do was join two wires in the wall of my building to 
activate a new line. I put this scenario to Dawn Marie, and 
she confirmed that that’s exactly how SaskTel would handle 
my situation. Just to further illustrate the ridiculousness of 
this whole situation, I put forward one more scenario. If I 
owned a section of land and I wanted to put a phone line on 
each quarter, four lines in total, in the middle of the section 
— each line conceivably could be one metre apart from each 
other — what would SaskTel do? Dawn-Marie said they 
would plow four separate lines from the appropriate location 
to the middle of the section, and it would cost me $492 times 
four. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

I said are you sure you wouldn’t just plow in one cable with 
four lines in it? The response was no, we would plow four 
separate trenches. She said all you need is a separate land title 
and we will plow in four new lines. She then shared with me 
that SaskTel was preparing for CRTC regulations to come in 
effect in June of the year 2000. Well this was news to me 
again because I was told it was March, previously. Their 
story was that regulations were in effect, and they would be 
severely reprimanded by CRTC if they connected my line for 
a mere $492. 

 
To summarize this situation, I must say that I feel many 
emotions. I am shocked, dumbfounded, angry, disillusioned, 
and mostly insulted. I’m a third generation Saskatchewanian. 
My grandparents were homesteaders and farmers. My parents 
were business people and farmers. And my wife and I are 
also farmers and agri-business people. We directly employ 15 
people full time in our agriculture-based machinery and 
export business. We pay taxes in this province and have paid 
taxes here our entire lives. Our employees pay taxes here and 
live in our community. I am insulted when people lie to me 
and speak out of both sides of their mouths, treating me like 
some country bumpkin who might accept whatever feasible 
excuses come to one’s mind. 
 
I am doubly insulted when SaskTel, a corporation, a publicly 
funded business admits that they will waste tens of thousands 
of dollars in taxpayers’ money, human resources, and violate 
our environment by trenching lines all over the face of the 
province, when they are not even required. I am even more 
insulted when every SaskTel representative I talked to 
maintained that it is impossible to let their customers know 
by mail or some definite method, what the future plans are 
for SaskTel. 
 
As a lifelong resident and taxpayer of Saskatchewan, I can 
officially say I am unwanted. Our hard work and dedication 
to a team and a company are not appreciated. I am beginning 
to understand why many of our people and companies are 
setting up or moving to other jurisdictions. The reasons? 
Companies like SaskTel say “we don’t want you”. 
 
My situation is absolutely ridiculous. My time should be 
spent running my business, spending time in my community 
and with my family — not butting heads with a service 
provider that I’ve been paying for all my life. 
 
We are a young business, an expanding business. The seeds 
have now been sown in my mind to begin looking at people 
and places who appreciate good, solid corporate citizens and 
treat them accordingly. 
 

End of letter. 
 
This letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why I question our 
minister’s statement that he’s trying to make the transition 
period a smooth one and that SaskTel’s number one priority is 
its customers. 
 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

Mr. Speaker, our minister for Crowns did indeed reply to Mr. 
Smith’s letter. And I would also like to read a quick insert from 
his letter. The minister of Crowns replied, saying: 
 

I would like to clarify that the most recent changes to 
SaskTel’s installation rate policy are not the result of 
SaskTel’s pending regulation by CRTC which takes effect on 
June 30, 2000. However, in preparation for CRTC 
regulations, SaskTel is taking a number of steps to ensure 
that corporation’s activities are consistent with CRTC 
regulations. This includes a strict adherence to SaskTel’s 
policies and procedures, meaning that while exceptions may 
have been made to rules or practices in the past, SaskTel 
today must (adhere) that rates and policies apply consistently 
to all customers. 
 
The change to SaskTel’s installation rate policy instituted on 
March 1, 1999, was designed to clarify SaskTel service 
connection charge rates — especially as they apply to rural 
locations — in order to reflect more accurately the cost of 
providing service in those areas. As you are likely aware, 
SaskTel operates in a highly competitive environment for 
long-distance service, and it is increasingly difficult for the 
corporation to subsidize services that have historically been 
provided by SaskTel at a . . . loss. 
 
With respect to advising customers of this policy, SaskTel 
did send letters to customers who were in the process of 
having additional lines installed and had received formal 
estimates prior to March 1 . . . Because Combine Salvage did 
not have a formal request for adding additional lines pending, 
we did not send a letter to you regarding this change. 
 
SaskTel has a very large number of regulations and policies. 
These change frequently and in many of these cases no mass 
advertisement is done.  
 

Now this tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our minister was 
more interested in lining SaskTel’s pockets before the June 30 
deadline when CRTC regulations actually came into effect, than 
in keeping his customers informed. 
 
Mr. Smith, being a business owner, should not have had to have 
a formal request filed with SaskTel before he was privy to 
important information that would affect his business. 
 
I would like to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this is just, 
just too irresistible of an opportunity to give up — Mr. Smith, a 
contributor to Saskatchewan’s economy and economic growth, 
is being inhibited by a Crown governed by our provincial 
government. He is having no difficulties with his business and 
the local municipality. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to echo the words 
of my exceptional colleague from Cannington. I too feel that it 
is critical that we talk with the third parties that are interested in 
this Bill to determine whether it serves the needs of the 
customers of SaskTel, whether it serves the needs of SaskTel, 
and whether it serves the needs of all the people of 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 20 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fine member he is. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to be able to rise again today in this Assembly to speak 
to the proposed amendment before us to The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 
 
The SaskTel Holding Corporation is the holding company 
owned by the government that houses all the services SaskTel 
offers outside the core local and long-distance telephone 
services. This Bill deals primarily with SaskTel Mobility and 
getting it into line with CRTC regulations. 
 
I will admit that SaskTel has come a long way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — a long, long way. I remember a long time ago when 
we first got our telephone system ploughed into our yard and 
my farmyard, and that’s . . . well, it’s really not that long ago 
because that would reveal my age, but it sure was nice to get the 
SaskTel system into our house. 
 
I remember the first few phone calls that came through and 
everybody was running to answer the telephone. It was quite a 
unique experience to do that. It was definitely a unique 
experience to get some phone calls on the telephone from the 
girlfriends. You didn’t have to go all the way over there to visit 
them. It sure helped out. 
 
But that was a long time ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and since 
then . . . but since then SaskTel has come a long way and now 
we have things like cell service. I would like to speak a little 
about the SaskTel system and the phone system that we have 
today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my area there was many areas where 
the cell phone system just does not work. It works in a very, 
very few spots in my town and my area, and the constituents are 
always complaining about they cannot talk to me for the simple 
reason they have no SaskTel Mobility system. 
 
I do recall though, because of a few members opposite that have 
cabins at a lake by Christopher Lake, that their SaskTel service 
was not very good and they needed service to get down to the 
legislature and whatever have you, so they actually got a new 
SaskTel system for cell phones. 
 
And that system came into Christopher Lake and it was a 
benefit to the members opposite. If that was implemented into 
all the areas in Saskatchewan, like in my area, my constituency, 
as well as all over Saskatchewan; it would also help with 
SaskTel systems. 
 
I also would like to know to the members opposite that the old 
SaskTel system that was up, when it was taken down it was in 
perfect hands. Why could that not be moved to one of the areas 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

that doesn’t have SaskTel Mobility and cell service and it 
would help out one of those fringed areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Act is an organization, as I said, that deals 
with SaskTel Mobility. I would like to talk about how SaskTel 
Mobility affects our agriculture system in Saskatchewan. And 
being Saskatchewan is based on agriculture, in every which 
way you turn, many of the people that live in this rural area are 
somewhat frustrated at the increases that their government has 
put on to the SaskTel system, many increases that our patrons 
are constantly paying. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the farm crisis 
that’s in effect, it’s tougher and tougher to try and make ends 
meet. And when the increase to the SaskTel bills keep going up 
at the rate their going, it just adds more confusion and 
frustration to the taxpayers who have to keep paying this. 
 
As you know in the agricultural system with the crisis that’s 
going on, the farmers are saying, where do I cut to make ends 
meet, to make things payable, to make things work? 
 
Well one of the reasons that . . . one of the things they’re 
looking at is the SaskTel thing. Maybe they should do without a 
phone. Maybe they should just go with a SaskTel cell phone 
and never mind the other phones. It is one way that they can 
create some more cash and keep our farm and agricultural 
system viable. 
 
The other aspect that I want to talk about a little bit is how 
SaskTel infringes on small business. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, our province is made up of agricultural institutions, 
but it’s also made up largely of small business. And without 
small business and farming, this province would not survive. 
 
Without reasonable rates from SaskTel, our small-business 
people will not be able to survive. They also look at their 
monthly statements and see how their phone increases have 
gone up, and they keep going up. And to the players of that, 
they say, how can we keep in contention of being in business? 
How can we keep going on? Why is the government keeping on 
doing this? But as you know, our government is proud of tax 
increases and raising everything up. 
 
Small business is a viable feature in Saskatchewan. It keeps the 
people going. It creates and stimulates the economy, creates 
new money. And we need small business. And without small 
business in this province . . . SaskTel and how they keep adding 
to the cost of small business, it is time that the government look 
at what it is doing to our province both in agricultural and in 
small business. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do have a few questions about this Bill. 
SaskTel has increased rates along with the power and the . . . or 
SaskPower and SaskTel; the increases are something like $41 
million. The company must make available a schedule for all 
charges, rates, terms, and conditions for the services they 
provide. I think it’s mandated that they should do this. The 
people out here should have the right to know what’s going on. 
Will they do it? That’s the question. 

As the Minister of Finance stated, it’s up to us to implement 
these costs and increases. It’s up to the opposition government 
to find out where they have been increased and to look them up. 
And I guarantee to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
opposition party on this side will do their utmost to find out 
where the increases are. And if those increases are with 
SaskTel, then we will find them and we will bring them 
forthwith. 
 
This Bill also gives SaskTel the right to strike private deals with 
customers outside its usual rate structure. This is something I’m 
not in agreement with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know our present 
government of opposite is doing this with other facets of our 
system. They have set up deals also with trucks on highways 
which is a very serious problem, but I will deal with that in 
Highways department. 
 
We have other questions when this Bill gets to the Committee 
of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. When we talk about this Bill, Bill 
19, we will want to take our time and look over the implications 
of what these legal changes will mean to the average 
Saskatchewan resident. 
 
SaskTel is moving into a brand new world and an ever more 
competitive world. And we would hope that this government 
will take the opportunity over the course of this debate over 
these Bills to enlighten us on some of the future plans for the 
upcoming of SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that needs to take place 
with this province when we’re dealing with the tariffs on 
monopolies, when we’re dealing with tariffs on Crown 
corporations, is that there be review process put in place that 
allows for input and allows for information to be gathered. 
 
We have always been . . . they have always had rate increases, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so far the government has failed to 
provide a public review process independent of the government. 
Here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of third parties 
involved in this particular pieces of legislation, they need to be 
consulted and they need to have their views heard. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move 
debate adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 3 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a privilege for 
me to be able to enter into the discussion and debate about The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll forgive me if I’m a little bit concerned 
and other members on this side of the House are concerned 
whenever we’re dealing with an Act involving pretty much labour 
anything, bus especially labour reorganization, that’s been 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

proposed by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had plenty of experience in these matters. One need only 
look to the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement), 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we understand now that . . . and it’s 
with a bit of a knot in our stomach frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we’re anticipating the son of CCTA which will 
soon be brought forward by members opposite. And it will plan 
probably, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to visit more destruction on the 
construction industry in our province than its predecessor did. 
 
We’ve also seen labour changes in other areas that have been 
wrought by this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are a 
cause for concern. And you need only to talk to the many 
entrepreneurs across the province, especially those involved in 
short-line manufacturing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have them 
confirm for you and for all of us in the Assembly that some of 
those changes to labour legislation in this province have done 
some damage, frankly, to those entrepreneurs and to those 
businesses. And to the potential for them to continue to create 
jobs and to grow the economy and to pay taxes to fund all of the 
things that we need, including of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
including health care facilities which the Act speaks to as well. 
 
Whenever we talk about the NDP government reorganizing 
labour legislation or bringing labour legislation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, frankly, it’s a little akin Colonel Sanders bringing in a 
health plan for chickens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The only thing 
that we can be assured of is the destruction and the carnage that 
the chickens will face, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the only, it’s 
the only certain thing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill does extend the provisions of the 
health reorganization that was passed in 1996, and it seriously 
reduces the number of bargaining units in health care 
professions in the province. The reorganization was commonly 
known, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Dorsey commission and 
you will be familiar with that as many members of the 
Assembly will be. The number of bargaining units were 
reduced at that time from three hundred and . . . or 538 — I beg 
your pardon — to 45. 
 
The change in part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was supposed to make 
labour negotiations more manageable. It was supposed to make 
labour negotiations more manageable. And I think we, I think 
we all have some questions on this side of the House — and 
frankly members on that side I think do too — about whether or 
not labour negotiations in the health care sector have become 
more manageable since the introduction of this Act, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I wonder what the nurses would say about that. I know what the 
nurses would say about that in Swift Current, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They would be stifling laughter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They would be stifling laughter. 
 
While reducing the number of bargaining units perhaps made 
some sense, some sense back in 1996, I think what we found is 
that working families had some problems with the 
heavy-handed approach that the government used in this regard. 
Really it’s the same type of approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we saw with the creation of the health districts themselves, 
where they basically just forced regions together into these 

large health care districts. 
 
And frankly, many people have been telling me in Swift 
Current — and I think people telling members across the 
province — that frankly, it hasn’t worked very well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I appreciate that members on 
both sides of the House may have some views on this matter 
and indeed will have an opportunity to enter debate either now 
or in Committee of the Whole when this Bill gets there. 
 
In the meantime, the hon. member for Swift Current has the 
floor, and I invite all members to allow him the opportunity to 
speak. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I appreciate the 
help. It’s as if Colonel Sanders has come into the House itself; 
all the chickens are clucking on the other side, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I just wish to caution 
the hon. member for Swift Current, and all hon. members will 
probably appreciate this, when a ruling is made from the Chair 
it is not to be commented on, but rather it provides an 
opportunity for hon. members to continue with their speech. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Similar to the 
amalgamation of the health care districts, or rather the health 
care unions; there will probably be very little consultation in 
this with this particular Bill. That certainly has been the case 
with the forced amalgamation talk that you continue to hear 
from the other side of the Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, 
as is the case with municipal amalgamation, we were told at the 
time of the Dorsey report that these changes would make labour 
negotiations more smooth and make the system run better. They 
would make labour negotiations more smooth and make the 
system run better. 
 
Well I think that the nurses’ strike last year certainly bears out 
the fact that labour negotiations in the health care sector are 
anything but smooth between that minister, between the 
Minister of Health and the health care unions in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In fact, they’re running so smooth that the health 
care unions, namely SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), 
didn’t even want the minister at their convention, at their annual 
convention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They weren’t really interested 
in hearing from the minister any more, and I can hardly blame 
them frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — When we were faced . . . when we were faced 
with the nurses’ strike last year, clearly amalgamation in the 
health care sector didn’t cure that problem, Mr. Speaker. Just 
like the government’s plan for forced amalgamation will do 
anything but improve the lives of people in rural or urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the original Dorsey recommendations were 
put in place, not only were some union members angry, there 
were plenty of non-union workers who were angry to find 
themselves being forced to join a union — being forced to join 
the union, Mr. Speaker. 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

And this is typical of NDP labour policy. We see it in sector 
after sector. It’s heavy-handed, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
destructive. It doesn’t do a service to health care. It doesn’t do a 
service to our economy. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t do a service to 
the short-line manufacturing sector or the entrepreneurs across 
this province who try, in spite of this government, to create jobs 
and create wealth and pay taxes in this province. The kind of 
health care that we’re talking about today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — If we are to attract health care professionals in the 
province of Saskatchewan — especially nurses, Mr. Speaker — 
we’re going to have to do a lot more than tinker with labour 
policy. We’re going to have to do a lot more than to bring in 
this kind of legislation. 
 
We’ve heard over and over this government’s commitment to 
hire hundreds of new nurses in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are desperately needed. They’re needed in Swift Current; 
they’re needed across the province, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t 
seem to be making much progress. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
tinkering with health care labour regulations and legislation. 
That’s the answer of the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to find a way to make the jobs of those working in 
health care tolerable once again. This will make it better for 
workers, but it will also make it better for patients, Mr. Speaker. 
We need to find out about what’s going wrong with our health 
care system and we need to do whatever we can to try to make 
the working environment more tolerable for health care 
professionals. 
 
So with those remarks, with those remarks . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I believe the member from 
Swift Current has adjourned debate on Bill No. 3, The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 1999. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1600) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like 
to introduce to the members of the committee four officials who 
are joining me here for estimates today, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
the deputy minister, Neil Yeates. Seated directly behind him is 
the assistant deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse, and beside her is 
Frances Bast, the senior policy adviser, finance and operations 
branch. And seated behind the bar is Brady Salloum, who is the 
executive director of the student financial assistance. 
 
Subvote (PE01) 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to welcome the 
minister’s officials here this afternoon to participate in these 
estimates. 
 
I would like to say at this time that I find that the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training have a 
responsibility, a very important responsibility to this province. 
They’re responsible for the operation of our post-secondary 
education . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order, order. Order. I invite members on 
both sides of the Assembly to allow the hon. member to continue 
with his questioning in such a manner that not only can the Chair 
hear it, but the minister who is even further away from the hon. 
member. I invite all members to honour this. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I was saying the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education, the minister and his 
department have a very serious responsibility in this province, that 
being the future . . . the training after students leave our primary 
education system, after leaving high school. Nowadays most 
people need some additional training or education to make their 
way in the world, and I think it’s a very important responsibility, 
and I hope that the minister and his department will assume their 
responsibilities and take it very seriously. 
 
I realize that as in every department there’s a problem with trying 
to do as much as you can for those people who are using your 
services, and yet on the other hand maintaining quality. And I 
think that is very important in the area of post-secondary 
education, that balance between access and quality. And we hear 
that from all sectors of society that are concerned with this area. 
 
But we must maintain that measuring stick, not only in our public 
institutions, but also in our private institutions. And I know in 
recent months that a number of students and parents have 
expressed that concern about access and quality, and particularly 
in the private schools that we have. 
 
In the last election the tuition fees and access to post-secondary 
education was an election issue. Members opposite had their 
plans; they brought them forward. The public judged those 
plans and those programs, and they found them somewhat 
lacking. 
 
I guess the first question I would like to ask to the minister is: 
what plans does your department have to improve access to 
post-secondary education in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
want to thank the hon. member for his question and also the 
introduction he brings to the estimates. One of the things that 
. . . And I would also add I’m not surprised that he does that, 
quite frankly. 
 
The hon. member from Last Mountain-Touchwood— as the 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training critic — and I 
spent some time together in the month of January while I was 
engaged for many of the meetings, together with the Education 
minister of the government, in public meetings on consultations 
on the subject that he raises — post-secondary education 
accessibility. 
 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

And I’m very pleased to acknowledge that the hon. member 
attended a good number of those meetings. And when he 
comments about the serious responsibility of the department 
and the importance of the department to take the job very 
seriously, I also want to acknowledge that I think he does that 
as well. And I look forward to a good and responsible change in 
the best interests of Saskatchewan people who are served by 
post-secondary. 
 
The hon. member talks about the balance of priorities and 
maintaining quality of including access to post-secondary 
programs, and I think we have a common mind about the 
importance of that and I want to acknowledge that as well. 
 
To summarize the conclusion that we came to following the 
public meetings — in my mind there were, in this budget, $16 
million in expenditures that were directly responding to the 
public discussions that we had. And I’d like to outline them for 
the hon. member. 
 
We heard, in my judgment, a number of important messages. 
And I think the hon. member will want to acknowledge . . . I’m 
sure will have much discussion about this at the public meetings 
that we responded to here. 
 
And just before describing them, I’d like to just reiterate 
something that I know the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood could recite in his sleep if I fall faint 
here in the middle of the comment, Mr. Chair, because we 
referred to them over and over again as their criteria for the 
public meetings that we were going to use in drawing our 
conclusions. 
 
One, that we would make decisions that would do the best we 
could to respond to real student need. Secondly, that it would 
support quality post-secondary education. And thirdly, that it 
would meet the test of fiscal prudence. And that, simply put, 
being an important thing that we described over and over again 
because it’s the test of fiscal prudence that enables decisions to 
politically have sustainability. 
 
So it’s with that in mind, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, that we 
drew four conclusions in addressing the access. Rather than it 
being a single program, really a combination of things 
reflecting what people were saying and I think a balance of 
things, largely it was my sense that the public were wanting 
prudent and fiscally prudent responses. 
 
The point number one: there was a message from the public to 
do the best we could to support the post-secondary institutions; 
to enable them to do their best to keep tuitions as affordable as 
possible; and at the same time, to permit them to deal as best 
they could with the access question. 
 
And in response to that, Mr. Chair, in times of inflation of under 
2 per cent, in the budget there was a 4 per cent increase in 
funding to the post-secondary institutions in the amount of 
$10.3 million. That was 4 per cent increases in the budgets of 
the university sector, SIAST, the regional college sector, and, 
Mr. Speaker, intended for those purposes. 
 
Now when we were out and about folks said to us that 
accessibility, financial accessibility, is influenced . . . a factor is 

tuition and that’s something that they look at. But over and over 
again what we heard particularly when we got outside of 
Regina and Saskatoon — and I acknowledge that some of the 
members who are here attended meetings in their locations and 
would have heard this as well — there was a strong statement 
of support for doing what I call bringing the campus to the 
student, where people were acknowledging, for example, the 
important role that regional colleges provide in our education 
. . . post-secondary education system as brokers as well as 
deliverers to bring credit training to rural and northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they asked us to recognize that for many families, many 
students one of the biggest deterrents, if you look at financial 
deterrents to having access to post-secondary education, was 
not so much tuition fees but the cost of living away from home. 
And that was . . . we were told over and over again that for 
many that’s a much bigger factor and the more you can address 
that, particularly in rural and northern Saskatchewan, the more 
effectively you’re — bringing the . . . by bringing the campus to 
the student — providing access. That doesn’t necessarily mean 
having entire programs but at least start the programs. 
 
And in that then it was important to me that we responded with 
the 4 per cent increase in funding to the base of the regional 
colleges. But at the same time that we’re moving forward in the 
area of technology enhanced learning, thereby attempting to 
take advantage of advances in technology to more effectively 
bring the campus to the student; a lot of acknowledgement that 
through the use of the SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network) delivery program that a lot of good things are 
happening to regional colleges. And to work to continue to 
expand that as much as possible but to work to move to the 
on-line . . . world of on-line training as a way of expanding 
those accessibilities. 
 
So in this budget, the technology enhanced learning portion of 
the post-secondary budget was increased by about . . . from a 
quarter of a million increased by $1.4 million to $1.65 million 
in order to expand the technology enhanced learning delivery. 
 
Also we heard, Mr. Chair, that people say to us if you’re trying 
to address a specific areas of disadvantage for some, rather than 
trying to address that by some kind of program that covers 
everyone, get focused on what you’re . . . spend the tax dollars 
most effectively by focusing them where the disadvantage is. 
 
And I thought that was good advice and consequently, Mr. 
Chair, we decided to increase the employability . . . sorry, the 
employment assistance for persons with disability program, the 
EAPD program, which provides support for persons with 
disabilities to have access to training that’s credited and leads to 
employment and is intended primarily to overcome those 
barriers related to the disabilities themselves. An increase of 25 
per cent in the budget there and by a million dollars from 4 to 
$5 million. 
 
And finally then, Mr. Chair, the advice we got from the public 
was this: they said it is legitimate to try to address directly the 
financial realities of students. And they also gave us a piece of 
advice, Mr. Speaker, that they said that approaches which are 
focused on the beginning of the study period were not as 
attractive as financial assistance which would be targeted and 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

would be perceived as a reward, it come toward the end of 
training as opposed to the beginning of training. 
 
They also said that what they would like to do is to have some 
comfort as well that their tax dollars were being used as the 
incentive for people who were getting their post-secondary 
qualifications to establish their careers here in Saskatchewan. 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we put that together and also in the 
context of the labour market forecast which was released about 
a month . . . in February, which points in this decade to the 
tightening of the labour market not only here in Saskatchewan 
but across the country. 
 
This is occurring, Mr. Chair, because there is a retirement of the 
baby boomers, and that will affect us in Saskatchewan just a 
little earlier than the rest of the country because of the relative 
ages of our populations here. But also said that there was some 
inherent wisdom in the advice we were receiving to address the 
matter of providing financial assistance preferably at the end, 
and preferably as well in a way that would be incentive for 
becoming a Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
And consequently, Mr. Chair, we concluded it would be 
prudent to introduce Canada’s first graduate tax credit that 
would be available in this calendar year, Mr. Chair. And so that 
would provide for students a benefit, a direct benefit of $350 
and implemented in this budget year at a cost of $3 million. 
 
So when I put them together, to the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, a 10.3 million in direct funding to 
institutions, 1 million increased employability assistance for 
persons with disability, 1.4 million technology enhanced 
learning; and 3 million graduate tax credit, and a total package 
of $16 million then in response to the direct question of access 
to post-secondary. And I thank the hon. member for his 
question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your answers to the 
question. I’d like to focus on the $350 tax credit that was 
brought down in the budget for students who have graduated. 
Could you explain exactly how that tax credit program is going 
to work? Also how many of your students, graduating students, 
will be affected this year by that tax credit? And has your 
department done any work in trying to estimate how many 
graduates will be staying in the province as a result of this tax 
credit. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, the assumption that we have 
made in calculating the budget for this is that about 95 per cent 
of the graduates from post-secondary this year would take it up 
this year. I point out that when the legislation introduced — 
we’ll get into the detail of that, and I know you want to — that 
it will not require the take-up to be necessarily in the year of 
graduation, although it’s capable of doing that. 
 
So we’ve assumed 95 per cent of 8,700 graduates. And the 
graduates that would be affected would be from programs of six 
months of continuous study or more, and would include then 
obviously graduates form university and SIAST programs, but 
also from private vocational schools and journey persons who 
achieve their . . . apprentices who achieve their journey person 
status. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Just to re-ask the one part of my question: has your 
department done any type of analysis as to the effect of that $350 
tax credit in students . . . graduating students’ decisions to stay in 
the province? Have you talked to student groups and asked them 
what type of an effect this would have on their future plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the consultation on it, as the hon. 
member will recognize, he participated — or not participated 
but attended a fair amount — heard from numbers in the public 
meetings that we had, including students. But also employers 
spoke, as you’ll recognize, hon. member, that employers spoke 
very favourably about it as a vehicle for recruitment in the 
province. 
 
There was not . . . there has not been a specific formal study 
that’s been done and that’s something we will be wanting to do 
to evaluate. But it is . . . it seemed to be another reason for 
establishing one’s career here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
There are some pretty attractive circumstances, I think right 
now, that I anticipate will be reinforced by this. 
 
I can quote for you specifically the study done by SIAST of 
1998 graduates, done six months after graduation. And that 
showed of those who were wanting to enter the labour force 
after graduation 90 per cent six months after graduation were 
employed. In excess of 80 per cent were employed in their field, 
precisely in their field of study and 90 per cent of them were 
actually employed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We see that as a very attractive phenomenon that’s been 
consistent for the last little while for sure, and something that’s 
important to work to retain and see continued. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. As you mentioned 
you had the series of meetings in the month of January, 15 across 
the province, and I attended over half of them. And as you said, 
we heard a lot of good suggestions come out of those . . . 
presented at those meetings. There were suggestions from various 
sectors of society: individuals, people on social services trying to 
get into post-secondary education, representation from union 
groups as to how we could incorporate more co-op programs in 
skills training and those sorts of things. 
 
I wonder, do you have a cost on . . . the cost of conducting those 
meetings that took place in January? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’ll have to get a precise 
calculation for the hon. member and provide that as soon as 
possible. I don’t have that here. It will be a minimal number. 
 
The reason I say that is because the only costs that were 
actually involved would be costs like travel and rental of 
meeting halls — that sort of thing. The people who were 
involved were all people who were in the employ of the 
department. So there were . . . there weren’t any what I would 
consider to be extraordinary costs that would be involved. 
 
But we’ll provide that . . . I’ll provide that number for you as 
soon as I can. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to present another 
question to the minister. I realize you’ve mentioned here this 
afternoon that there is a number of items and issues that you’ve 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

dealt with as a result of those meetings. 
 
I’m wondering is the minister and his department going to 
prepare a more comprehensive report of the . . . of all the 
suggestions that were put forward at these consultation 
meetings? And if you are, if the minister is going to be doing 
that, when will that be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. There is not 
and has not ever been a plan to publish a report as such — a 
final report. 
 
When we were holding the public meetings, as I explained over 
and over, is that the final report in effect would be the . . . 
would be ultimately in the decisions that would be found in the 
budget. And that was certainly . . . and I’ve outlined that 
response. 
 
However, having said that, I would remind the hon. member 
that one of the things that was done throughout the 
consultations is that the ideas that came forward were all 
recorded, placed on the web site, so that they were available for 
anyone who was interested at all to be able to see specifically 
the kinds of ideas and advice that was provided to us — 
whether it was from students or educators or families of 
students or people who have just called themselves nothing 
more sophisticated than interested taxpayers. And that was an 
ongoing exercise that provided for people, and still does, the 
ability to see what kind of ideas were brought forward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would like to move on to asking the 
minister and his department officials some questions dealing 
with the whole area of student loans. 
 
How many students in all post-secondary institutions, both 
public and private, will qualify for student loans or have 
qualified in this past academic year? And what is the average 
size of the student loan that those students may happen to have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, and he may 
want to . . . I may want to get clarification of the second part of 
his question. 
 
In the 1999-2000 loan year — a loan year runs from August to 
July — and so the loan year that we’re currently in, I think 
that’s what you’re asking for? Yes. There are 17,200 students 
who are assisted. And their loans are in the amounts . . . The 
hon. member will recognize that when a student takes out a 
student loan it’s really two loans. One is the Canada student 
loan; the other is the Saskatchewan student loan. And so to 
report those amounts separately. The amount of federal student 
loans in this fiscal year is $71 million, and provincial loans is 
$59 million. 
 
And then there are loan reductions, Mr. Chair, in the amount of 
$39.5 million. Those are reductions of benefits that occur to 
students from their loans as a result of a combination of the 
Saskatchewan student bursary, the Canadian millennium 
scholarship bursary, and the Canada and the Saskatchewan 
study grants and remission programs. 
 
(1630) 
 

I‘m not sure what you’re . . . can you just clarify for me what 
you were asking for when you said the average . . . you were 
wanting to know the average and I wasn’t just sure just 
precisely what it was, and if you can clarify a little we’ll do our 
best to answer that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, the question I was 
asking is what is the average amount of a student loan in this 
academic year? If we have 17,200 students with student loans, 
what is the size of . . . what does that average out to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I’m not sure if this is the information the 
hon. member is looking for. The average student has a debt loan 
of $12,500. But that would not be the amount of money 
borrowed in this year. That’s when you put all of the total debt 
together that student’s carrying on student loans. And so that 
will obviously range from some students who, for example, are 
in a program of, say, a year or less to students who would be in 
a four- or five-year program. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister: the minister mentioned 
that there is a $39 million student loan reduction programs made 
up of the Saskatchewan student bursary program, the millennium 
scholarship program, and one other program. I wonder if the 
minister and his staff could provide some detail as to the amount 
of reduction in each one of those programs; and compare that to 
previous years, particularly the Saskatchewan student bursary 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I would provide for the hon. 
member, I think is what he’s asking for, for the current year that 
we’re in and then our projected or estimated . . . our estimates 
regarding the next loan year but within this government fiscal 
year: for the 1999-2000 loan year — the one we’re in — and 
the Saskatchewan bursaries, the bursaries provided are $18.2 
million this year, and we’re estimating that to increase to $19.8 
million for the next student loan year. 
 
On the Saskatchewan study grant for the 1999-2000 low year 
. . . loan year, I should say, $4.5 million; and estimated for the 
2000-2001, 5.0 million. On the Canada study grant for the 
1999-2000 loan year, 4.5 million in forgiveness; and estimated 
for next year, $4.9 million. 
 
On the Saskatchewan remission provided in the 1999-2000 
year, loan year, $2.46 million; and for next year, 2001, $2.63 
million. 
 
And on the Canada millennium scholarship provided, that’s a 
constant $9.775 million for the 1999-2000 and projected for the 
next year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, there has been quite a 
bit of confusion in the minds of students and parents as to 
exactly how the millennium scholarship is administered in this 
province. Some of the students, many students I might say, 
were under the impression that they would receive this 
millennium scholarship and in the past they have also received 
a Saskatchewan bursary, and so that they would have a net gain. 
In fact when they received their annual statement of student 
loan, they realized that one was removed and they were really 
no better off. 
 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

I wonder, in the interests of clarity, would the minister clarify 
exactly how the millennium scholarship is administered in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the millennium scholarship . . . 
and I want to acknowledge that there has been some confusion 
about it and I . . . in retrospect my advice to the federal 
government in introducing the millennium scholarship would 
have been to call it something more accurate which would be a 
millennium bursary. I really would have preferred that that 
would have been the terminology used because I think it would 
have — for those students who found themselves feeling a bit 
confused about it — would have helped to clarify what it was 
intended to do and what it does. 
 
The Saskatchewan bursary program was expanded, enhanced 
here in Saskatchewan actually a year in advance of the 
introduction of the millennium scholarship, and provided for 
Saskatchewan students an advantage that the millennium 
scholarship then continued a year before the millennium 
scholarships came into play in this loan year. And 
Saskatchewan signed an agreement on May 7, 1999 in 
anticipation of that and introduced enhanced student bursaries 
for the 1998 year. And then the 1999 agreement came into 
place. 
 
It provides then, through the Canadian Millennium Scholarship 
Foundation, funds which provide for bursaries of 2,000 to 
$4,000 to students and intended to be targeted to those with the 
greatest need. 
 
And what happens then is that when a student receives a 
millennium scholarship then their provincial student loan is 
reduced by the amount of that scholarship, so that it becomes 
for them an amount that is truly of that value for them because 
it’s reducing the amount of debt that the student would be 
carrying on the student loan. And I think, Mr. Chair, that will 
describe how it came into place and how it works to benefit 
students here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, another 
question dealing with the student loan, the whole student loan 
area and the administration of student loan. I understand that the 
federal government has not been able to renegotiate an 
agreement with the chartered banks to administer the student 
loan. 
 
I know there’s a lot of students are wondering is there going to 
be a student loan program? If so, who is going to administer it? 
Where do I get my application forms? Will the monies be 
coming forward on schedule as they have in the past? And all 
those types of questions. 
 
I wonder if the minister could clarify that whole area of 
administration in the student loan for the, for the upcoming 
academic year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, the question that the hon. 
member asked is a very important one, and one of concern to 
many students . . . as we’ve already talked about the number of 
students who, who look to student loans as a way of financing 
their post-secondary education. 
 

I think the most . . . probably the single, most important thing to 
have understood very clearly is that the application forms for 
next year’s student loans will be available June 1. And that 
clearly implies that there will continue to be a student loan 
program. 
 
That is a firm commitment of both the federal and provincial 
governments. We continue to work together. We and other 
provinces obviously all have a strong interest in the federal 
government’s continuation of the Canada student loan program. 
And we continue to be in contact and work together with them 
in that regard on an ongoing basis. 
 
It’s a priority area of concern obviously for the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. And the 
important thing, I think, is to clarify although some of the 
precise details as to just how it will be delivered have to be 
worked out. From a student’s point of view, it’s not likely to 
feel very different than it currently does, and the important 
thing is to assure students that the Canada student loan, 
Saskatchewan student loan programs will be continuing in the 
next academic year beginning August 1. And the application 
forms are anticipated to be ready and available as of June 1. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think students will be 
somewhat reassured by the minister’s answer. I think there was 
a certain amount of apprehension out there, and I guess until 
they actually see those funds deposited into their bank accounts 
for the first month, they will, you know . . . I think at that point 
in time they will hopefully realize that the program, as we all 
hope, will continue to aid students in accessing post-secondary 
education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to ask the minister, in the budget that 
was presented very recently in this Assembly, the minister’s 
government saw fit to reduce or eliminate the interest-free, 
six-month interest-free period which students had before they 
had to start paying their interest on their student loans. And I 
realize that was only on a portion of their student loan, but quite 
often for students who haven’t found a job, every dollar that can 
be saved in interest costs is very important to them. 
 
And I wonder, has the department . . . does the department have 
any programs in place to help those students who are unable to 
seek or to obtain employment, to help them recover at least 
some of the benefits that were lost by the cancellation of that 
program? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member quite correctly 
identifies the relationship between the Saskatchewan student 
loan and the Canada student loan. The average student who’s 
graduating with a student loan will find that typically a third or 
less of the total debt load, it will be on the Saskatchewan 
student loan. And so he quite correctly identifies that. 
 
There is an interest relief program that is available for students 
regarding their Saskatchewan student loan. And the way it 
works is this, is that at the point of six months past graduation, 
if the student is not employed, then he or she can apply to have 
. . . to receive the benefit of the interest relief program. 
 



April 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

What that means is that for up to 18 months — so it can be a 
period that long — that no interest will accumulate that’s 
covered by the province, and that no payment is required under 
Saskatchewan student loan. So that’s the program that’s . . . that 
is there available for students regarding their Saskatchewan 
student loan if they’re not employed at that point. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the minister for his 
response to the question. I would like to ask the minister a 
question with regards to the cancelled partnership program. The 
minister indicated in the answer to a written question that there 
was a cost saving to his department of $777,000. 
 
What I would like to hear from the minister is how many 
employers participated in the last . . . last year in this program? 
How many . . . what was the number of students that were able 
to obtain summer employment as a result of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I obviously appreciate the 
enthusiasm and the interest from your side of the House there, 
Mr. Chair, and we’ll anticipate that continuing. 
 
I can’t . . . I don’t have here the number of the employers, but 
the number of jobs that were touched by the program is 1,524. 
And just to put that into a context, Mr. Chair, it’s important to I 
think understand the relationship between the Saskatchewan 
partnerships program and the federal summer employment 
program which is also there available for employers. 
 
The Saskatchewan program provided a dollar twenty an hour to 
the employer for wage subsidy. The federal program provides a 
minimum of $2.50 an hour and as much as $5.60 an hour. It’s 
quite a substantial difference between the benefits provided by 
the provincials compared to the federal. 
 
And therefore I guess it would not be surprising that 64 per cent 
of the employers who had applied for the provincial program 
ultimately withdrew their application, said they didn’t want it 
— the provincial program — because the federal program was 
more attractive. 
 
So there was a substantial . . . there was a very substantial 
message in terms of the attractiveness of the provincial program 
compared to the federal program. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I thank the minister for his 
answer. I would like to comment that although the number of 
jobs may not sound as . . . or 1,524 may not sound like a lot of 
jobs to those students who were able to get a summer job as a 
result of this program, I’m sure it was a very important program 
to them. I know there was a number of community 
organizations and towns and villages who hired students out of 
these programs. And to them, it was an important program. 
 
I realize that in the budget of $4 million, that $777,000 is 
perhaps not a large amount of money if you look at it in that 
context. However, if you look at it from the individual basis 
perspective, money earned by those students during the 
summer, it was very important to them. And I’m sure there are 
concerned students out there wondering where they may be 
getting jobs this summer. 
 
Will students see a direct benefit from the elimination of this 

program? And if so, in what areas will they see that benefit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just in response to the hon. 
member, when we’ve looked at the take-up of the provincial 
program, although $777,000, depending on your point of view, 
sounds like a lot of money or not a lot — it still seems to me 
that there is a responsibility to be prudent fiscal managers of the 
tax dollars that we’re spending. 
 
As you pointed out and we both said at the beginning of the 
estimates here, the task of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training is an extremely important one and extremely 
challenging with resources available. And that says to me that 
there is an ongoing and continuous responsibility to be ensuring 
that you’re spending those tax dollars as prudently as you 
possibly can. 
 
Although there were 1,500 jobs that were touched by it, just 
given the rejection of the program by employers who had 
originally applied for it and then said that they didn’t want it, it 
really causes one to question whether the job was actually 
creating many new jobs at all that otherwise would not have 
been created with the dollar twenty amount per hour that we’re 
able to provide. 
 
There’d be certainly no doubt that it would be providing a 
subsidy. But whether it was actually stimulating jobs that 
otherwise would not have been there is really questionable; and 
therefore deemed appropriate, given the much richer federal 
program, to allow Saskatchewan employers to take advantage 
of that. Because they were clearly telling us in their response 
that that was their view and to redirect the funds to more 
prudent use. 
 
When you asked your question, I couldn’t hear it specifically 
and I just ask if you wouldn’t mind repeating the question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly I would be happy to 
repeat the question for the minister’s benefit. 
 
Those savings of $777,000 that will be saved by the elimination 
of the partnership program, will those funds be redirected 
specifically in such a fashion that students will benefit from 
them directly, or will they just be put back into general 
revenues and absorbed in the overall budget of the department? 
That was the gist of my question, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it’s my view and just picking up 
from what I commented without having heard . . . being able to 
hear your question, we will already talked about some of the 
direct benefit ways that have resulted in increased funding in 
the budget. And so . . . I can rename them if you like, but the 
funding to institutions we’ve talked about, the support for 
disabled . . . people with disabilities, technology-enhanced 
learning in the rural and northern areas, the graduate tax credit 
— these are all the things that directly benefit students. 
 
And so this becomes part of the way of being able to afford 
some of the things that you deem to be a more prudent 
expenditure of the tax dollars to achieve our objectives. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would now like to turn my 
questions for a moment — and I realize the hour is late and 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2000 

we’re nearing adjournment — but I would like to ask the 
minister one question in the area of skills training. His 
department administers a whole myriad of programs that are 
aimed at skills training and employability and all those sorts of 
things. 
 
I wonder, could the minister list for me today what programs in 
the area of skills training does his department administer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The answer to the hon. member’s question, 
Mr. Chair, is a combination of things. There will be funds 
through the skills training — we referred to that — that will 
find themselves flowing through to training for Saskatchewan 
people in a combination of ways. 
 
One is through the JobStart Future Skills program, which is 
focused on training for direct skill application. The multi-party 
training plan, where the department is working together with 
institutions and industry to develop training programs targeted 
to anticipated needs in the province so that we’re doing the best 
we can to provide Saskatchewan training for Saskatchewan 
people to take Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Grants to . . . some of it will be in the form of grants to SIAST 
as our technical delivery system and which is made . . . of 
which great use is made by the regional colleges for delivery in 
the regional areas, and the colleges will be involved along with 
the career and employment services centres in identifying the 
needs and the priorities. 
 
And then also through the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission there would be funds that are directed 
there to provide training towards journey person’s status. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think we’re probably about as far as we’re going to 
go today, and I want to thank the hon. member for his questions 
and we’ll look forward to continuing this at another time. 
Unless he wanted to vote it off right now. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 
 


