





























































Hansard: March 29, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 309 
 March 29, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member for Estevan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege for me to 
stand in the House today and present petitions on the important 
issue of taxation. And I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the personal income tax review committee’s 
recommendation to expand the provincial sales tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds of petitions here from Swift 
Current and across the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I apologize to the hon. member from Swift 
Current for having misidentified him as being from Estevan. I 
apologize. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions presented 
on December 17 have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) 
they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province praying that your Hon. 
Assembly cause the government to overrule the Parkland 
Health Board’s decision with regard to the Blaine Lake 
Medical Clinic; and 
 
Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly 
repeal the personal injury benefits contained in the 
automobile insurance Act; and 
 
Citizens of the province praying that the Assembly cause 
the provincial government to withdraw from the AIDA 
program; and 
 
Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly 
cause the Minister of Education to stop the closures of 
classes in Qu’Appelle. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Visiting Clerk 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, ladies and gentlemen, before I 
call for introduction of guests this afternoon, it is my pleasure 
today to introduce to members of the Assembly, a new face at 
our Table. Ms. Donna Bryce is a Table officer and committee 
Clerk in the Legislative Assembly of Ontario; and also serves as 

the Legislative Coordinator of the Ontario Legislative 
Internship program. 
 
Ms. Bryce is on a three-month attachment to our Assembly. 
During this time she will assist the Clerks with Table duties, 
administrative responsibilities, and is serving as the primary 
Clerk to the Special Committee on Tobacco Control. 
 
Please welcome Ms. Bryce to our Table.  
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 

The Speaker: — I would also, with your indulgence, also 
introduce the pages for this session to the members of the 
Assembly and to you ladies and gentlemen. And I’ll ask that the 
pages stand as I introduce them: Rachel Birns, Charla 
Borowski, Carla Huber, Brooke Johnston, and Terry Rushworth 
— your pages for the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice that there’s 
a few guests here today. And so I’d like to . . . rather than 
starting in the back left corner, I’ll start by introducing a group 
of students that we have joining us here today from Campbell 
Collegiate. 
 
Campbell is a high school in my riding. They’re seated in your 
west gallery and there are 50 of them here today. This is an 
important exercise. And I had a chance to meet and answer 
some questions earlier today with them. 
 
They have great interest in what the Minister of Finance will be 
announcing in the next couple of hours. And I know that they 
will undoubtedly have a lot of questions for me after that. So if 
you would join with me in welcoming the students. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen, at this time before we 
go on with our business again if I might, I would like to 
introduce legislative interns visiting our province who are from 
Ontario. They are seated in my gallery. The program, now in its 
24th year, brings eight recent university graduates to Queen’s 
Park every year to work with backbench members from both 
government and opposition. 
 
The interns provide non-partisan staff assistance while gaining 
insight into the provincial political process. As part of the 
program, the interns visit other legislatures to broaden their 
understanding of parliamentary institutions in Canadian politics. 
 
I would ask them to stand one at a time as I call out their name: 
Emily Bain, Jennifer Harrington, Stephanie Lu, Kevin Machida, 
Brandy Miller, Chris Morley, Andrew Owen, and Priya Suagh. 
Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Accomplishments of Liberal Leader 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today on 
behalf of the official opposition to congratulate the Leader of 
the Liberal Party on all of his accomplishments since the 
election last fall. 
 
I’m sure you are well aware, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member sent 
a letter to the editor in commemoration of the six-month 
anniversary of the coalition government. And I would like to 
highlight some of the comments he made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is taking credit for the 
grossly inadequate farm aid package, so I can only assume that 
he is proud of the fact that farmers have not yet seen a single 
penny of money. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party goes on to say he’s proud to 
end the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. So, Mr. 
Speaker, he must be proud that this unfair union preference 
tendering policy will actually be in place for another year, and 
then will be replaced by even more draconian piece of 
legislation. 
 
One other area where the member opposite has taken great pride 
is in the utility rate review commission. Mr. Speaker, you must 
beam with pride to see Saskatchewan residents dig deeper into 
their pockets to pay more for the SaskTel and SaskEnergy bills. 
 
Lastly the member opposite is also very proud of their 
accomplishments in the health care area. For example: closing 
the Carrot River Hospital, a $30 million deficit in the Regina 
Health District, the closure of an operating room in the Regina 
General, and last but not least, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
Saskatchewan’s longest hospital waiting list in Canada. 
 
Since the Leader of the Liberal Party has accomplished so much 
since the election, Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier should just 
resign and let the proud member take over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Hi-tech Announcements 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the only member of 
this legislature who has won her seat four times since last 
September and as the first Saskatchewan MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) to be sworn in in the new millennium, 
I’m more pleased than you can imagine to be addressing you 
today, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not what I want to talk about. 
 
While the Saskatchewan Party was distracted by the results in 
the Saskatoon Southeast constituency, the Saskatchewan 
economy and particularly the businesses and workers of 
Saskatoon were moving along just fine. 
 
This month we proudly hosted the most successful Canadian 
Brier ever. In return, the supporters of the Brier gave our local 
economy quite a boost — a fair trade in anyone’s books. 
 
South downtown redevelopment is moving ahead; residential 

construction is booming. I am especially proud, Mr. Speaker, 
that Saskatoon continues to be a leader in high-tech 
development. More and more firms recognize the value of our 
most congenial research and development setting. 
 
Just in the last few weeks, Calian Technologies has landed an 
$8 million contract for a satellite delivery system and 
PharmaDerm Laboratories will expand to develop new medical 
products. There are opportunities, major opportunities, in 
Saskatoon. 
 
With news like this to report, it’s good to be back here in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. I’m here for a good time, and a long 
time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Respect for Budget Address and Response 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
welcome everyone to the eleventh sitting day of the first session 
of the twenty-fourth Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have many traditions, practices, and rules in 
this Assembly. These traditions and rules make it possible to 
have an exchange of ideas and to provide the government 
people have voted for and elected. 
 
Our House at times can be very boisterous and even raucous. 
There are other times when we are very solemn. This 
Assembly, however, is always respectful of the institution of 
parliament and of the elected members. 
 
Today is budget day, one of our most important days in the 
legislative calendar. During the delivery of the budget by the 
Minister of Finance, the members and guests show respect to 
our legislature and to its traditions by listening attentively from 
their seats. There likely will be demonstrations of pleasure and 
displeasure by members during the address as is the tradition in 
this House. 
 
Upon completion of the minister’s presentation, the opposition 
has an opportunity to respond to the budget address. This aspect 
of our democracy is as important as the budget presentation and 
deserves equal respect by all members and guests. 
 
As a show of respect to our democratic institution, the 
Saskatchewan legislature, I ask that all members and guests 
remain in their seats until the both the budget address and the 
official opposition response are completed before leaving the 
Assembly floor. 
 
Thank you for your co-operation in respecting the democratic 
process of the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Growth and Expansion in The Battlefords 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know how 
much hon. members always enjoy hearing me talk about The 
Battlefords, especially today with our mayor present. To 
properly describe all the great things going on in my 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

constituency is impossible in the allotted time, but I’ll try and 
contain all the good news to 90 seconds. 
 
First, Mifab Manufacturing celebrated its 10th anniversary. The 
people of North Battleford celebrated the grand opening of a 
brand new Wal-Mart, the re-openings of an upgraded Farm 
Credit Corporation and the North West Regional College. We 
had the expansion of the Real Canadian Wholesale Club, 
Lewchuk and Associates, Fabricland, and Canadian Tire. 
 
North Battleford’s newly created regional economic 
development authority will be tested early and often. 
Construction is now underway in our downtown core and I 
continually hear rumours that a number of 
nationally-recognized retail outlets are looking to locate in The 
Battlefords. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, thank you for this opportunity to 
spread the good word from North Battleford. I am certainly 
looking forward to a budget that will point to a brighter future 
for The Battlefords and all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Johner Brothers Big Winners 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize the achievements of the Johner Brothers. Mr. 
Speaker, recently the Johner Brothers received several awards 
at the Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards held in 
Saskatoon. Brad Johner is a constituent of mine. He and his 
brother Ken have worked very hard in this competitive industry 
but despite the hectic schedule and travel they continue to place 
their family first, and I’m so proud of them. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
everyone to join me in offering our congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Previous Budgets 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a few minutes our 
many gathered guests and MLAs (Members of the Legislative 
Assembly) will be hearing the Minister of Finance deliver 
Saskatchewan’s seventh consecutive balanced budget, Mr. 
Speaker — lucky seven. 
 
I predict this budget will balance the priorities of debt 
reduction, program enhancement, and tax fairness — much like 
all the budgets that we’ve delivered under various Finance 
ministers, the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, and the patron 
saint of Finance ministers, Ed Tchorzewski. Several of those 
ministers have had sage and steady help from associate 
ministers John Penner and Ned Shillington. 
 
I mention all the Finance ministers of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, because this budget will be very much of a piece with 
those that came before it. It will bear the stamp of the member 
from Saskatoon Mount Royal and it will show its kinship with 
his predecessors. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, this budget will, I dare say, present 
valuable tax reduction — fair, targeted, and affordable tax 
reduction — just as in 1997 when the PST (provincial sales tax) 

was reduced by 2 cents, then last year by a further cent; just as 
in 1998 when the personal income tax was reduced as it was 
again last year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, every year since 1992 
we’ve had targeted, effective tax adjustments. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, today we get not a new book, but a 
new chapter in a continuing and very happy story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Project on Racism 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
distinct pleasure today to rise in this Assembly on behalf of five 
of my constituents from Saskatchewan Rivers. Mr. Speaker, 
Lauren Buness, Tami Brandrick, Mandy Ethier, Terra 
Lennox-Zepp, and Lindsay Ward are all grade 11 students at 
Wesmor Community High School in Prince Albert. 
 
These young ladies prepared a project which included a puppet 
show geared toward a young audience. This show depicts a 
horse and an alligator to illustrate how racism can be overcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a great deal of thought, effort, and energy went 
into their pictures and notes. The story tells how the horse and 
alligator don’t like each other at first because of their 
differences. But once they discover they actually have a lot in 
common, they become friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lauren, Tami, Mandy, Terra and Lindsay have 
given these anti-racism workshops and puppet shows at various 
elementary schools for children in kindergarten. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to announce that they have been travelling 
to 10 cities across Canada, including Toronto, Vancouver, and 
Ottawa, to give their presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, racism can not and will not be tolerated in our 
society and I am pleased to see today’s youth are indeed 
spreading such a positive message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating Lauren Buness, Tami Brandrick, Mandy Ethier, 
Terra Lennox-Zepp, and Lindsay Ward on their remarkable 
achievement. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Income Tax Cuts 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to be 
back and have a chance to hold the government accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question of course is for the Minister of 
Finance. Well, Mr. Minister, today’s the day. Today’s the day 
we find out whether you actually heard the wake-up call you 
got last September or whether you hit the snooze button and 
rolled over and went back to sleep. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers want you to cut their income tax 
without increasing the PST. That’s the message. Pretty clear. 
The question is: did you get that message? 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

Mr. Minister, will you keep your election promise? Will you 
deliver a budget that cuts income tax without expanding the 
PST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
obviously will be delivering this much anticipated budget very 
shortly and of course the question that the Leader of the 
Opposition asks will be answered very concisely at that time. 
 
But I can tell the Leader of the Opposition, as I can tell the 
members of this Assembly, that this budget will be in the 
tradition of the budgets since 1991. They will be balanced; they 
will be compassionate; they’ll be fair. They’ll be dealing with 
the debt; they’ll be dealing with all the issues that concern the 
people of Saskatchewan in health care and education. And they 
will add up. They’ll make sense and they’ll add up. Something 
that your party and your predecessor party was not able ever to 
do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, we won’t get into rhetoric, but we will mention that 
every other jurisdiction in the country is cutting income tax 
without increasing other taxes including the PST. 
 
But that isn’t the nature of this government is it? I know it’s 
hard for the Finance minister, it’s hard for him to put a dollar 
back into someone’s pocket without reaching into the other 
pocket and grabbing it back out again. He just can’t help 
himself, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, did your government resist the temptation this 
time? Or are you going to do what you always do — give us a 
tax cut with one hand, and then pick our pockets with the other. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the Leader of the Opposition for the question. 
 
Ever since we balanced the budget, in 1994-95 I believe it was 
. . . by the way, the first government, provincial or federal, in 
Canada in recent history to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And in the face of what I may say, 
when we inherited government in 1991, the largest per capita, 
per capita debt of any province in Canada, thanks to those 
people sitting over there. 
 
Since we balanced, we are able to do a balanced approach in a 
budget. And I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, with the surplus 
dollar a portion has gone to debt reduction, a portion has gone 
to health care and education, significant programs for people. 
And ever since we’ve balanced, we have reduced the taxes. 
 
But I’ll tell you something that we’ve not done. We’ve not done 
what Ontario has done — cut taxes and continue to run huge 
deficits adding to the debt. This is a responsible government 

with a responsible budget as you’ll hear in the next few 
minutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course you 
know the Premier, both as a minister in a previous government 
and in his own government, have also increased the debt of this 
province. 
 
But Mr. Premier, taxpayers are expecting tax cuts. Not soon, 
not about now, but right now. And let’s not forget you’ve 
already increased SaskTel and SaskEnergy rates by $40 million 
this year so if you cut taxes by even $40 million you just get 
taxpayers back to where they were. So clearly the tax cut in this 
year’s budget must be much more than $40 million to have any 
real impact whatsoever. 
 
The people of our province can hardly wait. Quite frankly, I can 
hardly wait. Mr. Premier, are you going to follow the lead of 
other provinces? Will you deliver a major tax cut this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can only do . . . and I 
know the hon. member, being a former member of the House of 
Commons, knows that the rules of the House are such that the 
budget will be delivered in the next few minutes. And I can’t 
reveal the aspects of the budget; it’s not my job. That honour 
falls on the Minister of Finance. 
 
But I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that unlike anything 
that the Conservatives and their successors, the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party sitting opposite have done, this budget will 
not indebt the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
what it will do, it will be budget of growth and opportunity and 
optimism in the greatest province in the greatest country in 
which to live. Just hold your horses, you’re going to hear a 
fantastic budget in the next few moments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Madam Minister, thanks to eight years of disastrous 
management by your NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government, we are staring at a full-blown health care crisis. 
Quotes like “We’ve hit the wall. The health system is on the 
ropes.” Madam Minister, if those words sound familiar to you, 
they should. That’s how you described your health care system 
just last week. 
 
The federal government has already announced $150 million in 
one-time health care funding for Saskatchewan. Madam 
Minister, will the province follow suit? Will this year’s budget 
include an increase in funding over what health districts 
received last year that at least covers the cost of inflation, or 
will your message to health districts be, zap, you’re frozen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again this is in the 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

question of wanting us, as government, to try to reveal what’s in 
the budget in advance, and of course the member knows that 
that will be happening, as I say again, in the next short few 
moments. 
 
We all know that the federal government needs to come up with 
more money for health care. I think even you folks on the 
opposite side will acknowledge that. We need also to make sure 
that health care for the 21st century is designed to be that — an 
effective health care system for the 21st century. 
 
What we do not need is what your party advocated prior to the 
last election as reported in the StarPhoenix in reviewing your 
platform. Quote: October 31, 1998, referring to your plan: 
 

It has no plans to address concerns in health care. There’s 
no prescription to cure the bed closures, surgical waiting 
lists, nursing shortages. All they will do is hire an 
ombudsman to whom people can complain. 
 

That is your program, and zap, you’re frozen for five years. Not 
one penny extra for health care. That was what your leader and 
what you campaigned on. That’s not us. We support and defend 
medicare in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, we’ll see 
soon enough who does the zap, you’re frozen trick in this 
legislature. 
 
Madam Minister, with this year’s health care district deficits 
running in excess of $50 million — this year alone — isn’t it 
time to admit you’ve seriously neglected the health care 
system? Isn’t it time you clean up the mess your government 
has created? 
 
Madam Minister, will you be announcing in today’s budget 
proper funding for health care? Will you be announcing a 
value-for-money audit and a complete review of the system so 
you can fix the mess that you’ve created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want all members of 
this Legislative Assembly and the public to note what the 
official opposition, the so-called Saskatchewan Party, is 
advocating. They want us to have a value for audit conducted 
on the health care system. 
 
What they want to do is they want . . . what they want to do is 
bring out all of the pencil sharpeners — all the pencil 
sharpeners after we gave 10 per cent last year and 9 per cent the 
year before that time — what they would have us do is bring 
out all the pencil sharpeners and monitor every nurse’s work 
time, monitor every doctor’s time, monitor everybody who 
works as an orderly, monitor everybody Texas style as an audit 
on top of the five-year audit. 
 
Because that is the way that they believe in health care . . . They 
believe that if you freeze the spending, you can find the savings 
by having a Texas-style audit. They believe in two-tier 
medicine, private medicine, and I tell you that is not our 

position at all. We believe in the five principles of health care 
and this budget will reflect it. 
 
No, not zap you’re frozen as you’re advocating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Funding 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, it is great to finally get 
a glimpse of you here in the legislature. We’ve been trying to 
meet for a number of months. Unfortunately it hasn’t been 
possible because you’ve had to cancel every one of the eight 
meetings we’ve had set up. 
 
Mr. Minister, it may come as news to you that education is a 
priority for Saskatchewan families, even if it isn’t for your NDP 
government. Thanks to your new-found NDP friends, education 
funding has been cut by more than $380 million since 1991. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you follow through on your election promise 
to make education a priority. Will you provide enough funding 
to cover the cost of the new teachers’ contract as well as 
increased costs for out-of-scope workers, special needs 
children, rising utility costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this budget going to show your real 
commitment to education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Again this question is in the line of 
the previous questions about what’s going to happen in the 
budget, and I’m answering the questions on behalf of the 
government. Because as I tell the hon. member, as I tell the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the Minister of Finance will be 
telling the people of this legislature very, very shortly what’s in 
education. 
 
I want to tell you that we are committed to the best in K to 12, 
the best in post-secondary education, and the previous budgets 
have so reflected this. 
 
What we are not committed to is your second five-year freeze. 
You had a first five-year freeze on health care where there was 
not to be one extra penny for health care. That’s what you 
campaigned on. And you also campaigned on the fact that 
there’d be not one extra penny for education — not one extra 
penny for education. That’s the only way that they could 
finance their so-called tax cuts that they campaigned on in the 
election of September 16. In the consequence, if we had 
adopted your platform, K to 12 and post-secondary would have 
been decimated. 
 
We believe in a knowledge-based society and economy, and 
this budget will reflect that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if this budget is going to reflect 
the government’s continued commitment to K to 12 education, 
everybody should be really worried. 
 
I have a second question for the Education minister. I know that 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

over the past six months he’s managed to squeeze in the odd 
school visit, and I’m sure that he’s noticed that things are being 
held together by a lot of duct tape and binder twine. That’s 
because the NDP has ignored the capital needs of school 
divisions for eight years. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it time to make a real commitment to 
education. Can school divisions expect to have their capital 
budgets increased this year or will your NDP government 
continue to allow our school system to fall apart at the seams? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The coalition government of the Liberals and the New 
Democrats are committed to education. That is one of the 
foundations behind this coalition which we have arranged and 
which I believe is working very, very well; working very well 
to the advantage of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
But I repeat again that we have never campaigned — the 
Liberals never did and the New Democratic Party never 
campaigned once — on freezing health care. 
 
And if the hon. member from Kelvington is so committed to the 
future of education, I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker, her 
platform in the last election campaign as contained right here in 
this pamphlet. I defy her or anybody in this Legislative 
Assembly, either as a sitting member or anywhere in the public 
or anybody watching on television, to find one mention of the 
word education anywhere. That’s how much they care about 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Taxation of Off-Reserve Purchases 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, since our 
founding convention in 1997, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
calling for tax fairness. That means, among other things, 
requiring that First Nations persons pay the PST on purchases 
made off reserve. That is the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party; that is the position of the Canadian taxpayers association; 
that is the position of the Vicq report; and that is the position of 
the vast majority of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Minister, will today’s budget adopt the Saskatchewan Party 
position on tax fairness for First Nations persons? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question is 
predicated on the government, the coalition government 
adopting a platform commitment of the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party. That’s not to say that there aren’t some ideas in the 
platform — very few as they are — that merit some 
consideration. There are one or two that merit some 
consideration, and where we can get a good idea, even from the 
Saskatchewan Party, we’ll adopt it. 
 
But I simply indicate to the hon. member opposite what will 
take place on this particular issue again will be announced in 
the next few minutes by the Minister of Finance when he gives 
his report. This is a contentious matter and it’s one which has 
meritorious arguments on all sides. 

It was Mr. Vicq’s committee which in fact spoke to the issue; 
Mr. Vicq’s committee which did the analytical study and the 
analysis behind this — not to say that the Saskatchewan Party 
has spoken on it. But it is the Vicq analysis that I think we will 
be looking at and have been looking at plus all the other input 
from the community at large in deciding this budget. 
 
I say to the hon. member opposite, in just a few more minutes it 
will all be out before the public and then you can make your 
comment as to whether it’s good or bad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has always been against our 
position on tax fairness even though every other jurisdiction in 
Canada charges the PST on off-reserve purchases. The NDP has 
called this policy unfair. They said that it was illegal. They said 
it violates the treaties. They said it was an attack on First 
Nations persons. In fact, they stopped just short of calling it 
racist. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit today that you are wrong. Does 
your budget adopt the Saskatchewan Party position on tax 
fairness for First Nations persons? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to 
get into the particulars, the wordplay about the Saskatchewan 
Party position. In a sense it’s . . . I suppose has some merit. I 
have here a document by WEFA, which is being used very 
extensively by the Saskatchewan Party, “Sharing 
Saskatchewan’s Fiscal Dividend.” This was released in August 
of 1999, just prior to the election. 
 
By the way I might add, parenthetically speaking, that at the 
time that they released the report, the headline in the 
Leader-Post was, “Province tops in productivity growth.” 
According to whom? A study by WEFA Canada Ltd., the very 
group that the members opposite used against us. 
 
Take a look at this paper, Mr. Speaker, and again you’ll see 
absolutely no mention of the issue that she claims credit for. 
The point that I want to say to you, sir, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
members of the House, and to that member in particular, is wait 
until the budget is delivered. This is a budget of hope, 
prosperity, and it is optimism brimming to the full, showing 
Saskatchewan is the most dynamic, most progressive, positive 
province in the country in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Additional Police Officers 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question this afternoon is for the 
Minister of Justice. During the last provincial election campaign 
the NDP promised to get tough on crime. They promised to 
provide funding to hire another 200 RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) and municipal officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Minister of Justice is simple: 
will there be funding allocated in this provincial budget for 
these 200 additional police officers in Saskatchewan? 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I guess I’ve got to say it over again 
about waiting for a few more minutes. But I’d ask the members 
of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at the tone of the 
questions put forward by the Saskatchewan Party: cut taxes, 
spend more on health, spend more on education, spend more for 
the police officers, have a Texas-style audit on health care, 
spend here, spend there, willy-nilly. This is the same old bunch 
that was in power from 1982 to 1991. 
 
And while I’m very sorry that the hon. member from 
Canora-Pelly is incapacitated, the Finance critic, one thing I 
want to pay tribute to the Leader of the Opposition, I agree with 
him totally — I think he made the best decision going in 
naming himself the Finance critic for the Saskatchewan Party. 
Because if I were you, I wouldn’t trust any one of those Tories 
behind you to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier talks about 
the tone of our questions. Mr. Speaker, the tone of our questions 
is pretty basic as well. It’s about holding the government 
accountable to the promises that it made during the last election 
campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just over a week ago in a response to 
a letter I wrote to the minister on this issue, he said that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is considering the election 
promise for 200 new police officers as part of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is simple: what is there 
to consider? Mr. Premier, you yourself made the promise for 
200 additional police officers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Can you assure the representatives of policing agencies that are 
here today that this budget will keep that promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe — I’m going 
by recollection but I’m quite sure I’m accurate in this — the 
election promise taken by ourselves, to which the coalition 
partners are in agreement, is that there would be 200 extra 
police officers over the four-year period of the administration. 
And that is a commitment, that is a commitment to which we 
stand. 
 
We believe it is the right of everybody in Saskatchewan to have 
safe streets, safe communities, and to make sure that they live in 
safety in their homes and walk in safety on their streets. There’s 
no doubt about that. 
 
But I repeat to the hon. member opposite, the best thing that I 
would urge him to do is to wait until the budget is announced. 
And we’re not going to be able to, to be quite honest with you, 
to agree — forgetting about the policing issue for the moment 
— on every aspect of that four-year platform in one budget. But 
I can tell you one thing. Unlike the Saskatchewan Party and the 
PC (Progressive Conservative) Party of Saskatchewan, the 
promises that we make, we keep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Funding for Local Governments 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I 
should just remind you, you’ve got double the promises to keep 
this time and we’ll be watching that you keep accountable for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. Mr. Speaker, municipalities across the province are 
dealing with many issues at this time, the least of which is the 
subject of amalgamation. But they also have been dealing for 
many years with provincial off-loading and the taxpayers are 
struggling under this burden. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give municipal governments and 
taxpayers in this province a reason for optimism today and 
ensure them that this provincial budget will provide increased 
funding for municipal structure and roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all 
that local governments have fulfilled a very important role in 
the fabric of Saskatchewan and in the economic and societal 
development of the province of Saskatchewan. And we 
recognize that that role is very important. And we recognized 
them with respect to previous budgets and contributions thereof. 
 
I simply want to say to the member opposite that related to this 
whole issue are the simple facts that they refuse to accept but 
cannot be ignored. Here’s the Saskatoon StarPhoenix of March 
11, “Provincial economy grows jobs.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
best in the country. 
 
Here’s today’s business report, “Forecast calls for growth,” 
even in the midst of an agricultural problem that we have. Now 
how does this happen? It happens because individual farming 
people, individual entrepreneurs, risk and invest and work hard. 
 
But it also happens because the government of the day sets a 
climate, sets a policy with respect to budget which is 
progressive, which is optimistic, which is growth oriented, and 
is balanced. And that is what the Minister of Finance will 
deliver today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
last fall’s campaign literature, the NDP stated if re-elected they 
would work with communities to build on the province’s 
strengths. They promised to maintain and renew 
Saskatchewan’s rural and northern transportation system. They 
promised to improve our municipal infrastructure program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Municipal Affairs if this 
provincial budget will provide some relief to municipalities 
who have had their provincial funding reduced by two-thirds 
since 1992. 
 
Mr. Minister, or Mr. Premier, will there be substantial funding 
increases in this budget for roads, water and supplies, sewer 
systems, and general infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan and in 
urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier? 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 
times I can say it, but I’ll say it again to the hon. member from 
Saltcoats, as I said to the Leader of the Opposition, just hold 
your horses. We’ve got about another question or two at the 
most for question period to end and then the budget will be 
delivered. Hold you horses. 
 
But I have some other advice for the member from Saltcoats. 
Don’t work to wish so hard for what you want because you 
might just get it and you may not like it all. You might just get 
it. You’re going to get a budget that will be in the interests of 
the province of Saskatchewan — interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan — which will be based, as I say again, on 
growth, optimism, and opportunity. Just hold your horses and 
then you can make your judgment call. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Safety Net for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the farmers, the farm families of 
Saskatchewan see in today’s budget detail of your long 
promised — promised since 1992 after the removal of the GRIP 
program (gross revenue insurance program) — will farmers 
today see detail of a long-term safety net program that they 
desperately need to put them on a level playing field with 
American and European farmers? Will the farmers of 
Saskatchewan see detail in the budget of that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the budget again will be 
read momentarily, but I do want to say about agriculture, this 
province can be very proud of what we’ve done for support to 
our farming community. 
 
The members opposite, they don’t like to hear this. I heard 
during members’ statements, the member from Cannington 
saying that we deserve the right to be heard. Apparently that is 
only one way as far as the Saskatchewan Party is concerned. 
 
So I’ll repeat again, Mr. Speaker, we give $300 per capita 
taxpayers in farm assistance programs. That’s not counting the 
80 million cash, not counting what’s going to be in the budget 
today. That is two and a half times more of the province which 
is closest to us, that’s PEI. We even beat Alberta, we beat 
Manitoba, and we beat Ontario. That’s what we do. 
 
We have a record of which we can be very proud. Of course 
we’d like to have more assistance, of course we want a safety 
net program — I think it’s a legitimate question — into place. 
The minister is working on it here provincially with his federal 
provincial counterparts. 
 
Agriculture is a mainstay of this province. We are strong 
supporters and believers in the family farm as the way of life 
and an important economic future engine too, of growth. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, it is 
my duty to inform you that the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral Officer, 
certificates of the following elections and returns: 
 

Of Pat Lorje for the constituency of Saskatoon Southeast; 
of Glen McPherson, for the constituency of Wood River. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to submit the 
written answer to the question 37 from a government that’s 
open, accountable, responsible, and happy. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to the question is tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the answer for question no. 38. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with thanks to my colleagues 
for that warm welcome. Before I begin the budget speech, I 
want to inform the House that I have a message from Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask all hon. members to please stand 
while I read the message from Her Honour. The message is as 
follows: 
 

From the Office of the Lieutenant Governor. The 
Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain sums 
required for the service of the province for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2001, and supplementary estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province for 12 
months ending March 31, 2000, and recommend the same 
to the Legislative Assembly. Hon. Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to stand in this House today to present 
Saskatchewan’s first budget of the 21st century. And before I 
do that, I’d like to take a moment, with your indulgence, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce a few special guests among the many very 
special people here today. 
 
Firstly, my wife, Pauline Melis, who works at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Secondly, our very good friend, Vera 
Pezer, who assists students also in her work at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that Vera is also 
known for having won the Canadian women’s curling 
championship on four separate occasions and her rink was 
recently named by Saskatoon StarPhoenix as Saskatoon’s team 
of the century. And, thank you, Vera. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce Dorothy Ross, and Dorothy resides in my 
constituency in Saskatoon. Every morning Dorothy gets up and 
she walks to Pleasant Hill School, as she has done for the last 
17 and a half years, in order to prepare breakfast for the 
children at Pleasant Hill School. And I want to say also, Mr. 
Speaker, that once in a while I accompany Dorothy and make 
breakfast much to the culinary delight of all concerned, I might 
add. Welcome, Dorothy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And last but not least I’d like to introduce 
Joe McMaster from Plenty, now living in Saskatoon and going 
to school, who is a very good student, studying political 
science, and also quite a good hockey player and coach. And he 
takes an active interest in political affairs, which I am glad to 
see. And welcome, Joe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the shift to a new century 
provides us with a special energy for change, to look not back at 
what was, but ahead to what can be. 
 
I say to the people of Saskatchewan that it is time to move 
forward. It is time to address pressing challenges in innovative 
ways, to shape our future with a solid plan for the growth of our 
economy and, more importantly, the growth of our society. 
 
By taking bold, thoughtful, forward-looking action today, we 
will achieve our vision for the future — a vision of a 
Saskatchewan where people choose to live and work based on 
the strong bonds of family and community; where responsive, 
effective, public services support and enhance each person’s 
ability to lead a meaningful, satisfying life; and where our 

young people can build an exciting and productive future; 
where they will find real opportunities to develop their talents 
to contribute to and benefit from a dynamic, growing economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we are entering a new 
century. We’re on the threshold of change and opportunity. The 
question before us is this. Do we, the people of Saskatchewan, 
have the vision and the courage to step over that threshold, 
through the door, and into the future? I say we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And this budget says let us begin shaping 
that future today. 
 
In my budget address today I’ll describe a broad, four-point 
plan for growth and opportunity in Saskatchewan — a plan we 
intend to follow not just in the coming months, but over the 
coming years. The key areas of this plan for growth and 
opportunity are: fiscal responsibility and good government; a 
sustainable, responsive health system; economic growth and 
jobs; and tax reform. 
 
First things first. Fiscal responsibility and good government. 
Mr. Speaker, sound financial management is a hallmark of this 
government. Our responsible, balanced approach has supported 
the longest period of sustained growth since the 1970s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It has allowed us to invest in important 
public services and reduced taxes each and every year since we 
balanced the budget in 1994-95, and to reduce Saskatchewan’s 
debt from almost 70 per cent of gross domestic product to less 
than 38 per cent today, falling to 31 per cent under the four-year 
plan being presented by this budget Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Sound management has encouraged 
confidence in our economy and in our ability to manage 
through good times and bad, but that success remains 
vulnerable to forces beyond our control. Over the past few 
years, we’ve seen clear evidence of the volatility of our 
economy. Our revenues can rise and fall dramatically from year 
to year depending upon global forces such as the price of oil. 
 
While we may have no control over these fluctuations, good 
planning allows us to prepare for them despite the demands of 
those who would spend all our revenues and more as soon as 
they’re generated. Simply put, our plan for the future starts with 
the fundamentals. 
 
Today I am announcing the creation of a new fiscal stabilization 
fund to strengthen our capacity to respond to the long-term 
needs of Saskatchewan residents. Our goal will be 5 per cent of 
our annual revenue set aside in this fund in order to deal with 
drops in our revenues when they occur, and to ensure that when 
they do occur the people of this province will not see higher 
taxes, cuts to services, or a return to deficits and growing debt. 
Our target level for the fund will be clear and the use of the 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

fund completely transparent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good government is something that every citizen 
in a democracy expects and deserves. Careful financial 
management is part of it. Accountability is another. Over the 
past year, we’ve been developing a new accountability 
framework that will outline the goals, objectives, and 
achievement targets of provincial government, its departments 
and agencies. The framework will be fully implemented over 
the next few years giving Saskatchewan people solid reference 
points by which to judge the performance of their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at our fiscal situation what do we 
see? We see today Saskatchewan’s seventh consecutive 
balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The seventh consecutive budget with no 
personal income tax increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The sixth consecutive budget that will 
reduce taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Five credit rating upgrades in the last four 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re back to straight A’s all across 
the credit rating agencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Eight straight years of economic growth, 
declining debt, interests costs down $200 million a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is good public policy, that is good economics, 
that is good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that is our record and that is 
our plan. 
 
I want to turn now to the issue that is of significant concern to 
people throughout our province, and indeed our nation. That of 
course is the future of our health system, the second part of our 
plan. 
 
The recent federal budget was a huge disappointment to 
Saskatchewan, and to all provinces in this regard. What was 
once a strong commitment by Ottawa to medicare, a health 
system that is the envy of the world, has become little more 
than lip service. 
 
Let us not fool ourselves. With the federal government paying 
only 13 cents of every health dollar, the future of 
Saskatchewan’s health system is in our hands alone. 

Today there are major challenges to achieving a sustainable 
health system. New technologies, new drugs, new treatments, 
an aging population, increased utilization, better home care and 
more preventive services, these have had the twofold impact of 
improving care and increasing costs. 
 
Two years ago, we increased health spending by 8 per cent, and 
last year by 11 per cent. We have to protect our health care 
system while changing the trend toward skyrocketing costs. 
And to do that, changes will have to be made. 
 
We recognize that change is never easy. And we recognize that 
additional funding will be needed to ease the transition to the 
health system of tomorrow. To back our commitment to 
renewing the health system, we will put in place the necessary 
measures to get it done. 
 
These measures will include an injection into our health system 
of $213 million this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Of which, Mr. Speaker, $150 million will 
be placed in a health transition fund to provide one-time support 
toward building the health system of the future. Because let’s be 
clear on one thing, Mr. Speaker. There’s a future for medicare 
here in Saskatchewan which is, after all, the birthplace of public 
health care in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We will be working with health districts, 
health providers, and the public to develop the very best 
sustainable and effective health system for the 21st century. 
That is good economics, that is good public policy, and that, 
Mr. Speaker, is responsible government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now let me turn to the third part of our 
plan, which is also our most important opportunity — creating 
an economy that realizes the vast potential of our great 
province. 
 
Building an economy of growth and opportunity obviously 
includes economic development, but it also requires social 
development. Our plan includes both. We seek to build an 
economy and a society that focuses on the tremendous energy 
of our people; provides opportunities for them to innovate and 
contribute; and rewards them for working hard, taking risks, 
and giving back to society. 
 
Some of this government’s greatest success has come from our 
strong belief in this fundamental principle of sharing economic 
opportunity through sound social development. Our building 
independence strategy has been instrumental in reducing 
dependence on welfare and removing barriers to entering the 
workforce. 
 
In particular, the Saskatchewan employment supplement has 
started to break down the so-called welfare wall. In the past five 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

years, 6,000 households in this province have left the welfare 
rolls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the anti-poverty coalition, campaign 
2000, says, Saskatchewan is the only province to reduce the 
incidence of child poverty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our nationally acclaimed Saskatchewan 
Action Plan for Children has also played a key role in ensuring 
Saskatchewan children and families have had the support they 
need to live with dignity and independence. It has provided 
support to children and families most in need through services 
such as nutrition programs, school allowances, infant care for 
teen mothers, early childhood intervention, and social housing. 
 
Building independence and the Action Plan for Children have 
become models of success attracting national and even 
international attention. They clearly demonstrate this 
government’s commitment and the commitment of all 
Saskatchewan people to ensuring that opportunity extends to all 
members of our society regardless of their financial 
circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, a plan for growth and 
opportunity must focus on our young people, on ensuring that 
they have the skills they need to take our economy into the 
future. It must include a plan for education and training because 
the new economy is a knowledge-based economy. 
 
That is why this budget includes increased funding for our K to 
12 school system to hold the quality of education to its highest 
standard, focusing on special education, community schools in 
the North, pre-kindergarten programs, and new distance 
learning initiatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Capital funding to complete up to 115 
school projects this year to ensure modern, safe and healthy 
schools for all Saskatchewan children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Increased operating funding for our 
universities and capital funding for important projects, 
including the Thorvaldson and Kinesiology buildings at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Increased capacity in the registered nurse and licensed practical 
nurse programs. New funding for technology-enhanced 
learning. More support for people with disabilities to access 
education and training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And increased operating grants for regional 
colleges and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) as well as universities to maintain the quality 
of our post-secondary systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to job and skills 
training that makes sense for Saskatchewan people. This budget 
provides training opportunities for thousands of Saskatchewan 
residents through our apprenticeship, adult basic education and 
other employment programs. Included in the budget are 
increased funding for the Skills Training Benefit, and a new 
Forestry Training Strategy. 
 
For post-secondary students, our student assistance programs 
are among the best in Canada. Mr. Speaker, as is well known, 
ideas were advanced in the last general election proposing 
payment of full tuition for one year or partial tuition each year. 
 
As is also well known, these ideas prompted much public 
debate leading to a consultation process conducted by the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training and 
the Minister of Education. We have listened to students, 
parents, faculty members, administrators, and the public at 
large. We have been advised that the wisest investment in this 
regard is to improve the ability of our universities, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and regional colleges, to provide the education and training our 
young people need. Accordingly, this budget directs increased 
funding towards higher education. That is the first message we 
received. 
 
The second message was the idea that there must be also be 
opportunities for our students beyond graduation. The energy, 
creativity, and drive of young people are critical to 
Saskatchewan’s future. We want our graduating students to stay 
in Saskatchewan and contribute to shaping our future. We also 
want graduating students from across Canada to come to 
Saskatchewan. So I’m very pleased to announce that beginning 
in 2000, every post-secondary graduate who chooses 
Saskatchewan will receive a tax credit that can be used over a 
four-year period to help them establish them careers in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We will invest in education to build the 
new economy, and our province will promote more growth and 
prosperity and opportunity in a knowledge economy through a 
strong underpinning of research and development. R&D 
(research and development) is key to creating new jobs in the 
new economy. 
 
So I’m pleased to announce that this budget will keep building 
our province’s research infrastructure with continued 
commitment to a test centre to reduce carbon dioxide emissions 
and increase oil recovery. Two new facilities at Regina research 
park dedicated to petroleum technology research and 
information technology, construction at Saskatoon’s renown 
Innovation Place with the addition of new agricultural research 
centre, and the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron, this 
nation’s largest scientific project scheduled for completion in 
2003. The Synchrotron will attract researchers from around the 
world and is a strong symbol of our growing reputation for 
excellence in research. 
 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But there’s more, Mr. Speaker. To further 
strengthen our research opportunities and investments, I am 
pleased to announce the establishment of the new innovation 
and science fund. The innovation and science fund will help 
increase the capacity of our research institutions and encourage 
new partnerships. 
 
Furthermore, it will enhance our ability to attract new federal 
investment through the Canada Foundation for Innovation. This 
fund with $10 million a year will attract the total R&D pool of 
up to $100 million over four years, major new investments that 
will build on our tradition of innovation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, another crucial element of 
growth and opportunity is agriculture and the development of 
our rural economy. This province has a strong future because 
Saskatchewan people are able to see beyond what is, to what 
can be. 
 
The success stories in Saskatchewan agriculture are many. In 
spite of the current difficulties, Saskatchewan farm families 
forge ahead with new ideas and new directions for the future. 
New crops, such as pulses and organic crops, and new 
initiatives in livestock and agricultural processing, are 
bolstering the drive towards growth and opportunities in 
agriculture and agri-value. 
 
There are many challenges. The recent downturn in agricultural 
markets puts a sharp focus on the changing face of agriculture 
and our rural economy. 
 
American writer and educator John Gardner said, “We are all 
faced with a series of great opportunities, brilliantly disguised 
as insoluble problems.” 
 
Our farmers have had the courage and vision to look past that 
disguise to find new opportunities, and our government will 
look beyond short-term solutions that do nothing to prepare us 
for the future. 
 
In February, following months of intensive negotiation, our 
government secured an agreement with Ottawa that will put 
needed cash in the pockets of Saskatchewan producers in time 
for spring seeding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We continue to work towards long-term 
solutions with the federal government and will continue, Mr. 
Speaker, to support Saskatchewan people in seizing new 
opportunities through investment in areas such as research and 
development and new generation co-ops. 
 
We’re reducing the producers’ share of crop insurance 
premiums to make it more affordable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we’re going to do more. I’m very 

pleased to announce that effective immediately and retroactive 
to January 1, 2000, the cap on the farm fuel rebate program 
eligibility will be eliminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Farmers will be fully reimbursed for 
provincial fuel tax on all their fuel purchases used in farming 
operations, reducing input costs today and in the future. There 
will be no provincial tax on farm fuel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As we work with farmers to build a new 
future for agriculture, we must also deal with the current 
realities. So to further assist this important industry in a difficult 
time, I am pleased to announce that this government will 
provide Saskatchewan farmers with a property tax rebate of $25 
million in the year 2000, and another $25 million in 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, our abundant natural 
resources, sensibly and sustainably developed, will also 
contribute to create new opportunities for growth in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget looks to the future of our northern communities 
with a special forest fire contingency to manage the risk of 
extreme forest fire seasons and their threat to communities in 
the North, and a new forestry industry development plan, 
including new industrial plants, new partnerships, and new 
training initiatives. These major forestry initiatives are an 
important step in developing our northern economy. They are 
also key to building real partnerships with Saskatchewan’s 
Aboriginal people. 
 
In forestry, in the North and elsewhere, success demands that 
all people participate in, contribute to, and increase the wealth 
of our province. In pursuit of this important goal, this budget 
will provide continued support to create opportunities for 
Aboriginal people through the multi-party training plan, the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, the northern teacher education program, and the 
Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program, Indian 
and Metis education development services, the Aboriginal 
employment development program, and the forestry training 
strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The goal is simple and it’s achievable — 
full Aboriginal participation in our economy and nothing less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, another element of growth 
and opportunity is the development of our physical assets — 
our roads, highways, schools, colleges, universities, social 
housing, municipal infrastructure, our environment, parks, and 
heritage properties. 
 
For starters, I’m pleased to announce that this budget makes a 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

$250 million investment in our highways and roads, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Which is, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
investment in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is how we’ll ensure our transportation 
system supports new opportunities and the economy of the 
future. This is in addition to $26 million provided to local roads 
through our provincial municipal revenue-sharing arrangement. 
 
And I’m proud to make a further announcement on this topic: 
namely a $120 million Centenary Capital Fund — $30 million a 
year to help communities address specific infrastructure needs 
over the next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This is a plan to build a bridge to the new 
economy. A plan that this year will invest $5 million more for 
upgrading our parks and heritage properties, $5 million more 
for social housing, $5 million more for school capital projects, 
$5 million more for capital investment in universities, SIAST, 
and regional colleges, adding to last year’s substantial 
commitment. 
 
Five million dollars more for municipal infrastructure, 
supplementing the $10 million provincial-municipal 
infrastructure program established last year, and $5 million 
more for transportation, highways, railroads, and environmental 
cleanup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In allocating these funds, we will be 
mindful of the need to develop a stronger northern economy. To 
this end, the criteria used to allocate monies from all the 
categories within the Centenary Capital Fund will ensure a 
minimum of $5 million a year will go to the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we will address northern water and 
sewer needs through a multi-year capital program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding we are providing for transportation 
and infrastructure is a substantial investment in Saskatchewan’s 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we will also work to continue to 
develop a federal-provincial— municipal program to build on 
our efforts to upgrade and modernize Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — As you can see, this budget will help create 
a future of growth and opportunity that is good economics and 
good government for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This brings me to the final topic of my 
address today, the fourth and final part of our four-point plan 
for growth and opportunity in Saskatchewan — tax reform. 
 
In my last budget address I promised that this government 
would review our personal income tax system. I want to 
publicly thank the members of the Personal Income Tax Review 
Committee — Jack Vicq, Shelley Brown, and Charlie Baldock 
— for their hard work in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As we know, Saskatchewan’s economy is 
changing and there are real opportunities for new prosperity and 
growth. But if we’re to capture those opportunities and keep our 
economy growing, we must have a competitive tax structure. 
 
That is why our plan for growth and opportunity includes a 
strategy to reduce taxes, make our economy competitive with 
our neighbours, and put money back into the pockets of every 
Saskatchewan resident. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Over the last several months we have been 
advised by the experts, we have heard from the people, and we 
have listened. Saskatchewan working people need a tax cut and 
a fair tax system. Our local business and industries need a 
simpler, more competitive tax system. 
 
But a tax reduction plan can’t be about cynical politics — about 
buying the short-term goodwill of people with their own tax 
dollars. It must be about good public policy. It must be about 
good economics. Above all else, it must be about the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now there are those that say, and I quote, 
“You can have your cake and eat it too.” They say you can slash 
hundreds of millions of dollars from tax revenues with no effect 
on the level of services you provide, without concern about 
deficits and debt, and in the naïve belief that spending on 
services like health and education can be frozen. 
 
That is not good public policy. That is not good economics. 
That is not even good arithmetic. That is just cynical politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Others sincerely believe that change is not 
needed. But we must recognize that the creation of wealth is a 
prerequisite to the fair distribution of wealth. That economic 
development is not the enemy of social development — it is the 
foundation of solid, sustainable social development. 
 
To resist change and the opportunities that change can bring is 
to say that the way into the future is by the pathways of the past. 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are demanding a bright 
future, and we are prepared to lead the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If we are to capture the new economic 
opportunities being offered by a rapidly changing world 
economy, Saskatchewan will need vision, leadership, and 
courage. Saskatchewan people know that something must be 
done. They know change must come. 
 
I’ve been clear in stating that tax reform from this government 
will be guided by three principles. Tax reduction must be 
sustainable and funded from new revenue. It must be matched 
by investment in priority public services. That is a balanced 
approach that recognizes that both competitive tax rates and 
good public services are important to society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It must be fair and progressive, putting 
lower income people in a better financial position. 
 
Let me outline the key elements of our plan for reforming 
Saskatchewan’s tax system. 
 
First, we will establish a personal income tax system that 
creates exciting opportunities for Saskatchewan to achieve 
simplicity, fairness, and competitiveness. Effective January 1, 
2001, Saskatchewan will move to a simple, three-rate income 
tax structure, completely eliminating the 2 per cent flat tax, the 
debt reduction surtax, and the high income surtax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This move alone will make our tax system 
simpler to use and to understand. It will provide us with the 
ability to use our income tax system in a way that fully benefits 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Second, the new tax structure will levy tax directly on taxable 
income at the following rates: 11 per cent on taxable income 
over personal exemptions up to $35,000; 13 per cent on taxable 
income over $35,000 up to $100,000; and 15 per cent on 
taxable income over $100,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. These rates will be phased in over 
three years as recommended by the Personal Income Tax 
Review Committee, and when fully implemented, about 70 per 
cent of Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay income tax at a rate 
equal to residents of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Third, we will provide significantly higher 
non-refundable tax credits in support of the family than the 
current income tax system does. On full implementation, 
Saskatchewan people will be able to claim a basic tax credit of 
$8,000, a spousal or equivalent to spouse credit of $8,000, a 
child tax credit of $2,500 per dependent child, and a senior’s 
supplemental credit of $1,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, 55,000 Saskatchewan people 
are coming off the provincial income tax rolls. Fifty-five 
thousand low income seniors, single parents, minimum wage 
earners, and working families — one out of every eight 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan is no longer going to pay any 
provincial income tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Every Saskatchewan taxpayer will pay 
less. And once fully implemented our tax system will be 
indexed to inflation, eliminating tax increases in the form of 
bracket creep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is good economics. That is good 
public policy. That is good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — These changes represent the largest 
reduction in taxes in the history of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But the tremendous savings to all residents 
of this plan and the significant impact tax reform could have on 
our economy has been ignored by some in the recent loud 
debate over the sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again: this is a plan for a bright future. It is 
not about buying the short-term goodwill of people with their 
own tax dollars. It is about preparing Saskatchewan for growth 
and opportunity. 
 
In order to make our economy competitive, good public policy 
requires us to adjust other aspects of our tax system. Our 
provincial sales tax is currently levied at the lowest rate in 
Canada and on the narrowest consumer base. A reasonable use 
of the sales tax will enable us to make our promised cuts to 
personal income tax and will make the tax system more fair and 
just. 
 
Therefore the sales tax rate will remain at 6 per cent and the 
sales tax base will be broadened to include items generally 
taxed elsewhere but not extending to restaurant meals. 
However, this government is not in the business of taxing 
family necessities. Therefore we will continue to exclude items 
such as children’s clothing, insurance premiums, reading 
materials, funeral services, personal services like haircuts, and 
home heating and electricity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ve already stated our commitment that 
under our tax reforms lower income people would be better off. 
This includes those on fixed incomes and those who do not pay 
any provincial income tax. 
 
Therefore I am pleased to announce that as part of our reforms 
to the sales tax, our government will introduce a new, fully 
refundable Saskatchewan sales tax credit. This credit will 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

provide annual tax savings of $32 million to lower income 
residents and ensure a progressive distribution of the sales tax. 
With this initiative, Saskatchewan people earning up to $35,000 
a year will be eligible for a sales tax credit, administered in 
conjunction with the federal GST (goods and services tax) 
rebate. About 285,000 lower income Saskatchewan people will 
receive a sales tax rebate cheque of up to 264 million . . . $264 a 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — For a minute there, Mr. Speaker, I thought 
I was lapsing into opposition math. But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that with proper government coalition math — I’m 
going to repeat it — 285,000 lower income Saskatchewan 
people will receive a sales tax rebate cheque of up to $264 a 
year, more than offsetting the amount of additional sales tax 
they may pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, over the past months 
Saskatchewan’s long-standing arrangement with First Nations 
people regarding the issue of taxation has been called into 
question. Three key factors, namely, widespread tax reform 
which is being undertaken in this budget, the introduction of the 
Saskatchewan sales tax credit to all low income people, and 
various court challenges have prompted a change in policy. 
 
Therefore effective midnight tonight, the provincial sales tax 
will be extended to off-reserve purchases by First Nations 
residents. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new tax system is fair. It is sensible. It is 
sustainable. It will result in a tax system that enhances tax 
fairness and progressivity, contrary to the assertions of some in 
our province. It will contribute to building our future of growth 
and opportunity while ensuring that everyone is better off under 
our new tax system. 
 
Our new income tax system will begin in 2001, but our 
commitment is to lower personal taxes every year, as we have 
done since 1995. I am pleased that effective July 1, 2000 
Saskatchewan’s flat tax will be cut in half — from 2 per cent to 
1 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The combined impact of all tax measures 
in 2000 will be a reduction of $200 for the average 
Saskatchewan family — taking both income tax and sales tax 
into account — but growing to $1,000 a year by 2003, and 
fulfilling the commitments made by our coalition government 
with courage and foresight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, let me close by saying this. 
Now is the time to reach beyond the threshold; to build on a 
decade’s work, a century’s work; to use our strength as a people 
and our blessings as a province to create a new generation of 

growth and opportunity. For that is what society is about; that is 
what Saskatchewan is about. 
 
Our journey into the future will not be free from challenge or 
from change. But this budget puts us on a firm course to 
achieving that vision with clear plans for opportunity and 
growth. 
 
Let us have the courage and the spirit to lead change, not to 
follow; to face challenge, not to back away; to do what is fair 
and what makes sense for our province and our people, building 
a stronger, more prosperous Saskatchewan for us and our 
children. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
pleasure to rise today in response to the budget. But first I 
would be remiss if I did not mention the absence of the man 
who should be giving this initial response to the budget today. 
All hon. members know that the member from Canora-Pelly, 
the official opposition Finance critic, has taken a leave of 
absence for health reasons. And I’m sure all members join with 
me in sending the member for Canora-Pelly our best wishes for 
a speedy recovery so he can be back in this Chamber and help 
hold this government accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, there are two themes that 
emerge from this budget. First and foremost there’s the broken 
promise made by the NDP in the 1999 election to decrease 
income taxes without raising sales taxes. And then there’s the 
NDP’s talent at using the budget for another exercise in smoke 
and mirrors, another demonstration of their adept hand at the 
old shell game. 
 
Let’s deal with the issues of tax cuts first, Mr. Speaker; or 
should I say, the absence of tax reduction in the coming year. 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party was formed less 
than three years ago, our members decided that the cornerstone 
of our party’s platform and policy would be to drive . . . would 
be a drive to bring down taxes in this province. Our tax burden 
in Saskatchewan has grown to the point where Saskatchewan is 
falling behind the rest of the nation. 
 
We continue to lose our young people. The number of net 
taxpayers in this province is far below the national average, 
while those who are not net taxpayers are far above the national 
average. Our population is getting older and the demographic 
deficit grows worse as our young people head off in search of 
opportunities that simply do not exist in this province. 
 
High taxes have driven out opportunity. They have driven out 
people. Last year the Saskatchewan Party offered the people of 
Saskatchewan hope in the form of a substantial tax reduction. 
And for about a year, the NDP told us there was no way taxes 
could be cut in Saskatchewan, and they kept this up until they 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2000 

started plummeting like a rock during the election campaign. 
 
Suddenly, miraculously, Mr. Speaker, they were in favour of 
tax cuts which a week earlier were deemed reckless and 
unrealistic. And then they were re-elected with a whopping 38 
per cent of the vote. Just a per cent or two behind the 
Saskatchewan Party. We should have known then better than to 
actually expect them to carry through with this promise. 
 
Soon after the election, the members opposite acted as if their 
tax pledge was meaningless. Obviously they were borrowing 
from the Liberal leader’s political rhetoric theme book. 
 
If the Liberal leader needs further proof about his influence on 
the government, he need only to point to the lack of real tax 
cuts in today’s budget. Obviously the Liberal leader’s message 
of no tax cuts during the election was welcomed by his new 
colleagues in the NDP. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, jump ahead a few months and we hear 
that this government states that not more than a month ago 
nothing could be cherry-picked from the Vicq report. It was all 
or nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well not only have they cherry-picked Vicq, they’ve picked the 
pockets of Saskatchewan residents today on the PST. They have 
not only expanded the PST, they have kept it at 6 per cent. The 
increase in revenue that will result, Mr. Speaker, would be 
nearly equal to a 2 point increase in the PST. It would be like 
going from 6 per cent to nearly 8 per cent PST. 
 
That’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to hear it, but 
it’s the truth. This is a major tax increase, Mr. Speaker, and one 
that we simply cannot support. We cannot support it for two 
reasons. 
 
First of all, the Saskatchewan Party has vowed not to increase 
any taxes in Saskatchewan, and we stick to that. We are the 
party of putting more money into the people’s pockets and 
leaving it there. Not putting it in with one hand and taking it out 
with the other, as this government is so fond of doing. 
 
But the second reason, Mr. Speaker, that we will oppose this 
expansion to the PST is simply because it breaks the promise 
made by the NDP. And last year they ran their campaign based 
on a $1,000 tax cut for Saskatchewan families. Not a single 
word, Mr. Speaker, about increasing the PST was ever 
mentioned. 
 
I asked my colleagues: what’s the first impact of this budget on 
the people of Saskatchewan? What happens first? What happens 
tonight at midnight? Taxes go up. 
 
It’s important to note that the huge increase in PST takes place 
immediately, long in advance of any substantial savings on the 
income tax side. And that extra cash will flow in each year and 
every year for the next four years. 
 
And while that money pours into government coffers, we 
simply have to trust that this government will follow through on 
planned income tax reductions that are supposed to come over 
the next four years. They’re already breaking their promises. 
Frankly, as far as I’m concerned, the people of Saskatchewan 

are concerned, we stopped trusting this government to follow 
through on its promises a long, long time ago. Time will tell 
whether or not we actually do receive the benefits of future 
income tax reductions and whether those tax reductions are not 
once again offset by increases in other government revenue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The government calls this a historic tax cut. But this year this 
so-called tax cut will save the taxpayers of this province 
virtually nothing. 
 
I call this a teeter-totter budget. People who were teetering on 
the edge of moving to Alberta will now totter off in that 
direction. Or it might be called the see-saw budget. People who 
thought they saw more money go into their pockets this 
afternoon will see it taken away at midnight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister has accused us of wanting 
the Saskatchewan people to have their cake and eat it too. He 
said it couldn’t be done. This is coming from a Finance minister 
who is sitting on a $700 million pile of cash. He certainly has 
managed to ensure that the government has its cake and eats it 
too, leaving only crumbs for the taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, 
taxpayers are going to know that they have been burned by the 
NDP one more time and we’ll make sure that they do know it. 
 
Let’s look at one example. In the coming year a family with a 
total income of $25,000 will save a total of $121 in taxes. Let’s 
work that down to a savings per month — about $10 a month. 
But hold on a minute. Once you take into account the recently 
announced rate hike increases for SaskTel and SaskEnergy 
bills, which amount to $8 a month, this family will have a 
whopping $2 more every month to spend. Isn’t that historic? 
Isn’t that something to be proud of, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I believe that Saskatchewan people deserve better and the 
Saskatchewan Party will continue to apply pressure on this 
government to give the people what they deserve, the right to 
keep more of their hard-earned money. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party was established on the foundation of 
tax fairness for Saskatchewan residents, and we will not give up 
that fight. This is especially true, given another surprise 
contained in this year’s budget. It turns out that the 
government’s liquor and gaming slush fund is larger — much 
larger — than anyone expected. And we’re told this fund 
contains in the neighbourhood of $700 million, as I mentioned 
earlier, Mr. Speaker — $700 million. 
 
So here we have a situation where the government has $700 
million stored up in a slush fund but they say they can only 
afford $40 million in tax cuts for the average Saskatchewan 
family. That’s arrogant, Mr. Speaker, and it’s shameful, truly 
shameful. 
 
I should note, Mr. Speaker, that the government has decided to 
rename the liquor and gaming slush fund as well. It’ll now be 
known as the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or the FSF, otherwise 
known as the fancy slush fund. 
 
Whatever you call it, Mr. Speaker, it’s money that belongs to 
the people of this province. We will never forget that. The NDP 
never knew it in the first place. 



March 29, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I want to get into all the areas of 
government in which this government is failing the people of 
this province — education, agriculture, roads, and especially 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only will each and everyone of our caucus 
members have plenty to say on the issues that are important to 
Saskatchewan people, I know the people of Saskatchewan will 
have much to say as well about this budget especially when 
they begin paying more PST at the stroke of midnight tonight. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I say six months ago the NDP told us 
they had learned from their close call in the election. Today’s 
budget shows us precisely what they have learned — nothing. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will not be fooled by the NDP’s 
smoke and mirrors. They have been burned once too often by 
the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say 
tomorrow on this budget but for now I want to go and wash my 
car before the 5 per cent . . . or the 6 per cent PST is added to it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 
Thursday, March 30, 2000. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:15 p.m. 



  

 


