





























































Hansard: April 28, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 913 
 April 28, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of people throughout the province 
who would like to see a reduction in fuel tax. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt and from Regina, Martensville, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today regarding fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Fosston, 
Wadena, and Hendon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and Choiceland. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions regarding the fuel tax. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals from 

the communities of Nipawin, Aylsham, and White Fox. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Unity, Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of the citizens concerned 
about the municipal reserve account confiscation, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Preeceville and Kamsack. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
opposed to forced municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens of Beatty and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to read a petition 
opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people of Abbey. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners’ signatures are from Saskatoon, Dundurn, 
Holdfast, Rapid Lake, Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever humbly 
pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Lanigan, Humboldt, Fulda, Annaheim. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here concerning exemption of private sales. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide a $3,000 exemption for dealers in addition to 
private sales, therefore providing a tax break to the 
consumers of this province wherever they choose to 
purchase a vehicle. 
 

And the petitioners have many, many signatures from the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today that 
deals with the confiscation of municipal reserves. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And the petition is signed by citizens of Runnymede. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with high fuel prices. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Nipawin, Pilger, and Ridgedale. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Your petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 
To overrule the Parkland Health Board’s decision with 
regard to Blaine Lake Medical Centre; 
 
To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; 
 
To provide a $3,000 exemption for PST (provincial sales 
tax) for vehicle dealers; and 
 
To cause the government to grandfather vehicles that were 
tax paid on budget day. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Wartman, as Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills presents the first report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petitions for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 
rules 64, 65, and 68 have been fully complied with. 
 
The petitions are for the Regina Golf Club, the Mennonite 
Central Committee Saskatchewan Inc., and the 
Archiepiscopal Corporation of Regina and the Episcopal 
Corporation of Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moved by myself, 
and seconded by the hon. member from Arm River: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, today’s flags on the 
Legislative Building and provincial government buildings are 
flying at half-mast as we commemorate Saskatchewan workers 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

injured and killed on the job. 
 
Back in 1988 I was approached by Nadine Hunt who was then 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, to ask if I 
would introduce a private members’ Bill to have April 28 made 
a statutory day of mourning for workers killed and injured on 
the job. 
 
I was very proud of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, when that Bill 
passed unanimously, making Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction 
in Canada to legislate the day of mourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 28 is the day chosen because it was on that 
day in 1914 that Canada’s first workers’ compensation board 
Act was passed in the province of Ontario. 
 
This is a day to share the grief of workers injured on the job and 
of families who have lost a family member on the job. Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately young people and first-time workers are 
more likely to be injured in the workplace. More than 8,000 
young workers, age 15 to 24 are injured each year. Since last 
April, 28 people have died on the job in Saskatchewan, five of 
them under the age of 24. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for ourselves as legislators, this is a day to 
recommit ourselves to legislation and action in support of good 
occupational health and safety practices and programs. We do 
this for those who make up the backbone of the Saskatchewan 
economy, Saskatchewan workers — for them and for their 
families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
recognize all Saskatchewan workers killed on the job last year 
and in past years. Under any circumstance it’s just as difficult to 
deal with but if we lose an elderly loved one or an individual 
who has suffered for long periods of time, their length of life or 
removal from pain may solace us. But one can only imagine 
how horrifying it would be to lose a loved one in a sudden 
work-related accident. 
 
On average, 30 people are killed at work each year. Mr. 
Speaker, on this day of mourning we should all remind 
ourselves that it is everyone’s responsibility to make sure their 
workplace is as safe as it can possibly be. As legislators we 
must be vigil of occupational health and safety regulations. 
Employers must maintain a safe work environment and 
procedures and employees must take that extra life-saving . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to protect themselves. 
 
I would like to take a brief moment to remind all workers who 
have been fortunate enough to avoid a work-related tragedy 
whether they are working in Canada or overseas to exercise 
caution — take care and come home safely to your children and 
loved ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important day, and I would ask all the 
members in the Assembly to join with me in remembering all 
workers killed on the job in Saskatchewan and around the 
world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Radio Interview About Upgrading for Former Nurses 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every now and then, Mr. 
Speaker, the media gets it right — perhaps more often than we 
like to admit. In public life we’re quick to criticize when we 
think we have been treated unfairly. I think it’s only fair that we 
equally be quick to commend a story that is balanced, fair, and 
accurate. 
 
A case in point, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday morning on CBC’s 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio Morning Edition 
acting host Garth Materie interviewed two former nurses who 
are taking advantage of our program of a half million dollars 
dedicated to upgrading former nurses so they can re-enter the 
profession. 
 
Mr. Matherie asked them if they were prepared for the heavy 
workload of the modern-day nurse. Fair enough. He then asked 
them what they hoped to accomplish, and one explained that 
today there is much greater scope of nurses positions available 
in the community and a lot more nurses can do than 12 years 
ago when she left to raise her family. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, and I quote one of the nurses: 
 

(This program made the difference in letting me go back to 
work.) 
 
. . . it made me feel like Saskatchewan . . . There is hope 
and there is help and the people understand and we want to 
go back there and work and that they’re willing to support 
us in our studies and it’s great. 

 
I’d like to thank . . . whoever set this through, whether it 
was . . . the Health Minister or Mrs. Longmoore . . . 
whoever made (it) . . . possible, and the people of 
Saskatchewan. I want to send them a big thank you. 

 
That says it all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Housing Starts 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this morning to speak on an issue of grave concern in regards to 
the province of Saskatchewan and most certainly to the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Assembly was informed recently that housing 
starts in the city of Prince Albert were up slightly and, Mr. 
Speaker, in a small way this is good news. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, it has fallen on my shoulders the responsibility to 
inform this Assembly of the rest of the story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert’s real estate board has 
released its figures for the calendar year of 1999. These figures, 
Mr. Speaker, allow us an open window into the devastating 
effect this NDP government has had and is having on this 
province and the city of Prince Albert. Although sales of higher 
priced homes have held their own, real estate sales are down by 
the astounding number of 7 per cent — down, Mr. Speaker, 7 
per cent. 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

What is even more astonishing, Mr. Speaker, is that overall 
housing sales are down by more than 12 per cent. This figure 
includes the new housing starts, Mr. Speaker. A dismal 
reminder of this NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s 
economic policy. 
 
Fortunately on September 16, 1999, the citizens of 
Saskatchewan were given a glimpse of the future. A future, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be led by the next premier of 
Saskatchewan, the member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Member of Parliament Les Benjamin Celebrates 75 Years 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, today’s good news-bad news story 
has been ongoing for about 75 years now. I say good news-bad 
news because Les Benjamin was good news for the people of 
Regina-Lumsden Lake Centre for the 25 years he served as their 
MP (Member of Parliament). He was bad news for the Liberal 
government and Conservative governments of the day as he 
stood up for his constituents. 
 
One of Les’s speeches began, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, things are so dry and so windy in 
southwestern Saskatchewan this spring, not only is there 
no point in seeding, but the gophers are eight feet high and 
digging. 

 
Les Benjamin was quite a character. First elected in 1968 in 
Regina Lumsden-Lake Centre as I mentioned. Many of us 
remember 1968 as a year of Benjamania. We also recall another 
MP elected that year — what was his name; he went on to be 
prime minister — I think, Trudeau. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, 
Boxcar Benjamin outlasted Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the House 
of Commons. As mentioned, he served for 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, friends will be joining Les Benjamin and his wife, 
Connie Friesen on Saturday, April 29 at Tommy Douglas 
House from 2 to 5 p.m. Everyone is invited to help celebrate 75 
years with a great Canadian and a compassionate socialist — 
Les Benjamin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emu Oil Plant to Open at Carlyle 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to inform the 
House about more good economic news coming out of rural 
Saskatchewan and I’m sure the member from Cannington will 
support. 
 
Carlyle, Saskatchewan will be the new home of an emu oil 
manufacturing plant. The plant, which is relocating from British 
Columbia, is expected to be operational by the end of this 
month. 
 
The Shirley farm, just north of Carlyle, will be home to the new 
operation. The plant will be operated by Jim and Carolyn 
Shirley with the help of their daughter, Jessica. The Shirley’s 
raise and market emus and emu by-products. 

Emu fat is condensed into oil. The oil is bottled for sale to 35 
health food stores. Emu oil is known for its anti-inflammatory 
agents. Perhaps the opposition members should consider using 
this product to reduce their recent inflammatory remarks on a 
number of subjects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — It also helps with eczema, cuts, burns, and 
arthritis. The plant was able to move to Saskatchewan with 
funding and assistance from the industrial research assistance 
program, Agri-Food Innovation Fund, and the Canadian 
adaption rural development study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example of the hard work and 
ingenuity of the people of this province to help ensure the 
Saskatchewan economy continues to thrive. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regina Public Library Film Festival 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, from May 8 to May 13, the Regina 
Public Library will host a film festival. It’s called Queer City 
Cinema. 
 
Mr. Premier, how much money is your government contributing 
to help fund this event? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the question being of 
a very specific nature — funding of a particular program — I 
take notice of the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Premier, I have a brochure here 
promoting this event. It says Queer City Cinema gratefully 
acknowledges funding support from the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board, SaskTel, and SaskFILM. These are all government 
Crowns and agencies funded by Saskatchewan taxpayers. So 
I’ll ask the Deputy Premier again, how much taxpayers’ money 
is being used to fund this event? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 
want to say first to the member that in this year’s budget what 
the provincial government did provide is provided an additional 
funding to the Arts Board as we have across the piece for 
culture and recreation and municipalities. 
 
The function today that’s going on in Regina, Saskatchewan, 
that the member makes note of would be a decision that would 
be made by the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Now if there’s a 
question or concern that the member has of the expenditure that 
this board of individuals, that’s made up of people from across 
the province, if there’s a understanding . . . or a concern by the 
member that there’s a misappropriation of the fund or a 
misexpenditure of the fund, she should direct that question to 
the Chair of the Arts Board who’s now Ms. Colleen Bailey. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the brochure goes on to say that 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

on May 13 at 1 p.m. there will be a panel discussion entitled 
Community Porn featuring visiting artists, activists, porn 
filmmakers, and porn actors. This little porn discussion group 
will be held in conjunction with screening of some of their 
movies. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Premier, it seems we have a bunch of porn stars 
coming to Regina to promote porno movies sponsored by 
SaskTel, SaskFILM, and Sask Arts Board. 
 
Mr. Premier, how much money are you giving to this little 
porno film festival? And do you think this taxpayers’ dollar 
should be used to promote pornography in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that in this province today this government 
sets aside a chunk of money that we put towards the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. The Saskatchewan Arts Board this 
year is getting about $3.7 million, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board will be making decisions about a 
whole host of different events or activities that it’s going to 
participate in. 
 
If the member opposite . . . And as I said earlier, that the 
participants on the Saskatchewan Arts Board are men and 
women who are made up from across the province who in fact 
are well-recognized individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, if she’s concerned about the 
kinds of functions and activities that the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board today puts on in this province, she should contact the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board; she should make it known to the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board what her preference is for further 
funding because, Mr. Speaker, it’s their decisions in which the 
Arts Board provides its direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — This government can’t hide behind another 
board. They’re responsible for money that they give out in this 
province — every single penny of it. And I think they’ve lost 
sense of what’s happening in this province. 
 
First of all we raise the PST and we find out some of this 
money is used to promote pornography in this province. Then 
we raise SaskTel rates and you use some of that money as well 
to promote pornography in this province. 
 
And you know what’s even worse? It’s not just the province; 
you’ve got the city of Regina and Canada Council also 
spending money to promote pornography in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to ask you: do you really think this is a good use of 
taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, today we have a number of 
third parties in which the government provides funding to. 
There are health boards, Mr. Speaker. We provide money to 
school boards in this province. We provide money to cultural 
boards. We provide money to Saskatchewan Arts Board. And 
these are men and women, Mr. Speaker, who are elected and 

appointed throughout this province who have a vision or a view 
on what a particular area of expertise should be expanded or 
developed on. 
 
Here today we have the member opposite saying that she 
doesn’t have any confidence in the third party members who are 
elected men and women, who are appointed men and women in 
this province, who come from . . . some of them come from 
your part of the world. 
 
Now if you have a problem, Madam Member, with the 
individuals who serve on the Arts Board — you think that 
they’re making inappropriate submissions or determinations on 
taxpayers’ money — you should provide a letter to me and say 
to me that we want those people removed. And you should 
provide a letter to me saying you should remove from the Arts 
Board . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll just remind members from 
both sides to direct their comments through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is: do 
you have a problem with spending taxpayers’ dollars on 
pornography? That’s the question. 
 
In about an hour from now we’re going to have educators on 
the steps of the legislature and they’re here about the lack of 
funding for education. And yesterday the Liberal leader said 
that they didn’t have any more money for education because 
there was other government priorities. 
 
I want to go out on the steps and say one of your priorities is 
supporting pornography in this province — one of your 
priorities. You don’t have enough money for education, but you 
do have money to bring porno film and activists into Regina. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Premier, my question is: what kind of message 
are you sending to the children of Saskatchewan? You don’t 
have money for education; you have money for pornography. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that when you take a look at all of the 
organizations and all of the men and women today who are 
serving in appointed positions or elected positions to make a 
broad range of recommendations in terms of how we spend 
money in this province, we think that those are responsible 
individuals who are appointed to those environments. 
 
And I say to the member opposite today, if you have a problem, 
Madam Member, if you have a problem with the men and 
women today who serve on the arts council, what you should be 
doing is you should be saying and writing a letter to the Arts 
Board and saying: member of Chair of the Arts Board, you in 
fact should remove yourself from the Arts Board. And you 
should be saying that to the Arts Board. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is we have a 
government . . . a member and we have an opposition party 
today, Mr. Speaker, who wants to intervene in all of the issues 
in the public affairs of what men and women who are appointed 
on our behalf . . . (inaudible) . . . to do. This is an intrusion by 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

this group of men and women into the functioning of appointed 
and elected members of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I can’t help but wonder what would 
Baptist minister Tommy Douglas think of this little 
development. His party — his party — using taxpayers’ dollars 
to promote pornography. You must be very proud, Mr. Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, this is absolutely sickening. Pornography 
is one of the most degrading, dehumanizing activities that 
human beings lower themselves to, and here we have your 
government using taxpayers’ money to promote it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, will you immediately, immediately cancel 
all Saskatchewan government sponsorship of this event? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
members opposite very, very clearly that the issue of 
pornography and the issue of . . . the whole issue of morals that 
these people talk about, and I would argue, are no better or no 
worse than other people in the province. 
 
One should remember this. When it comes to the issue of 
pornography, we want to check and see what the issue is that is 
being dealt with at this meeting that is being planned. Because 
believing the member opposite, believing the member opposite 
that this is something more than defining where pornography 
starts and ends and trying to make it sound like the Arts Board 
in this province is involved in promoting pornography, I would 
question the member’s words. 
 
But we will check. And we will go to meet with the Arts Board 
and find out whether they’re promoting pornography as you 
say. But I trust this. I trust Colleen Bailey who I know from 
Yorkton, who is a member of the Sask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
benefit of the Deputy Premier I will today table this card which 
explains the promotion of pornography by this government in 
this province. I table that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, your government does not have money to 
fund transition houses to help children trapped in the sex trade. 
But you do have money to bring porn stars to Regina to 
promote their porno movies. Mr. Deputy Premier, where are 
your priorities? How can you possibly justify using taxpayers’ 
money to promote and sponsor this event. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again as 

clearly as I can to the members opposite and through the 
Speaker and through this Assembly to the people of the 
province, that I will be checking with, and we will be meeting 
and the minister will be meeting with the board, the 
independent board, to see whether your accusation, that they are 
promoting pornography, is accurate. Because I don’t believe it. 
 
I think that if there is a discussion going on about pornography, 
it’s the definition of pornography. And as you know, in 
provinces in Western Canada, we have a film rating agency in 
each of our provinces that look at where pornography exists and 
where it doesn’t. 
 
And for you to say and accuse, I say again, members of the 
board, Colleen Bailey, of promoting pornography in this 
province is a serious accusation. And I challenge the member to 
go outside of the House and say to Ms. Colleen Bailey that 
she’s promoting pornography. 
 
We’ll check into it, but I don’t trust what you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, on 
Monday next the all-party committee on the child sex trade will 
be holding a special meeting. They will be holding that meeting 
to discuss sending members to a conference on healing sexual 
exploitation. 
 
Meanwhile, we have your government promoting pornography, 
one of the most destructive forms of sexual exploitation. So 
what sense does that make, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Immediately after question period today, the Saskatchewan 
party will be moving an emergency motion to immediately 
cancel government funding of this event and to redirect into 
programs to help children being exploited through the child sex 
trade. 
 
Will you support this motion, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I do support, and 
I ask the member opposite, is whether she took time to phone 
Colleen Bailey this morning before she came and asked and 
made these accusations? I want to ask you that. And I challenge 
the members of the press, when they talk to you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I will ask hon. members 
from both sides to please allow the answer to be heard, the 
questions to be allowed to be heard, and the answers to be 
given. I ask you, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
member opposite and I ask her in a sincere way whether she 
checked with the Arts Board and the chairperson, Colleen 
Bailey, whether or not they were promoting pornography before 
they came in the House and made these outrageous, outrageous 
statements. 
 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

And I would ask her when she leaves the Assembly that the first 
thing she do is talk to the Chair. And also I believe what’s 
happening here is an attempt to get a cheap headline, a cheap 
weekend headline and then correct her statement on Monday 
which they’ve done a number of times. And I challenge them to 
withdraw the accusation of Colleen Bailey and the Arts . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in East Central Health District 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, there is 
a serious situation underway right at this minute at the Yorkton 
Health District. We have learned that due to a water main break, 
the dialysis unit has been shut down. The Yorkton District 
Health is doing what it can to cope and help the patients 
involved. 
 
Dialysis patients who normally receive treatment at the Yorkton 
centre are being driven to Regina by volunteers and district 
health vehicles. This situation is called a backup for patients 
requiring dialysis care at the Regina General and are putting 
excessive pressure on the staff at the dialysis unit. 
 
And more worrisome, if the Yorkton unit is not up and able to 
run by Monday, the Regina unit is telling us that they won’t be 
able to handle the load without getting extra machines delivered 
into Regina. 
 
Madam Minister, are you aware of this situation and what are 
you doing to cope with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the 
situation. My understanding is the Department of Health 
officials are dealing with the East Central Health District on this 
issue. I understand that preparations are underway to repair the 
water line. We’re optimistic that the water line can be repaired 
in short order. 
 
I understand that if that isn’t possible, and we should know 
shortly the length of time it will take to repair the water line, 
that arrangements will be made to ensure that people get 
dialysis in the east central area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
nurses who called me are saying that they’re at the breaking 
point in terms of overtime and workload already in the Regina 
dialysis unit. They’re getting incredible amounts of overtime 
hours already, and they’re saying that the increased pressure is 
almost to the breaking point. 
 
But more importantly, Madam Minister, there are qualified 
dialysis nurses who are in Yorkton who are not going to be 
working this weekend because of the breakdown of the unit 
there. 
 

But why can’t they come and help the Regina nurses do their 
job? We understand it’s because of an inter-district contract 
situation. Does this make sense, Madam Minister? Why can’t 
you bring nurses from Yorkton to help the Regina nurses 
provide the necessary service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t ask the member if 
he’s asking for health board consolidation in the province; but I 
will say this, that the Department of Health is aware of the 
situation. The Department of Health is working with the East 
Central and the Regina Health Districts. 
 
There are other health districts in the province that provide 
dialysis services to people, as the member may know. Up until 
recently, we only had two centres in the province that provided 
dialysis care. We now have a centre in East Central, in P.A. 
(Prince Albert), in Lloydminster, and one is soon going to be 
operationalized in Swift Current. And we’re planning on 
announcing another centre. 
 
But I can assure the member that the department and the health 
districts are working as closely and co-operating closely in 
order to ensure that the people in the East Central area have 
access to dialysis services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately the kidney dialysis unit isn’t the only unit that’s 
closed. As of 9 o’clock this morning, the Yorkton Health 
District ICU (intensive care unit) has been shut down. Why? 
We’ve been told it’s because there are no doctors available for 
the weekend. And the district could bring in other doctors, but 
there’s no money to pay for the overtime. 
 
And also apparently, the maternity ward at the Yorkton district 
hospital only will have one registered nurse on duty today. 
 
Madam Minister, you have a major regional centre in this 
province that is virtually shut down on a busy spring weekend. 
What are you doing to make sure that there’s quality care for 
the people in eastern Saskatchewan serviced by the Yorkton 
Health District? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of that 
situation in Yorkton. I’m advised that the three specialists that 
usually provide services in the Yorkton area are away for the 
weekend. I understand that arrangements are being made to 
ensure that anyone who may get into difficulty in the Yorkton 
area will be transferred to an appropriate service in another part 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
this is just incredible. Here’s a district that you’ve assumed 
responsibility for because you said the district board was 
incompetent and couldn’t do it themselves. 
 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

And here under your direct responsibility we have the dialysis 
unit shut down; we have the ICU shut down; we have the 
maternity ward shut down. Madam Minister, this isn’t exactly 
what I would call living up to your responsibility. 
 
What’s next? Are you going to send out a press release saying 
don’t get sick in eastern Saskatchewan this weekend? When are 
you going to live up to your responsibility and do a review of 
the system so it can be fixed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member 
that I didn’t go out to Yorkton and break the waterline — the 
waterline broke. 
 
What I can, what I can tell the member is that the Department of 
Health in Yorkton and the Regina Health District are working 
to ensure that dialysis patients have access to dialysis services 
in this province if the waterline cannot be repaired quickly. 
 
A second point I want to make is that every Friday in the 
province of Saskatchewan all of the regional districts get 
together with the Department of Health and look at intensive 
care units and cardiac care units to make sure that we know 
exactly what is happening in the province so that if something 
happens we can move patients quickly to the appropriate 
service. 
 
We’re going to continue that kind of coordination. We’ve done 
it in the past, and we’re going to continue it today, and we’re 
going to continue it into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Parolees at Regina Community Correctional Centre 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday we asked the NDP why criminals 
from Alberta were being moved into a half . . . into halfway 
houses here in Saskatchewan. And what was the NDP’s 
response? The Minister of Justice just said he would use more 
tax money to build more halfway houses. And the Justice 
minister assured us, and I quote the minister: 
 

. . . all necessary precautions have been made to ensure the 
safety of the community here in Regina. 
 

Mr. Minister, today we find out that two criminals sent to a 
Regina halfway house — criminals who were supposed to be 
monitored daily — were somehow able to escape from 
supervisors, get a hold of some guns, rob two stores, and 
commit a sexual assault. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that what you meant when you said all 
necessary precautions have been made to ensure the safety of 
the community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
if the Leader of the Opposition had got his facts straight, he 
would have realized that this was a federal facility, that the 
transfer was from a federal facility in Alberta to Saskatchewan, 
that the facility is administered by corrections Canada, not by 

Saskatchewan corrections. Mr. Speaker, he would have realized 
that this was a federal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve taken steps to raise the issue with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. I was not able to 
hear the answer being given by the Hon. Minister of Justice. 
Please co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
contacted the Solicitor General in Ottawa to express our 
concern and to express the need to respond to this problem by 
ensuring that there are adequate halfway houses in Alberta. And 
I’ve ensured the Solicitor General, Mr. Speaker, that we should 
have a meeting as soon as possible to discuss the situation of 
halfway houses across Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the minister 
recognizes that he’s responsible for the safety of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, last winter Vernon Blaker and 
Harvey Cote were sent to the halfway house here in Regina. But 
the National Parole Board said that these two guys were a risk 
to society. Both men had serious problems with alcohol and the 
Parole Board said they should be constantly monitored. 
 
But the NDP Justice minister assures us that all necessary 
precautions have been made to ensure the safety of the 
community. Mr. Minister, one of the robberies that these men 
committed took place at 11 p.m. Apparently that was made 
possible because their curfew wasn’t until 1 a.m. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that your idea, and these are your words, is that 
your idea of taking all necessary precautions to ensure the 
safety of the community? What steps are the government taking 
right now to address the serious threats that some criminals in 
these halfway houses pose to Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this comes from a leader of a party who campaigned, Mr. 
Speaker, on not one single extra dollar for criminal justice in 
this province. That is not the way to keep our communities safe. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind — I want to remind the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that this is the 
Saskatchewan legislature, not the House of Commons. This is a 
responsibility of the federal government; we know that; he 
knows that; and he’s just playing games with the Saskatchewan 
public. 
 
We have ensured that there will be more police officers on the 
street, Mr. Speaker, in this province than ever before. We have 
ensured there’ll be more RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) officers across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
crime rate in this province, as he well knows, is coming down; 
it is not going up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of 
the Assembly to make a statement of importance to 
Saskatchewan workers. 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and all 
the members. Today, April 28th is the National Day of 
Mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. While we 
take time today to remember those workers, it’s particularly 
important to remember young and first-time workers. We know 
that young and first-time workers are more likely to experience 
workplace accidents than other workers. 
 
In Saskatchewan more than 8,000 young workers, age 15 to 24, 
are injured each year. This is about one-quarter of all injured 
workers. Since last April, 28 people have died on the job in our 
province. Five of them were under the age of 24. Each of these 
tragic accidents is needless and completely unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is vital that all of us — government, labour 
organizations, educators, employers, occupational health 
committees, and working people — reaffirm our commitment to 
the prevention of accidents, injuries, illness, and death in the 
workplace. 
 
We must continue our support for prevention programs and the 
enforcement of health and safety laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now read into the record the names of the 28 
people who died in Saskatchewan workplaces this past year, 
after which I would ask all hon. members to rise and in this way 
convey our thoughts and deepest sympathy go to these workers’ 
families and to all those who have been injured in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker the names I wish to read into the record are: 
 
Thomas Newlove, Young Wong, David Parslow, Jody Churko, 
Lionel Stephens; Ken McCoy — who was just 15 years old — 
Michael Anderson, Gary Marion, George Wickenhauser, Louie 
Woloschuk, Walter Bender, Eric Kurz, Murray Jeffrey, Gordon 
Merrick, Raymond DesRoches, Elmer Bernard, John Nelson, 
Allan Fleck, Leon Wolowski, Don Schweitzer, Daryl Baier, 
Patrick Kerr, George Fern, Frank Hepp, Donald Martin, Gordon 
Kristoff, Lyle Yurach, and Brenton Eikel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all hon. members rise for a moment of 
silence. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 233 — The Democratic Unionism Act 
 

Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 233, 
The Democratic Unionism Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 234 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2000 
(Freedom of Speech in the Workplace) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 234, 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2000 (Freedom of Speech in 
the Workplace). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I ask for 
leave to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under 
rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to kindly explain 
briefly why it is urgent and necessary to debate this matter 
immediately, please. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Funding to Combat the Child Sex Trade 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in view of 
the fact that many people in Saskatchewan, as well as many 
members and almost all members of this Assembly, have 
agreed prior to this day that funding, taxpayers’ dollars in this 
province be used towards prioritized initiatives such as taking 
care of our children, helping our children that are suffering on 
the streets through the exploitation of themselves in the sex 
trade. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party believe that the government must 
take account of this very pressing need for these children and 
examine carefully how they are using their money and the 
taxpayers’ money in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forward a motion: 
 

That all funding provided by the provincial government 
that is being used to promote pornography be immediately 
cancelled and redirected to programs to combat the child 
sex trade. 

 
And I put forward this motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the 
member from Moosomin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

move a motion dealing with memberships on committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on the  
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That the name of Carl Kwiatkowski be substituted for that 
of Ken Krawetz on the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to my 
immediate left is my deputy minister, Stuart Kramer. To my 
immediate right is Tom Harrison, the director of the West 
Boreal EcoRegion. Directly behind me is Dennis Sherratt, the 
director of fish and wildlife branch. And to the left of Dennis is 
Lynn Tulloch, the executive director of corporate services. And 
we also have other officials in the galleries, Mr. Chair, and 
we’re certainly looking forward to any questions that the 
opposition may have. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’d like to 
welcome the minister’s officials here this morning as well, and 
it’s particularly nice to see Mr. Kramer. In my previous life as 
president of SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) and SARCAN, we met on numerous 
occasions to work out all of the details around the legislated 
container program. And I think in the end we developed a very, 
very successful program with SARCAN and one that is a model 
I think for the rest of North America. So welcome to all of you 
this morning. 
 
Perhaps we could start, Mr. Minister, if you’d like to take an 
opportunity and provide us with what you feel may be some of 
the highlights in your department through this budget, and 
where some of the new areas of spending are going to be, and 
what types of new projects, initiatives that may be involved this 
year as well. 
 
(1100) 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just very 
briefly, SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) budget for 2000-2001 was 116.924 million — an 
increase of 15 per cent from last year, which is a fairly hefty 
increase. 
 
And certainly some of the costs that we have incurred, and 
some of the initiatives run we are undertaking in 2000-2001 
include $6 million to ensure forestry industry development is 
done in a sustainable manner, and that’s also inclusive of a 
$750,000 fund for a four-year forest strategy. We have $2.5 
million for the carbon sequestration agreement that SaskPower 
and SERM is able to put together. 
 
As well, we have set aside $2.2 million to further our efforts to 
reduce damage caused by the spruce budworm; $350,000 extra 
for forest regeneration survey; $200,000 to help prevent and 
reduce the ravages of Dutch elm disease in our forests; 
$532,000 will be invested into the provincial park system. 
 
As well, we have committed $321,000 to fund work on land use 
and renewable resource planning for the Athabasca winter road; 
250,000 will help launch a multi-year federal/provincial project 
to decommission the abandoned Gunner and Laredo uranium 
mine sites in northern Saskatchewan; and as well, $100,000 will 
be used to meet increased contractual costs with SARCAN. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Chair, there’s a lot of other expenditures that 
we would like to certainly brag about, but SERM is on track to 
have a very, very successful year. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And as you 
indicated, there are definitely a lot of areas to talk about in this 
budget with respect to the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management. There are a couple of specific areas I’d 
like to touch on today, particularly in the area of the forest fire 
contingency fund. 
 
But I also noticed in your response you talked about the 
increase in the spruce budworm program, and I’d just like to 
have one question in that area first before we proceed to the 
forest fire contingency fund. 
 
What type of request for proposal process does SERM use 
when calling for proposals on the budworm spraying program? 
If you could please let me know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The proposals 
come from the FMA (forest management agreement) holders; 
and as mentioned previously there’s $2.2 million in that fund. 
And certainly the FMA holders have an option to approach 
SERM to put forward the proposals in reference to their battle 
against the spruce budworm problem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — As I understand it, the requests for 
proposals are lent by the department, and there’s a proposal 
evaluation process that is weighted as follows: 50 per cent 
technical, 15 per cent productivity, 25 per cent cost, 10 per cent 
references. 
 
So it appears that we have a process here where cost only 
accounts for 25 per cent of the decision or evaluation process. 
Even if you add in the 15 per cent on productivity there, costs in 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

productivity aren’t even half of the evaluation process. 
 
And I had a specific example given to me of where two tenders 
could be . . . or two proposals could be submitted; one at 
$164,000 higher cost, but it could be given to . . . and it could 
be given to that higher tender because of this weighting process 
where 50 per cent, as I say, is on technical and 10 per cent on 
references with less than 40 per cent on productivity and cost. 
 
I’m just interested in that cost for a department that you’ve 
indicated, Mr. Minister, is very interested in maintaining costs 
and staying on line and holding the line, is such a small, almost 
irrelevant factor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
point out that certainly the criteria that you use, we’re not 
totally aware of that particular criteria. We would ask that you 
would forward information to us and we’ll get back by way of a 
letter or verbal correspondence to you to advise you the details 
of that particular program. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Well I would very much 
appreciate that, Mr. Minister, as this particular process and the I 
guess subjective nature of the various parts of it have caused a 
great deal of concern amongst a number of potential contractors. 
So I would be more than prepared to follow this up with you. 
 
If we could just move on to the forest fire contingency fund. 
Firstly how is this fund to be administered? Is it to administered 
separately? Will it be part of the overall administration of the 
department? And what types of mechanisms are going to be put 
into place to administer the new $50 million forest fire 
contingency fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. And certainly 
from the perspective of the forest firefighting budget, many of the 
FMA holders in the forestry companies and the people living in 
the forestry fringe area and in northern Saskatchewan are quite 
pleased that SERM has taken the active step of trying to put a 
contingency fund in place in the event that there is a serious forest 
fire problem in the upcoming season. 
 
What I would indicate is that the amount that we have budgeted 
for the forest firefighting season is $28.7 million. Now if that 
money is expended, this new $50 million contingency fund would 
then kick in. And if the money is not used, then of course that will 
be returned to treasury. It’s very clear that the money is not to be 
used for anything else except forest firefighting practices. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — So then if the money is set aside, did it 
come out of the General Revenue Fund? Is it allocated? Are there 
certain portions of it that have been allocated in certain areas, or is 
it allocated to any specific purpose around firefighting, 
equipment, personnel? Is there any type of specific purpose for 
any parts of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to 
point out that in reference to the question of how the money 
was allocated, that’d be a question for the Minister of Finance. 
But in terms of the operation of the $50 million contingency 
fund, what I say today is that all costs associated with forest 
firefighting, if we’re above the 28.7 million as I talked to you, 
would be then derived from this particular fund. Any funds not 

used from this $50 million contingency fund would be returned 
to Finance. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Your department 
has said that the average annual fire suppression costs have 
been nearly 45 million over the past 10 years. The regular fire 
suppression budget has been around the $29 million. Now why 
wouldn’t the department just simply have topped up the regular 
portion of the budget by another 16 million. If you already had 
an idea of what those costs would be, why the need for the extra 
34 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The question in 
reference to why didn’t we just go to the $46 million average 
instead of having to claim the full 50 million in the contingency 
fund is quite frankly there’s many years that the fire season is 
low. There’s many years that the fire season is extremely high. 
And some of the facts we have: in the year 1995 we spent $90 
million in forest firefighting; in 1998 we spent $90 million; in 
1999 we spent $70 million. And these figures are always very 
hard to predict. And so the question that we answer back in 
terms of your particular question is that it’s very difficult to 
determine the amounts and many times the forest firefighting 
budget is way over and sometimes it’s under. And that’s why 
the $50 million contingency fund is necessary for us to be able 
to handle the fluctuating costs of fighting fires in northern 
Saskatchewan and the province as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the minister, 
and he alluded to this just briefly a little earlier, if the $50 
million is not used in its entirety this fiscal year, what would 
happen to the balance, the unused portion. Or is that . . . does 
that accumulate or is it returned to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As I’ve said, any amount not being 
used would be returned to the Treasury Board, and obviously 
for next year this same scenario would be asked for and whether 
we get it is certainly for next year’s budget to find out. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister you 
talked about it would only be used for firefighting purposes, 
forest fire costs associated. Could you briefly detail what those 
costs are and how they break down in terms of equipment, 
personnel, administration and the other costs associated with the 
overall firefighting. 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. Just very 
briefly on the current budget that we have, and again it’s 
difficult to talk about the $50 million contingency fund, but on 
the current budget we have, generally our costs range from . . . 
for the $28.7 million that we have allocated, our estimated 
expenditures would be broken down in salaries at $12.5 million. 
And suppliers and other payments, which include helicopters 
and food supplies and so on and so forth, runs about $16.2 
million. So roughly speaking again, it’s a very rough 
guesstimate. We’re probably spending 45 per cent on salaries 
and 55 per cent on other costs associated with forest 
firefighting. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the 
minister . . . We’ve all been hearing a lot recently about the 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

forest fire danger this year. It’s expected that we may have a 
very, very severe fire season. 
 
Aside from the $50 million contingency fund, what other 
measures, if any, is the department taking in order to handle 
what could be a very severe fire season this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As you know, 
it’s very, very difficult to us to continue to watch how the forest 
fire season is going to come about. All we’ve done over the last 
several years is we’ve done extremely well compared to some 
of the other neighbouring provinces. And Alberta, for example 
— we have had half the cost of fighting just as much, as many 
of the fires that they have fought. So Saskatchewan and SERM 
is really leading in the forest firefighting efforts. 
 
And right across the nation, many people have come to 
Saskatchewan to try and see how we prepare for the forest 
firefighting season, and the different strategies that we 
implement, and certainly the manner in which we fight fires. 
 
So far this year, we moved one month ahead of our schedule to 
make sure that we’re prepared for the forest firefighting season. 
We’ve had 41 fires that have started — no escapes. And again I 
go back to the fact that Alberta has followed Saskatchewan’s 
lead. They also moved their crews up a month early to prepare 
for the season. So in essence there has been a great amount of 
work being done by many of the fine men and women that are 
involved with firefighting. 
 
And throughout time, throughout the years, Saskatchewan has 
built a very solid reputation of the manner in which they fight 
fires, the budgets in which they’re able to fight fires with, and 
certainly some of the preparedness that they have undertaken 
over the years to prepare, as I mentioned before, for a tough 
perceived summer of forest fires in northern Saskatchewan and 
throughout the province as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Chair, the minister actually 
anticipated a couple of my next questions. Some of them had to 
do with some of the technological changes that are coming 
around firefighting and that kind of thing and some of the 
reviews that are in fact going on in other provinces as well. But 
we perhaps will leave that for another day. 
 
In terms of some of the additional efforts, is the department 
planning to step up its education campaign and to educate the 
public and do a little more awareness around fire safety, this 
kind of thing? And if so, would that money be coming out of 
the $50 million contingency fund? Or is there a part of the 
budget where those types of awareness programs can be 
developed from? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, there’s 
no question that we have to have more awareness of the issue 
— you’re absolutely right. But the situation is that all the costs 
of trying to promote awareness by the people in Saskatchewan, 
in terms of how some of these fires are started, is certainly 
covered by our operational costs and not from the $50 million 
contingency fund — if that was the question. 
 
And the other point I want to raise is the 41 fires that we spoke 
about, the 41 starts this year, almost all were caused by human 

error. So there’s no question about it that we have to make 
every effort to educate the people on the dangers and the 
potential threat to our forests when it comes to fires. 
 
So there’s no question that the point you raised today in 
reference to awareness is very, very key. And I again state that 
of the 41 fires that we spoke about, almost all were human 
caused. So there is a need for an awareness campaign, and 
we’re undertaking to do that from our general revenues. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You had talked 
about having stepped up . . . being one month ahead of last year 
in terms of preparedness. If we could just go back to last year 
for a minute, would you be able to provide the official 
opposition with a breakdown of the costs associated with all of 
the firefighting program last year, and the contractors involved, 
individuals involved, and the contract amounts and salaries of 
those individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As you know 
March 31, 2000 was our year end. It’s going to take us some 
time to get all the information but if there’s some specific 
information that you’d like we’d certainly make every effort to 
find the information that you wanted. Public Accounts . . . it’s 
going to take us some time to get all the information in place, 
but certainly consistent with our government’s theme we’re 
open and accountable and transparent, and we’ll certainly 
provide you with information. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — I thank the minister, Mr. Chair, very 
much for his offer and we will certainly take that up . . . take 
him up on that and if he can provide that we would be more 
than pleased to have it. 
 
Just specifically with respect to employees for a second, 
obviously if there is going to be a heightened need this year 
with respect to the severity or the threat of fire this year, where 
typically are the firefighters recruited from? What types of 
training are provided to them? And what is the cost of that 
training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The money for 
training the forest firefighters does come from our operating 
budget within SERM. And all the people that we train for forest 
firefighting are from northern Saskatchewan. On occasion, 
many people from southern Saskatchewan do go north to create 
or to get some of these jobs. And it doesn’t happen at a 
wide-scale basis, but certainly the majority of people that we 
train are from the North. And we train them in how to fight fires 
and safety and first aid and so on and so forth. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, after 
having discovered the way in which proposals are asked for 
with respect to the spruce budworm program, spraying 
program, I am curious as to how the contracting of water 
bombers and other types of equipment that is used in forest 
firefighting is done. 
 
Does the department own a lot of this equipment? Is it 
contracted? If so, what is the procedure for contracting 
equipment for forest firefighting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to let you 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

know that in terms of the water bombers we own the basic 
aircraft. It’s owned by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the aircraft — I don’t have the exact numbers — we have 
trackers and we have bombers — and on many occasions when 
the forest fire situation is serious, we have the different 
jurisdictions that share. Last year we had some trackers and 
bombers from the Territories. And often, we also ship some of 
our trackers and bombers to Alberta, to Manitoba, and so on 
and so forth. 
 
This has all been done and co-ordinated throughout all the 
jurisdictions. And certainly from our perspective, it works well. 
When one jurisdiction has some major problems, then the other 
territories and provinces certainly help them out by affording 
them the use of the aircraft at agreed upon rates. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
the situations where the services and equipment are contracted 
out, are those typically notwithstanding the agreements that you 
have with other provinces on sharing equipment, are those 
contracts typically let in Saskatchewan or are there 
interprovincial agreements where the tenders will be let across a 
number of provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that in the case of helicopters we often have difficulty in finding 
enough helicopters in the province because there isn’t that many 
here. But we make every effort to try and employ some of the 
local helicopter companies that are available. 
 
And again, when you look at trying to forecast the forest 
firefighting season, it’s often a very, very difficult task in doing 
that. So do we have opportunity to go to jurisdictions and get 
other helicopters contracted in the case of a serious fire. 
 
So to answer the question, there are some within the province 
that we use. Many times, depending on the seriousness of the 
forest fire situation, we do have to shop around in other 
jurisdictions to try and find, in this case, the helicopters that are 
needed. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
wonder if the minister could provide me with an idea of the 
direct costs involved with using a water bomber. And I 
understand that there are different types of equipment and there 
are certainly different ways in which it can be used. But is there 
a basic cost that when you have to put a water bomber in the air 
that you can identify? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again for the 
question, in terms of the direct costs in using water bombers, 
give us a couple of weeks and I’ll get the answer for you. We 
don’t have the details here. But within the next couple of weeks 
we should have the information and we’ll certainly forward it to 
you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have a lot of 
— as you’re very well aware of, Mr. Minister — smaller 
privately owned businesses in northern Saskatchewan that have 
developed over the years who are available to participate in the 

firefighting program. And I think in some cases we probably 
depend on it to a certain degree with investments that they’ve 
made in equipment and resources, those kinds of things. 
 
What number of northern contractors are involved in 
firefighting? And how many people are involved through the 
employment by these northern contractors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chair, our priority when we look at 
the forest fire situation is to fight the fire with the most effective 
means and try to get the fire out as quickly as we can. And we 
don’t have the direct number of contractors here available for 
you, but we will forward to you the number of contractors that 
we have used in the past and certainly the number of 
employees. That information will become available very, very 
quickly. 
 
However just to point out that in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan — I go back to our earlier point — SERM is 
certainly recognized throughout the jurisdictions across Canada 
as having one of the most effective means to fight fires. And 
many times in northern Saskatchewan we have private business, 
as you mentioned, that do want to get into the service of trying 
to help fight fires and they certainly come at a cost. 
 
So the SERM officials are constantly, diligently looking at 
ways and means in which we can hold the costs, use as many of 
the contractors that are available within the immediate area 
within Saskatchewan, certainly within the other jurisdictions 
around Saskatchewan, so we’re able to maintain the costs and at 
the same time fight fires as quickly as we can and as best we 
can. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
certainly understand the minister’s appreciation of the work that 
the men and women who fight these fires do, and he indicated 
that appreciation a little earlier. 
 
There is some confusion in some quarters. I know that a lot of 
people have a difficulty understanding what’s all involved in 
fighting a forest fire, and how individuals themselves work both 
on the ground and with equipment — that kind of thing. One of 
the things that a lot of people I don’t think are very familiar 
with may be some of The Labour Standards Act regulations — 
that kind of thing — around forest firefighting. 
 
Perhaps if you could, could you explain the types of hours that 
people fighting . . . the workers fighting forest fires work? The 
number of hours that they are allowed in a maximum per day, a 
maximum per week? What overtime provisions there are? And 
what types of shift work there may be involved in terms of 
manning a fire throughout a 24-hour period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just for 
your information, depending on the fire situation again, there’s 
oftentimes that some of the staff work 14 to 16 hours because of 
the intensity of the fire. If the fire is deemed under control or a 
less serious nature, then there are oftentimes 10- to 12-hour 
shifts. And because of occupational health and safety, 
oftentimes these people that are out fighting fires cannot stay 
more than 14 days. 
 
And the average salary for an emergency firefighter would 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

range roughly between 7 and 7.50 per hour depending on the 
certification. Other firefighters may make as much as 8 to 8.50 
per hour again if they’re certified and qualified. 
 
So the amount of money that they are being paid is fairly low, 
but certainly it’s something that we’re continually working 
towards to try and see if we can get better working conditions 
and certainly better salaries. That’s certainly something that we 
have to look at in the future. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Are the majority of individuals involved 
directly in firefighting trained in any kind of night fire firefighting, 
and do we have any particular types of technology available to us 
for early detection? And I’m thinking specifically of being able to 
fly at night and do early detection and have trained personnel that 
can go in and perhaps eliminate the threat before it becomes 
full-blown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just for the 
member’s information, as always SERM is always looking at new 
ways of doing things and there are some exciting plans that we 
want to talk about later in the years. 
 
But certainly in reference to the night firefighting situation, we 
do some work with heavy equipment, the cap lines, certainly 
that isn’t a problem, but during a night, we do not place people 
on the fire line. Occupational Health and Safety rules dictate it’s 
just much too dangerous, and certainly we agree. 
 
In terms of looking at early means in which we could look at 
the firefighting or forest fire problems, we have a tower system 
that we are constantly trying to improve. We have aircraft 
patrolling that really helps with this particular challenge. And 
we also monitor lightning strikes. These are certainly some of 
the efforts that we have undertaken and will continue to 
undertake to make sure that we get a handle on our forest fires, 
before they get too big to handle. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair and to the 
minister, and welcome to the officials that you have here. I was 
listening to the questioning and the responses and there’s an 
area that from my constituency has quite a bit of relevancy, 
particularly in the changing mode of agriculture in the 
northwest. And I’m referring to the raising and marketing of elk 
in my part of the country. 
 
Now I know under your program the elk is a responsibility of 
SERM, and I just wanted to explore one or two things there. 
 
The first question, Mr. Minister, would be because it is under 
the jurisdiction of SERM, what is the overall objective that you 
have for this elk program. And we want to get maybe into some 
of the marketing objectives, or developing objectives later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Just first of all, our priority from SERM’s perspective is 
safety and health for both the game industry and wildlife. That’s 
very, very important. What we do know is that we have a very 
strict protocol with Ag and Food on this particular file. Both 
SERM and SAF (Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food) are 
working together, and this strict protocol is certainly looking at 
some of those issues that I spoke about earlier in terms of safety 
and health. 

And also to point out that the elk industry, from my 
information, is growing at 15 per cent. So that we’re able to 
continually watch that balance between growth and to ensure 
that there is safety and health for both the wildlife and the elk 
industry, then we would continue going down that path. But 
certainly from SERM’s perspective, our priority is safety and 
health for both the game industry and wildlife. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
as I mentioned earlier, it’s an industry that is certainly growing 
in my part of the country and probably all across Saskatchewan, 
and the northern part of Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
Safety concerns, I think, are very, very important, and I think 
they have been. And the industry itself is also very concerned. 
And, as you know, the industry is maturing quite rapidly. It’s 
expanding as you’ve mentioned. Some of the people that are 
involved in the industry, particularly in my constituency, have 
been in the business now I think for 28 years — one of the 
original elk producers in the province. 
 
I guess their concern starts to come to the surface when they see 
other industries that are developing kind of peripherally to 
them. One industry, for instance, the bison industry has 
virtually moved ahead of them in terms of commercial 
production of bison — moving into the slaughtering and meat 
marketing of the processed meat. They can identify those 
industries such as bison being under the jurisdiction and control 
and programs of Saskatchewan Ag and Food. 
 
I think they’re wondering now is it time that the elk industry, 
because it has matured and has developed, moved over into a 
similar program controlled under Ag and Food in conjunction 
with their own ability to monitor certainly the safety aspects? 
 
(1145) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just 
quickly, there is no question that the elk industry has certainly 
expanded, and it’s growing rapidly than within any other 
jurisdiction across the country. 
 
The point you raise is why is bison dealt differently from elk. 
The information is elk is also in the wild, where bison have 
almost no wild population at all. So SERM has to ensure that 
not only are the native elk species protected and certainly the 
native wildlife as well, from the potential problems associated 
with importing of elk. 
 
As you know, Ag and Food is much more involved with the elk 
industry than before. And we’re constantly working on a 
protocol arrangement to work out some of the differences that 
SERM and SAF may have to ensure, as both portfolios are 
wanting to ensure, that we have a strict protocol process in 
place to ensure that some of the elk that are being imported into 
Saskatchewan are safe. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Deputy Chairman, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
I guess the concerns that the elk breeders themselves have are 
similar to that. They certainly don’t want to see any 
contamination or disease movement from the wild into their 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

herd and vice versa. 
 
I think what they feel is that the maturity of their industry now 
probably has some validity in allowing them to do the testing, 
and the testing can show up any particular disease or cross 
contamination very, very quickly, more so particularly now 
with the kinds of testing that’s done. 
 
And I’m happy to hear you say that there is a development of 
protocol between your ministry and the ministry of Ag and 
Food. I think that’s healthy. And I think the producers would 
support that. 
 
If your ministry is going to continue to do the . . . be responsible 
for the elk production in the province, I wonder if you could 
give me an idea of what are some of the advantages, other than 
the safety, what are some of the advantages that your ministry 
can offer the elk industry, and I’m thinking in terms of 
promotion of diversification? What can they do in terms of 
developing value added? I’m thinking of commercial herds and 
slaughtering. And what are the costs that you are now 
experiencing in trying to promote the elk industry in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again 
SERM’s role is to not control industry. As you know this 
particular challenge is of trying to help the elk breeders, and 
certainly maintain the health and safety of other animals is 
shared between Ag and Food and SERM. And our particular 
challenge is, as we mentioned before, the elk industry is moving 
at a 15 per cent at an annual growth rate, which is fairly 
impressive, and as part of our marketing efforts with SERM, if 
we can put it in those contexts, is that we want to ensure that 
these animals that we’re importing are disease free. This is 
where SERM certainly is contributing to trying to make sure 
that the problem doesn’t get out of hand in terms of the 
potential diseases that could be imported into Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly that’s consistent with what the industry wants as 
well. So SERM and SAF — Ag and Food — certainly have a 
shared responsibility here and we’re doing our very best to 
ensure that we work these things out. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The elk 
industry is in Saskatchewan . . . I think has a really bright future 
along with some of the other diversified animals as well. I think 
what the industry is looking forward to, and I know that this is 
being developed already, but they’re really looking forward to a 
lot of not only diversification but international marketing as 
well. And I know a lot of the breeders are doing a lot of 
international travelling in order to promote those kinds of things 
on their own. And I know that there’s a lot of restrictions, at 
least I’m being told that there are restrictions, between 
cross-border, provincial cross-border trading of animals within 
our country. And certainly to move animals from Canada into 
the United States seems to be a market that these producers are 
trying to develop because they feel they’re restricted between 
provinces. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, then would be in the promotional 
aspect of trying to develop this elk industry, can you assist these 
producers any further in conjunction with maybe the economic 
and development department or with other forms of economic 

development to try to expand that elk industry outside of our 
area, and also to allow the cross-contamination and 
improvement of genetics coming into the province. And I think 
that’s a very important aspect that the producers are really 
looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for your question. Again 
SERM’s role is to ensure that our animals are disease free so 
that they can move pretty well anywhere. And again we go back 
to re-emphasizing SERM’s primary role in this whole protocol, 
and that is the safety and health for both game industry and 
wildlife. And I think the industry itself certainly appreciates 
that. 
 
And what I also want to add is that I think it’s to everybody’s 
interest — industry, province, potential markets that you speak 
about, the elk breeders, and also the wildlife federation, all the 
people involved with this particular exercise — is that we make 
sure that these animals are disease free. That is our primary 
objective with SERM and we’ll continue working towards that 
objective. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Minister, thank you. And 
I just have one question to follow up on this particular line, and 
that is with those objectives that you’ve outlined for your 
department regarding elk. Is there in place or can you assure us 
that there will be in place a representative group of producers 
that are involved in the industry in assisting you on a 
consultative and a positive consultative way in trying to 
improve and develop further protocol programs and strategies 
for the elk industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
wanted to point out that, as always, our effort here is to 
maintain the health of the wildlife and the game industry. 
 
As a result of some of your questions, I want to assure you that 
we do meet with SEBA (Saskatchewan Elk Breeders 
Association), which is the elk breeder’s association, and to also 
point out that one of the challenges that we certainly appreciate 
coming from the industry itself is they have much more to gain 
or to lose depending on how well they develop their industry. 
 
And certainly my challenge as a SERM minister to SEBA and 
to other people involved with the industry is you have to work 
very, very closely with both Ag and Food and SERM in helping 
work and develop your particular industry. 
 
So SERM is more than willing to work on a number of 
initiatives to help the industry along. But I say again, as I’ve 
said many times before, is their industry has to be very, very 
co-operative and collaborative with SERM and with SAF in 
order for us to ensure we see a very good healthy growth of the 
elk industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, 
Mr. Minister. I’ll be pleased to relay some of that information 
back to the producers in our particular area. 
 
I’m going to defer to a colleague now, Mr. Deputy Chair, if I 
can. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is for the 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

minister. I have a constituent concerned about the Lovering 
Lake access road. If I may, I’ll read you a little piece of letter 
and then ask you a question about it. 
 

I am writing to voice my concern over the terrible 
condition of the road leading into the Lovering Lake 
Recreational Site. 
 
To begin with there are huge holes at the cattle gate, one 
on each side of the gate large enough to swallow half a tire. 
These holes abut the metal ties of the cattle gate. There are 
large potholes in the dirt road immediately prior to the gate 
as well. The blacktop also has large holes immediately 
prior to the gate. I feel that cars/trucks are in danger of 
tearing off an oil pan or wrecking the transmission. 
 
The paved road from the cattle gate in (it also) has many 
large potholes that cannot be avoided. 

 
Are you budgeting any money towards fixing that particular 
road? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I just wanted to point out that geography class was one of 
my weakest classes in high school and I never passed the 
subject. So in terms of the particular area you’re speaking 
about, I’m not totally familiar with it. And what I would ask 
you to do, please, is to send us the information as well as the 
letter from your constituent and we will find out whether this is 
a Highways road or a parks road. 
 
And to further point out is that we are making every effort to 
look at the park system to review how we’re handling the whole 
park challenges facing Saskatchewan. And we’re going to do 
our very best and we’re very optimistic that we are able to do 
some work in the parks system throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. She did send you a letter and hasn’t had a reply yet 
back so that’s why she sent it to me. So she asked if I would 
bring it up here, so you should have it on file. So hopefully you 
will address that. 
 
One of the other questions I’d like to ask you about that. The 
RCMP and the army uses this particular area for practice 
manoeuvres. Does the federal government give any grants to 
the Lovering Lake for the use of this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. Just to 
point out to your constituent, if I can apologize to her through 
you, you can tell her that I’ll respond to her letter promptly. We 
do go through a great amount of letters at times and we will do 
our very best to respond as quickly as we can, but sometimes it 
takes some days. 
 
I want to point out that to my knowledge we don’t get any 
revenues from the RCMP or from the army in terms of use of 
this particular road, but we’ll check with that and confirm with 
you if we do or if we don’t. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll thank you, Mr. 

Minister. I’d be interested in that information. 
 
Also while we’re still on Lovering Lake there, the leases have 
gone from $50 to 500 over the last five years. Could you give 
the reasons why they’ve increased that much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out just for the information of the folks that may be 
watching, right now from all the revenues from the 
campgrounds and from the park system, the province of 
Saskatchewan receives 8.565 million, and the actual expenses 
of the park system is 13.699 million. So there’s a net loss of 
5.134 million which the government covers. This of course is 
part of our 10-year, $25 million effort towards our park system. 
 
In addition to that we are also contributing $2.5 million in 
capital construction to the park system on an annual basis. And 
we’ll continue putting as much effort and emphasis on our park 
system. 
 
So to answer your question, there may have been increases. I 
can’t dispute your numbers; I don’t know of the particular 
details of the park and the span of the increases. But what I do 
know is this government is certainly committed to the park 
system. There’s much more that we can do and there’s much 
more we’re going to attempt to do with the park system. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, and I’ll thank you, minister, and I 
hope we will keep on you to make sure that you follow through 
with them promises. 
 
Another question I’d like to ask you about parks and rec grants. 
How many were given out last year to various organizations 
under the park . . . if they had a park and recs board? And how 
much was budgeted this year for the upcoming year to be given 
for grants for parks and rec boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that SERM does not fund or grant any money to any 
rec boards. We simply provide all our funding to the park 
system. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. A question I’d like to ask 
you concerns underground fuel tanks, abandoned ones that have 
been abandoned in yard sites, townsites. Does that fall under 
your jurisdiction? Are you doing any funding, putting it aside, 
to clean up if there’s some contaminated areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To answer the question, the 
underground storage tanks are indeed a challenge in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They are environmentally 
challenging for all the different communities that have them, 
and certainly areas that have these underground tanks. 
 
SERM does not have any dollars for the clean up of these tanks. 
We are largely leaving that to the responsibility of the people 
that have the tanks in the first place. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, how about sites that have been 
abandoned or maybe are on . . . basically that have been 
abandoned or they can’t even trace the owners back in some of 
the towns, that really nobody kind of almost — shouldn’t say 
— almost doesn’t own the property. 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

They can’t . . . they’re just abandoned sites that they haven’t 
taken back in tax enforcement yet, but to try and find the person 
responsible. Or the person that does own the property obviously 
has no money to fix up a site that they bought; maybe they had 
bought this site and not realizing that there was an underground 
tank under it at that time. Does that mean that they’re 
responsible for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out to the member, the situation with the underground 
storage tanks is this: number one is that we’re working with the 
jurisdictions and the people and the communities that have had 
this particular problem. We’re trying to see if we can trace 
back, as far back as we can, using some of the resources that the 
province and SERM has, to try and see if we can find somebody 
responsible for that. 
 
And the second thing is that certainly, as you’ve indicated from 
time to time, is that SERM does not have the budget to go 
around redigging up these old underground storage tanks, 
cleaning up the site, and then, then leaving it as it is. It’s a 
tremendous challenge, as I’ve mentioned before. But as I 
mentioned, we are working with the different jurisdictions, the 
different people involved with this to try our best to see what 
we can do to help them with that particular challenge. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, who determines and 
what is a contaminated site? Do you go out and do you test 
them if you’re requested? Basically is there money budgeted for 
that for you to test them? Or who . . . does your . . . do you 
decide what is a contaminated site or who does decide it’s a 
contaminated site? How much it has to be dug out, how many 
feet has to be dug out of dirt, surrounding dirt? If it has to be 
aired out, dried out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that in the event that you were to buy property and 
there’s some underground tanks in there, and you wanted to be 
ensured that these underground tanks were safe or you wanted 
to make sure that the problem was there, we in SERM would 
ask you to do a study of the site, which includes test holes. And 
then we’d ask you to fill out documentation and return it to 
SERM. 
 
And we certainly would ask you to get somebody that’s 
certified to do that for us, to determine whether this site is of 
course contaminated or not. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to do some follow-up in regards to these 
underground tanks. 
 
Are you just telling us that if someone buys a property and there 
happens to be an underground tank on it, it’s the responsibility 
of that individual to then approach the department to do some 
testing to see whether or not there’s contamination on the site? 
 
We’ve had a debate about this for a number of years already, 
and it would seem to me the department should have a policy in 
place that basically says, we’ve reviewed, we understand, we’ve 
got processes in place to determine whether or not sites, there’s 
contamination on these sites, and to kind of, if you will, close 
the book and basically acknowledge the fact we checked all of 

the sites so that if a person buys the property, they’re not left 
with, now we’ve got to decide whether or not that site is 
contaminated before we can do anything on it. 
 
I’ll tell you, no one is going to buy any parcel of property that 
has the potential of an underground site. And that right now, 
Mr. Minister, is one of the problems that we have in regards to 
rural communities working together with RMs (rural 
municipality) to amalgamate some of their services, where 
communities and smaller communities even want to 
amalgamate to provide higher levels of, if you will, some of the 
amalgamation that your government has been talking about, 
some of the amalgamation that Mr. Garcea and Mr. Stabler 
have been talking about, that communities themselves have 
been involved in, but nobody wants to go beyond some of the 
discussion because of the fact that there are some underground 
sites that they really haven’t a clear idea of what’s happened in 
regards to those sites. 
 
And I think it’s time, Mr. Minister, that your department either 
took the time or made sure that we had, if you will, a closing to 
this whole account rather than just letting it fester and grow. 
 
There’s obviously a lot of tanks out there that aren’t a problem. 
We should be able to come to some kind of determination to 
say that yes, we’ve undertaken the studies, we know that there 
isn’t a problem here and this site is now free and allowing 
communities to get on with the process of amalgamating their 
services. Or even, and for small hamlets and villages, to 
amalgamate with the RMs to provide a higher level of 
government and services they’re looking for. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to know exactly where your 
department is going, whether you’ve got a plan in place, or 
whether this is an issue that’s going to drag on for even the next 
10 or 20 years. I think it’s time that we came to resolve on this 
matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I just wanted to point out, as we mentioned before, this is 
a very serious environmental problem that we have. And we are 
going to continue working with the RMs, with the villages, on 
this particular challenge to see what we can do to help them 
alleviate this growing problem and this ever prevalent . . . or 
ever present problem that we have throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly your comments are noted in terms of what we 
wish to do in SERM, what we should do in SERM in reference 
to this problem. And I can assure you that it is our intent in 
SERM to do all we can to address this particular problem. 
 
And I say again, we will do all we can within SERM to address 
this particular problem. If that means working with every 
individual RM out there that has this challenge, we shall 
undertake to do that. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m not exactly 
sure if any RM or . . . (inaudible) . . . really feels comfortable 
with the comments we will continue to work with. We’ve been 
working with them for how many years? 
 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

You have the technology in place. I think it would be very 
simple and very reasonable to ask. And if there are situations 
out there that haven’t been addressed, and I know a number of 
areas that have already been addressed, and where there was a 
. . . because of some concerns about contamination and that 
they’ve already been . . . tanks have been dug up, they’ve been 
removed, and the site has been cleaned. 
 
But where there are sites with the testing equipment we have 
out there right now that really don’t have to be dug up, that can 
be just basically addressed and said whatever precaution and 
measures have been taken to address that situation, it would 
seem to me that it’s time we got on with it rather than saying we 
will continue to work with. And the unfortunate part is what 
happens, most people don’t realize until they start looking at a 
parcel of property that maybe there is or has been an 
underground tank on that site. 
 
And all of a sudden they’re left with the responsibility of 
approaching the department; what do we do now. Because I’m 
not going to buy that; that’s an ideal piece of property but I’m 
not going to invest in that and even for rural governments. 
 
And I don’t think we can wait and just expect that you’re telling 
us today we’re going to continue to work with. We need a 
resolve. We need to have a resolve to the issue and basically a 
timeline that says by such and such a date our department, 
working in conjunction with local governments or communities 
or towns, is going to address this problem and we’re going to 
arrive at a solution so that we can move on with our lives. And 
that communities or local governments can then begin the 
process that they all would like to work to in regards to 
amalgamation of services. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, we need a commitment. Because 
there’s no guarantee that you, sir, will be sitting in that chair 
next year. The Premier may decide he wants to change 
ministers again, and then we start the whole process over with 
the new minister. Or maybe the deputy minister has been 
moved to another area. And it’s just an ongoing problem. And I 
think the department must be getting somewhat frustrated with 
this issue as well. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we need a firm commitment, a 
timeline that says we will address this issue so that it’s off the 
plate and the discussion is over and we’ve resolved the issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out to the member as I . . . it is my endeavour to be here 
for the next three or four years, maybe longer, and I’ll work 
towards that. 
 
I just want to point out is that we do risk-based analysis, that if 
a certain area is not deemed to be an environmental risk then we 
will certainly undertake to advise the owners or the RM that — 
or the village — that there isn’t a major problem here. There are 
not many dangerous situations out there in reference to 
underground storage tanks. And I say not many because there 
are some. 
 
What we’re struggling with now is the liability issue — who is 
responsible. And again as we mentioned, we are looking at all 
the avenues that are available to us. And we’re even going so 

far as to work with the different industries that are out there — 
the oil and gas industry — to see if there’s something that they 
could do. 
 
So as I mentioned previously, I think that SERM is doing all 
that they can on this particular file. They’ll continue exhausting 
all the avenues to address the serious economic matter as I’ve 
indicated in previous statements. And to also point out that we 
haven’t the resources or the dollars within SERM to address 
this particular matter and this is why we’re exhausting all these 
other avenues — to work with the RMs, to work with the 
villages, to work with industry, to work with the potential 
owners, and to work with the whole issue of liability. 
 
So it’s something that we are quite serious about and we’ll 
continue being serious about. And as I mentioned before, we’ll 
undertake to exhaust all avenues on this particular file. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, one final comment, because I know 
my colleagues would like to get into some other debate and 
areas of discussion, and maybe they have some particular issues 
in regards to underground storage. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, I think we need a commitment to a 
timeline, I think we need a commitment to a timeline that 
basically says by such and such — whether it’s two or three 
years down the road or five years — the department working in 
conjunction with municipalities, local governments, urban 
municipalities, we’re going to come to a resolve on this issue. 
 
And basically at the end of the day, we’re going to be able to 
say to each, everyone involved that we have met all the 
requirements of the department, that those properties certainly 
meet the standards; we’ve addressed all the concerns in areas 
where we need to indeed dig up tanks that are continuing to 
give problems. We will address those, and we will address that 
issue. 
 
I don’t think it’s good enough to just sit here and say, we’re 
going to continue to work with and we hope to come to a 
resolve. I think that you need, as the auditor has indicated over 
the past number of years, you have to sit down and come up 
with a plan that says by such and such a date we will have a 
total resolve of this issue so that it isn’t an ongoing problem and 
an ongoing . . . The liability is a major concern for communities 
or businesses that have to address this issue. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Minister, and your departmental 
officials, to give us a timeline. Sit down, draw up a plan so that 
we can come to a total resolve and we’re not addressing this 
issue on an ongoing basis. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just to 
point out that in reference to the underground storage tanks and 
the particular problem that we have in SERM in reference to the 
environmental challenge that they pose, I’m pleased to report 
that many of the sites that we have spoken about have been 
cleaned up and many of the people involved with the industry 
— the owners, the RMs, or the business people — have taken 
the initiative and many of them have spent a considerable 
amount of money upgrading their fuel tanks and doing the 
environmentally responsible thing. 
 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

And I’m pleased to report that as a result of that effort, 90 per 
cent of the problem has been resolved, and that’s a very 
impressive position compared to other jurisdictions. And SERM 
has always and will continue, as I mentioned, working on the 
final 10 per cent. And as you know and as you may appreciate, 
there may be other sites that will be found as times goes on, and 
we need to get a handle on that as well. 
 
But as we’ve mentioned before, there’s many people that have 
led this particular charge and we feel that at SERM all the 
avenues and all the resources that we can afford for this process 
has had some success, and we’ll continue, as I mentioned, 
exhausting those avenues in working to resolve this very serious 
problem in a timely fashion. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you Mr. Deputy Chair. Okay, I guess 
that was an area that I hadn’t planned on asking any questions 
on, and I may just make a comment or two. But I think it’s a 
very real one, and I’m very concerned that SERM doesn’t have 
a plan to sort of say we’re going to deal with this issue; we’re 
going to put timelines in place for various aspects of the 
problem. 
 
When you mention that there’s only about a 10 per cent of the 
problem left, I would beg to differ because I . . . You go to any 
small community and you talk to an old-timer and they will tell 
you of tanks that SERM hasn’t even thought existed. Because 
virtually every small town had two, three, four, a dozen service 
stations around and over the years those places were rebuilt and 
covered over. And as I said, most people under the age of about 
45 or 50 in those communities don’t even know there ever were 
tanks there. 
 
So I think your problem is a whole lot bigger than you’re 
prepared to admit. And that’s why I think it’s important to get 
some timelines and some plans and programs out there so that 
we don’t have this hanging over the heads of people who want 
to develop; people who want to purchase — not knowing what 
kinds of requirements SERM is going to put on them to clean 
up the particular location. 
 
Having sold a particular business some time ago that had an old 
site on it and knowing the problems that we went through, I 
think that’s something that’s very definitely needed. Because 
any people making a particular deal on a piece of property end 
up with a very open-ended problem — not knowing what the 
extent of the situation’s going to be. And I think something 
much more definite needs to be in place. However, you can 
comment on that in a minute or two, if you wish. 
 
I did have an outfitter talk to me sometime ago that had a 
question that he very definitely wanted an answer to. So the 
question I’m just relaying from him, and that is apparently there 
used to be a number of — quite a number of — 
picnics/washroom sites on highways and roadways in northern 
Saskatchewan. And he has an outfitting camp for fishing, and 
he’s very concerned that numbers of these have been closed 
down and shut down. 
 
And I guess my question, first of all, is how many have you 
shut down? What’s the rationale behind that? And what is your 
view for the future if you plan on shutting down some more and 
why? 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just 
to point out that . . . to be blunt and open and front in reference 
to the number of rec sites we are looking at closing down, and 
the reason why we’re looking at closing them down is simply, 
primarily because of the volume of use. And that number is 40. 
 
And such a rec site is about 30 kilometres south of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, my hometown. And that particular area . . . that 
particular rec site is called the South Bay campground. And 
throughout time, throughout time, we’ve had SERM come in 
there and do some cleaning up and paint the toilets and drop off 
some firewood. But over the last four or five years the majority 
of some of the costs of maintaining that park, building some 
buildings on there for youth conferences and so on and so forth 
has been undertaken by the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
So in reference to the 40 sites that we announced today that we 
are looking at shutting down, we are also making every effort to 
try and transfer some of those rec sites to the RM, to the 
municipality, or just certain group [CORRECT] of people that 
want to undertake to be friends of that particular park. And 
we’re exhausting all those avenues. 
 
In the case of the South Bay provincial campground, I would 
suggest to you today that perhaps Ile-a-la-Crosse would be in a 
perfect position to say, yes okay, we’ll take care of the park, 
give us the park and we’ll do all we can for it. Because we have 
been doing that for years. 
 
They never received any grants for that; they never received any 
funding whatsoever. And as I mentioned SERM’s role was to 
go there and put the firewood in and certainly paint some of the 
buildings and so on and so forth. 
 
So I think of terms of the rec sites we’re looking at shutting 
down because of very minimal use, we’re making every avenue 
available to some of the RMs, the municipalities, and the 
villages, and other friends of the park system to take over the 
system so they can retain them as parks and use them for all 
people’s enjoyment. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I just want to verify that I 
understood the answer correctly. And that seemed to be that 
there were . . . that you’re planning on shutting down some 40 
sites. Correct me if that’s wrong. And I guess following to that, 
how many sites do you plan to maintain? 
 
And like I said, some of these aren’t major sites. They’re more 
the stop-off spots that might have a picnic table or two and a 
washroom. 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. Just to 
confirm that we are looking at 40 sites that we will be reducing 
service to; and these are rec sites — as you mentioned, 
stop-over sites for a picnic and a day in the park, so to speak. 
And we’re doing all we can to avoid closure. 
 
Now I make reference to the Ile-a-la-Crosse campground. As 
you mentioned, throughout time the village of Ile-a-la-Crosse 
and the people that use the regional park never received one red 
cent from any other source besides what SERM brought in for 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

firewood. So they maintain that park at their own costs, at their 
own time, for their own leisure. And we look at that initiative 
and that opportunity to be available to other RMs in southern 
Saskatchewan and to other villages and band councils and other 
friends of the park system throughout northern and in southern 
part of Saskatchewan. 
 
So our premise here is to be very clear. We want to do all we 
can to avoid closure but we are going to be reducing services to 
40 rec sites which are primarily unserviced parts that not a lot 
of people use. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I guess the reason I asked the 
question, I was just rather astounded that you’re shutting down 
40 sites, particularly at a time when I think one of the success 
stories in Saskatchewan — and we’re always looking for some 
of those — is the tourist industry. And I think it’s one of those 
things that everyone in Saskatchewan is feeling very positive 
about. And then to close down 40 sites. 
 
And I guess the other question I had is how many sites does that 
leave that you are going to maintain and what your plans for 
those would be. 
 
Moving to a slightly different area, and that’s to the Cypress 
Hills section of Saskatchewan — the east block and the west 
block. And I guess my first question would be, from your recent 
surveys, what are the number of elk in the Cypress Hills area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
again as we mentioned, we are not shutting down these sites; 
we are trying to reduce services to them to avoid closure and do 
all we can to handle the transfer, if we can use the word, 
transfer, to some of the potential users and some of the potential 
people that might want to use these sites. 
 
We do maintain about 90 other rec sites plus the provincial park 
system. And as I mentioned it certainly comes out of costs of 
the provincial government — that $5.1 million. A good 
investment, I might add. 
 
In reference to the elk situation, we done a survey last winter in 
conjunction with the Alberta government. And we don’t have 
those numbers in front of us today but we’ll certainly get them 
to you as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The area around Cypress Hills is a very 
attractive area, especially for elk hunting. And I guess the 
follow-up question is: how many elk were taken through the 
draw licence in Saskatchewan last year and how many elk were 
shot by people not being involved in the draw system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
we don’t have the exact numbers here because there is some 
extenuating circumstances. But in terms of the harvest itself, we 
harvest in the fashion of one-third for subsistence, one-third for 
Saskatchewan residents, and one-third for Alberta. This is 
where we have to make sure we get the proper numbers from 
the Alberta folks, and this is what we undertake to do as well. 
But we will have those numbers. But in terms of the harvest, 
again, one-third for subsistence, one-third for Saskatchewan 
residents, and one-third for Alberta. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m going to ask you to clarify 
the subsistence part because to me that seems people living in 
the area who need those for food, who are living there. I’m 
going to ask you if that’s correct, and maybe to explain that to 
some extent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that it is always the intent of SERM to balance all the interests 
in the province. And I’m pleased to report that the one-third 
subsistence hunting is for the First Nations bands that have 
traditionally hunted in these areas for many centuries. 
 
And it is part of the concession that they gave the province of 
Saskatchewan to manage this particular harvest. And there is a 
great number of bands that do hunt in the area. And so far . . . 
and it’s been so good in terms in the relationship and everything 
seems to be working well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You mentioned the Saskatchewan situation. 
I’m wondering what happens with people coming from out of 
province under that headline to hunt in Cypress Hills, if that 
follows the same jurisdiction. And secondly, it seems the 
definition of subsistence kind of falls apart. If you’re going 
have to drive 500-or-so miles to hunt it, then it’s no longer 
subsistence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that there is no out-of-province hunting allowed in the area 
except for the Alberta participants. And as well the courts will 
and have identified what subsistence hunting is. And if it’s from 
500 miles away, again as I mentioned, the courts have identified 
what that is and we’re certainly abiding by that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would hope that the 
minister does a little more research on that because I would like 
the numbers that I’ve asked for, and I would like for him to 
check a little more carefully with his people out in the field to 
see what’s actually happening out there. Because having hunted 
there myself, having talked with the people that reside in the 
area, including with the officers themselves, I think some of the 
information that he’s presenting at this particular point seems to 
differ to some extent with what seems to be happening there on 
that particular issue to some extent. 
 
And I guess here’s something I personally experienced hunting 
in that area, where people who do not require a license are 
hunting in that area but are not wearing the proper hunting 
apparel, which is very much a safety thing. And I remember 
walking through the north side of the west block and running 
into people who were hunting there without the proper clothing 
on — ended up being a very scary and a frightening situation. 
I’m wondering if that’s being addressed in one form or another. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chair, just to point out that it is 
always SERM’s intent to promote safety when people are out 
there hunting. We encourage people to do that on a constant 
basis. But in terms of the subsistence hunters, they are not 
required — as identified by the courts — to wear hunting 
apparel. And we do all we can at SERM to encourage them. We 
promote awareness with them and talk to them on many of 
these fronts, but we can’t enforce them to wear hunting apparel. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer. And I would hope 



April 28, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

that SERM puts a lot of effort into that because it’s very 
definitely a safety hazard and creates all kinds of problems in 
that particular area. 
 
Moving to something else that’s close to the Cypress Hills, and 
that’s the antelope. And I’m wondering exactly what’s 
happening with the count there. I know the season’s been closed 
for a while because the numbers have been down substantially. 
 
If I could have some comment on what you see as the reasons 
for the population being down, and what you see happening in 
the fairly near future — three, four, five years — with the 
antelope numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that surveys are done in the summer. We’ll be doing one in this 
budget year of 2000. And the reason why the antelope numbers 
are down is the production is low. And of particular interest to 
your colleague there, one of the reasons why the production is 
low is that many of the young antelope are quite frankly hunted 
by predators called coyotes. 
 
And as a result of that we now have a coyote tax where we 
allow people to come in in outfit and hunt these coyotes down 
so the antelope could grow up and there’d be greater numbers 
and the producing levels certainly happened, and then you, sir, 
can go out hunting. 
 
So the situation is quite clear. We’ll be doing a survey this year 
on antelopes, and the reason why they’re low and we anticipate 
they’d be low is because the production is down as a direct 
result of the coyote problem and the other predators that are 
high in that particular area. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And one question dealing with 
the coyotes, because I know that was sort of the answer. We’ve 
had some fairly mild winters in the last few years and that 
should have definitely helped the population come up. But it’s 
interesting that when you say that, you know, hunting is one 
way to keep the number of coyotes down, but you still put a 
licence on individuals that come from out of province to hunt 
them. 
 
If anything we should be putting some sort of a bounty on them 
to bring those numbers into line, because that’s part of SERM’s 
responsibility is wildlife management. And I’m wondering if 
any thought has been given to putting a bounty on it to get the 
coyotes down to where they should, because they also affect the 
populations of a lot of the birds in the area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The problem 
with the coyote population is especially apparent in the south, in 
the southern zone. And it is a serious problem. And as I 
mentioned before farmers can, indeed, shoot coyotes and other 
predators such as wolves if they’re of threat to their herd and 
certainly if they’re a threat to their family and to their home 
area. 
 
And, as we mentioned before, if you’re sort of looking at a cost 
of putting a bounty on the coyotes, you’re looking at a fairly 
significant amount of dollars. And many times the bounty 

programs do not work. We anticipate that if we increased the 
harvest opportunities to some of the outfitting opportunities and 
in working with the trappers’ federation and encouraging 
people that see some of their animals under attack, such as the 
farmers, that they have the right to harvest these animals. And 
we think through those scenarios, that there is not a problem 
with us bringing those numbers down gradually in a safe, 
consistent, and a credible manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the members having 
received much food for thought to gnaw over, over the 
weekend, I think perhaps it’s time that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to make a 
statement regarding the celebration of Easter in the Orthodox 
rite. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Orthodox Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
many people in Saskatchewan know, today is Good Friday for 
many Ukrainians and indeed Serbians, Russians, Romanians, 
and Greeks, and others who came to this country from countries 
in Europe who had an orthodox tradition. This, of course, will 
be followed by celebrating Easter Sunday — the Ukrainian 
word for which is Velekden. 
 
People celebrate Velekden by attending a Sunday church 
service which is quite often followed by a blessing of the 
traditional Easter baskets, baskets filled with freshly baked 
braided bread known as kolachi, or Easter breads fondly known 
to little children as babka reminding them of their 
grandmothers, and the traditional, beautifully decorated Easter 
eggs, the pysanky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the largest pysanky in the world is probably in 
Canada, prominently displayed near the town of Vegreville. 
 
And many times, Mr. Speaker, these baskets and the blessing of 
these baskets is done outside, around the church, if the weather 
is favourable. 
 
It’s a time when many of us take this opportunity to get together 
with our families and celebrate the old traditions. Often the 
focus of these celebrations are on children. It’s an occasion to 
teach the young people about these age-old traditions and skills; 
such as the traditions of the techniques of decorating the Easter 
eggs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of hope that Easter brings, I want to 
express to all in the House and to all families in Saskatchewan 
who observe this great holiday, and I want to do it with the 
traditional Ukrainian greeting of Easter Sunday: Chystos 
Voskres which means Christ is risen. And the response to that is 
Voyisten Voskres, which translates, indeed He has risen. 
Chystos Voskres, Voyisten Voskres. 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2000 

And if anybody wants lessons in pronunciation I’m prepared to 
help right after we adjourn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — To make a statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to join with my colleague from Prince Albert Carleton in 
wishing all of the people of Ukrainian ancestry and others of the 
Orthodox faith a Happy Easter. I, of course, am far more 
familiar with the Ukrainian traditions around Easter. 
 
My baba was of Ukrainian ancestry, and we participated in all 
the traditions and customs as she learned them as a child in the 
Ukraine. And it was a very nice time of year for our family 
when we got together around Easter, and baba used to look after 
the grandchildren very, very well. 
 
The contribution of the Canadians of Ukrainian ancestry, I 
think, has been very, very well documented both in our 
province and in our country. And their ability to be able to 
emigrate here and make the transition and then make the 
contribution that they have as all of the others, as the member 
indicated, of the Orthodox faith have made to the quality of life 
in this country and in this province is truly something to be 
celebrated. 
 
So I would join with the member in wishing everyone of 
Ukrainian ancestry, their families and friends, a Happy Easter. 
I’m not quite as eloquent in Ukrainian as my colleague, so I’ll 
leave it at a very Happy Easter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I too would like to join, and I 
thank the members for having acknowledged this special time 
of year. And I also would like to wish each and every one of 
you a very happy and special weekend with your families, with 
your constituents. And do I look forward, I really do look 
forward to seeing you at 1:30 p.m. Monday. This House stands 
adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55 p.m. 
 
 
 


