





























































Hansard: June 19, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1905 
 June 19, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens throughout the 
Watrous-Lanigan area and actually throughout the entire 
province, who are petitioning to save the Lanigan and Watrous 
hospitals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Allan 
and Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitioners 
concerned, ratepayers concerned about the talk of forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plan it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Atwater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
the people in Swift Current and area concerned about their 
hospital, about the Swift Current Regional Hospital. And the 
prayer can be summarized as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Swift 
Current and the small community south of Swift Current known 
as McMahon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I also rise to read a petition from citizens 
concerned about improved cellular telephone service. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 

Signed by the good people from Prud’homme and Saskatoon. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
speak . . . or to bring a petition by the citizens concerned about 
the highways in this province. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Christopher Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly ever 
pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned about poor cellular 
telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 

And the petitioners come from the communities of Duval and 
Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
improved cellular telephone coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the petitioners on this . . . or the signatures on this petition 
are from Saskatoon, Lloydminster, and Meacham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
amalgamation of municipalities. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Manor, Carlyle and Redvers. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on 
the following matter: 
 

To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals and the 
Cupar Health Centre remain open. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present three sets of written questions. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 68 ask the government the 
following question. This is: 
 

To the minister of SaskTel: does the SaskTel Mobility use 
out-of-province firms as a collection agency for 
outstanding accounts; if so, why isn’t a Saskatchewan 
company used? 
 

Second question. I give notice I shall on day no. 68: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: why are the shelter 
allowances rates paid in Dalmeny based on a rural tier 
while shelter allowance rates paid in Warman and 
Martensville are included in an urban tier; why are there 
two tiers of rates; and how does the department determine 
which tier should apply; and how does a community move 
from one tier to another? 

 
And I give notice I shall on day no. 68 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Energy and Mines: in the last five years 
how much in the way of mineral rights for farmland have 
reverted to the Crown as a result of banks not paying the 
mineral rights taxes on repossessed farmland; under what 
circumstances will the Crown give back the mineral rights 
to farmers who reacquire their repossessed land where the 
banks have failed to pay mineral rights taxes? 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice the I shall 
on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Justice: how many cases have been tried 
in Saskatchewan in which the Legal Aid lawyer has been 
paid above and beyond the regular Legal Aid tariff; and 
outline the additional costs to the Legal Aid Commission 
of these cases? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 21 grade 4 students from Hillside School in Estevan. 
They are sitting in your east gallery. Today they are 
accompanied by teacher Shelley Barlow, and chaperones 
Natalie Almond, Roxanne Murray, Donna Adcock, Tracy 
Abdou, and Peter Verbeem. 
 
I’d like to ask you all to join me in welcoming these students to 
Regina and I hope you enjoy the rest of your day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
really happy today to have an opportunity to introduce to you 
and through you to the rest of this House, a couple that I met 
yesterday. I was out . . . My son took me out golfing at the 
Murray Golf Course and we were teamed up with a couple, 
Janet and Gordon Johnston from Victoria. They’re touring . . . 
Gordon just recently retired and they’re touring the country and 
golfing in every province along the way. Janet is the observer 
and Gordon is an exceptional golfer who taught me a thing or 
two out there yesterday. 
 
So I’d like everybody here to welcome them to the House and 
wish them the best on their tour of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you, sir, and to other members of the 
Assembly, a group of 24 grade 6 students from the Rosemont 
School. If they would just stand up in the west gallery, we 
would recognize them. They are here today with their teacher 
Mrs. Struthers, and chaperone Mrs. Sauer. 
I wish all members to join with me in welcoming the students, 
teacher, and chaperone here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my great pleasure 
today to introduce not only our MP (Member of Parliament) for 
Regina-Qu’Appelle, Lorne Nystrom, but with Lorne is two of 
his staffers here in Regina — Donna Fincati and Warren 
McCall. 
 
Also with them is — I’ll describe it as a fourth, which would 
make an ideal golf team — but David Cashaback has a master’s 
in political science. But, Mr. Speaker, he is also on the 
parliamentary internship program attached with Mr. Nystrom’s 
office, and I understand that goes on for about five months now. 
And I also learned that this is the 30th year of that internship 
program. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

David is in Regina touring Lorne’s riding, and I know he was 
out in Weyburn over the weekend and I suspect has seen a 
number of . . . I said Weyburn; he was further north — 
Wynyard. My apologies to both the people of Weyburn and 
Wynyard for that slip of the tongue. 
 
Anyway, I ask all members to join me in welcoming, 
particularly David Cashaback, but the other three, to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, 15 
students from Makwa, Saskatchewan in my constituency, to 
you. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With them are teachers, bus drivers, and chaperones — I think 
probably duplicating in a number of those capacities — Charles 
Stein, Eleanor Stein, and Corrine Martin and Doug Kirsch. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them later, right after question period, for 
drinks and I’m sure a number of questions that they will have. 
So please join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

DryAir 2000 Funding Announcement 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to inform the 
Assembly about more good economic news for our province. 
 
The Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development is in St. 
Brieux, Saskatchewan today to announce that Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation has invested $500,000 in a developer, 
manufacturer, and marketer of grain drying and in-bin grain 
management equipment. 
 
SOCO’s (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) investment 
in DryAir 2000 will allow the company to manufacture 85 
DryAir units, primarily for an export market, and create 
additional jobs in rural Saskatchewan. DryAir produces a 
specialized portable heating and dehumidification unit primarily 
used to generate heat on construction work sites and to dry 
grain. 
 
DryAir is the kind of company that is part of Saskatchewan’s 
future, the kind of company that this government wants to 
encourage. They have demonstrated the drive, determination, 
and the innovative edge that marks excellence. In fact, DryAir 
was recently awarded with an ABEX (Achievement in Business 
Excellence) award for excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent international KPMG study puts 
Saskatchewan at the forefront when it comes to being a 
competitive place to do business. We recently became even 
more competitive with the tax cuts in our recent budget that 
represents the single largest income tax reduction in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let us all congratulate DryAir 2000 on this great 
announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Access to the Legislature 
 

Mr. Heppner: — I would like to comment today on a trend that 
I don’t like very much and I doubt the people of Saskatchewan 
like it either. That is the increasingly difficult time people are 
having gaining access to the legislature or should I say, Mr. 
Speaker, some people. 
 
It seems to me there is an increasing double standard when it 
comes to people getting into this building. And in my time as an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) it has always been 
a fairly open and accessible place. But in the last few months 
I’ve noticed a trend. 
 
Let me just illustrate a few examples. When the LPNs (licensed 
practical nurse) showed up in support of the government they 
were let in. When the teachers showed up to protest the 
government, they were kept out, as were the farmers. When the 
new car dealers showed up to support the government, they 
were let in. When a young woman accompanied by her toddler 
showed up to distribute the record of submissions to the public 
review on no-fault, she was asked to leave. When 
representatives of the gay community showed up to support the 
government, they were let in. But then just a few days later 
when they showed up to protest the government decision, they 
were kept out. 
 
We inquired about the policy regarding accessibility to this 
building and were told security is simply following the rules 
that were laid down by the Speaker, and we believe this to be 
the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rules are important, but even more important is 
that those rules apply equally to all. In this case, it appears they 
apply differently and related differently to whether or not an 
individual supports the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. This building is not owned by 
the socialist government; it is owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I urge some clarification and fairness be 
brought to this issue immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sig’s Charity Corn Roast 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on June 10 
I had the pleasure of attending an annual fundraiser for charity 
in the community of Vonda. Sig’s Annual Charity Corn Roast is 
in its 11th year and is a combined volunteer effort involving 
four rural communities in my constituency — Aberdeen, 
Prud’homme, St. Denis, and Vonda. 
 
The day in Vonda started with a parade followed by ball 
tournaments, a dunk tank, and later everyone enjoyed an 
all-you-can-eat meal of corn on the cob and hot dogs. Five 
hundred and ninety-five people were part of this event that 
raised a total of $6,000. This year the proceeds of the meal 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

tickets — $2,000 — went to the Brain Injury Association and 
the proceeds from other endeavours in the amount of $4,000 
went to the community of Vonda. 
 
Each year, Sig’s Charity Corn Roast moves to another one of 
the four communities involved, and next year the corn roast will 
be held in Prud’homme.  
 
In past years, Mr. Speaker, these communities have raised funds 
for Camp Easter Seal, the Children’s Wish Foundation, and the 
Rubella Foundation. 
 
Congratulations to all involved for making this a huge success, 
especially Sig Bouliane, a very high energy, very special, 
unique personality who is a major catalytic force behind this 
successful event. Sig is owner of Sig’s Place, a western-style 
café in Vonda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community volunteer spirit is alive and well in 
the Humboldt constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert to Host Special Olympics 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to inform the legislature that my hometown, 
Prince Albert, has been given the opportunity to host the 
Special Olympic athletes, coaches, and staff from all 10 
provinces and three territories at the 2002 Canadian Special 
Olympics that have been awarded to our city. I’d like to 
congratulate Mr. Fredette and his committee for their hard work 
in bringing this event to our city. 
 
Countless hours of volunteer time went into making this 
happen, and of course now the real organizing begins. But I 
want to say that I am convinced and I’m sure it will not be too 
onerous a task as Prince Albert can count on several hundred 
enthusiastic volunteers to ensure that this event will be 
organized and highly entertaining. 
 
I know that having the Special Olympics in P.A. (Prince Albert) 
will enrich our community. In return the citizens of P.A. will be 
very warm and welcoming hosts. All of the athletes, the 
coaches, and supporters will leave Prince Albert and 
Saskatchewan with very fond memories and new friendships. 
 
Prince Albert has hosted numerous sporting events in the past 
several years and judging from P.A.’s track record, I can 
guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that we will do our province very 
proud. We will do Canada proud in hosting these very Special 
Olympians. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Driving Events in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend in 
Swift Current, two young local brothers, Shawn and Craig 
Robinson pulled off a significant regional if not national 
sporting event right in the city of Swift Current. Many did not 
think that they could successfully and virtually on their own 
host both the Rema World Long Driving qualifying event and a 

Long Drive Cash Contest on the same day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday, the Robinson boys did 
just that. They lined up sponsors and attracted golfers from as 
far as Markham, Ontario for the competition. Indeed, Craig 
Robinson qualified at his own event to advance in the world 
competition with a drive of 352 yards and 8 inches. 
 
His brother Shawn did not have to qualify at all. He had already 
won a qualifying event in Calgary and so he could focus on the 
$3,000 up for grabs in the cash contest. And while young 
Shawn hit one of his drives 382 yards, it was not in the final 
round and so he finished out of the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young golfers demonstrated not only their 
love for the game, their own amazing abilities to organize, but 
also ability to conceive and develop and execute a world-class 
sporting event. This is another achievement for the growing list 
for both Craig and Shawn, for you see Shawn is also the 
second-ranked long driver in all of Canada and the 17th in the 
world. It’s no wonder international companies like Harrison 
Shafts have given their sponsorship to this third year U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) pharmacy student from Swift 
Current. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take the opportunity to 
congratulate the Swift Current firefighters on successfully 
defending their regional championship at this weekend’s 
firefighters combat challenge held in Vermillion, Alberta. 
Perhaps my colleagues could help the official opposition 
acknowledge this amazing achievement by supporting The Fire 
fighter Protection from Liability Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Imperial Millennium Celebration 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am told, 
Mr. Speaker, that we missed the event of this young millennium 
this past weekend. The community of Imperial wisely put off its 
millennium celebration until the weather was a bit more 
co-operative, and was therefore able to welcome about 400 
people to its celebration, many of whom returned from far away 
that day. This came close to doubling the population. 
 
The event began Saturday morning with a parade of 55 entries. 
There was a ball tournament, and as the highlight of Saturday 
afternoon the former MLA and current hotel operator dropped a 
bag of peanuts from a circling plane 300 feet above the target 
and hit the bull’s eye without breaking the shell of a single nut. 
An amazing feat indeed. 
 
As well there were historical displays at the school, a program 
with skits at the hall, and to conclude the first day, a street 
dance on Saturday evening. 
 
Yesterday morning there was a pancake breakfast sponsored by 
the wildlife federation and finally an ecumenical church service 
at which the former MLA, and perhaps some others, repented 
for what they had done Saturday evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by all accounts this was a very enjoyable weekend 
for the people of Imperial and vicinity and I congratulate them 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

on their very successful millennium celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan 4-H Program 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former 
member of the 4-H Light Horse Club in North Battleford, I am 
pleased to have this opportunity to speak to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly about the achievements made by 
Saskatchewan 4-H. 
 
The Saskatchewan 4-H program made a commitment in 
September 1996 to raise $1 million by the year 2000, and 
they’ve reached this goal ahead of schedule. This funding 
provides the Saskatchewan 4-H with the long-term financial 
structure it needs to provide programming into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this achievement speaks well of 4-H in this 
province, and it speaks well of public support for the program. 
 
The successful fundraising campaign over the last four years 
ensures that the program will continue to serve rural and urban 
communities throughout this province. It will allow the 4-H 
program to continue to offer its varied programming, to hold its 
summer camps, and to send outstanding members on 
educational trips to various locations across North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has recently 
entered into a new three-year agreement with the 4-H program. 
The Government of Saskatchewan has assisted the 4-H program 
for many years. 
 
The Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food has dedicated 
$300,000 a year to 4-H over the next three years to assist with 
programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 4-H will hold various regional shows throughout 
the province during June and July. I encourage all members to 
take these in and support the 4-H throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Gaming minister. Mr. Speaker, on Friday the 
minister announced that the chairman and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority received 
$360,000 worth of unauthorized expense money in the past 
year. 
 
The minister directed SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) to take a number of steps to deal with this serious 
problem, including the appointment of a new board Chair and 
new CEO to replace Dutch Lerat. Mr. Speaker, SIGA is now 
refusing to follow this direction. FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) Chief Perry Bellegarde says they 
will not replace Dutch Lerat as CEO of SIGA. 
 
Madam Minister, you are the minister responsible for SIGA. 

What steps are you going to take now that SIGA and FSIN are 
refusing to comply with the directions you issued on Friday? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. And as she stated, Friday 
morning we did have the conference to say the auditor . . . on 
the advice of the auditor, KPMG, discovered two things. 
 
It was reported by the Provincial Auditor to me that the CEO 
had taken certain actions, and therefore we had taken actions to 
direct certain things to occur and the board resolution. Through 
the course of the last few days, a new Chair has been selected 
for SIGA and we are now waiting to hear from them in a formal 
sense whether they will comply or not. 
 
The Liquor and Gaming Authority, Mr. Chair, has statutory and 
regulatory responsibilities for the oversight of gaming 
operations in this province. And I know that like any other 
licensee, we will expect them to comply. 
 
So we are waiting to hear that they’re complying with those 
directives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, you’d think that when the SIGA 
board was told of Mr. Lerat’s unauthorized expense claims they 
would have taken immediate action themselves. Instead they 
tried to cover it up. They tried to legitimize these claims by 
giving him a $360,000 unbudgeted salary increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these actions suggest the entire board may have 
breached their fiduciary responsibility, and now SIGA is openly 
defying your demand that Dutch Lerat be removed as CEO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education said that the Gaming 
minister has the authority to go a lot further. He said she has the 
authority to dismiss the entire board and appoint a public 
administrator. Madam Minister, are you considering this step? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we do have, according to a signed gaming agreement, certain 
areas that we expect that people would live up to those 
agreements — any licensee in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are waiting to hear . . . we know that about the middle of 
this week, SIGA will have its meeting, and they’re going to tell 
us what steps they’ve taken. There have been steps that have 
already been taken according to the resolution and to the Chair 
of the board. 
 
We have issued directives, and we expect compliance. We have 
statutory and legal compliance measures open to us, but I’m not 
prepared to speculate until I hear if they’re going to comply or 
not. And then we will take decisive action at that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the SIGA board clearly did not 
have the proper financial controls in place. The Chairman and 
CEO was making a thousand dollars worth of expense claims a 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

day without virtually any receipts to back up these claims. 
When the SIGA board was confronted with this information, 
they tried to cover it up. And now they are openly defying the 
minister’s order to remove Mr. Lerat as CEO. 
 
Madam Minister, this board is out of control. SIGA administers 
millions of dollars of casino revenues, money that is suppose to 
be used for the social and economic development of First 
Nations people. Yet they are not prepared to be accountable for 
their actions. 
 
Madam Minister, will you dismiss the SIGA board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday there were 
directives that I mentioned in the statement that would respond 
to some of these concerns. SIGA board must meet and let me 
know whether they intend to — well let the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority as the regulator, Mr. Speaker — because politically 
we’re not responsible; Liquor and Gaming Authority has a 
regulatory and legal responsibility to respond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those directives are non-negotiable. They are 
non-negotiable. The authority requires SIGA to comply with 
agreements, terms and conditions. And subject to that, if there is 
not compliance we would have strategies and measures in place 
to deal with that. So we will take direct action if those are not 
complied with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
are also for the Gaming minister. 
 
Madam Minister, now that you’ve admitted that you have 
regulatory and legislative responsibility for SIGA, my question 
is: who authorized a corporate debit card for Mr. Dutch Lerat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, Friday morning in the 
statement that one of the members opposite was present at, I’d 
mentioned that SIGA had issued their CEO and chief executive 
officer with a corporate credit card and debit cards. 
 
The minute we discovered this we requested and directed that 
those cards be cancelled. So we have directed; we’re expecting 
compliance. We will take direct action if compliance is not 
achieved with the terms, as we would expect would any other 
licensee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, my question was: who authorized the corporate debit 
card for Mr. Dutch Lerat? Was it the SIGA board, or did Mr. 
Lerat authorize it himself? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to 
speculate on details and information. I am going to say that the 
two items presented to me by the Provincial Auditor are serious 
concerns, and therefore we’ve directed that a complete review 
will occur. The review will have a team of auditors including 
the Provincial Auditor. If there are details like that, that we 

discover need to have corrective measures taken, they will be 
directed to put those measures in places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Madam Minister, who approved Mr. 
Dutch Lerat’s expense claims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned to the 
member opposite and I thank him for that question, there are 
many details that we discovered during the very preliminary 
working papers from KPMG. There are others that he’s asking 
or perhaps that will come to light during the course of the 
review. We will look at those. We certainly have made no 
attempt to hide what the Provincial Auditor has shared with us. 
 
If we find anything that needs to be complied with according to 
the terms of the legal agreement, we will make certain that that 
compliance occurs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, do you have any indication of who it was that 
approved these expense claims? Was it the board, was it a 
committee of the board, or was it Mr. Dutch Lerat himself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as I started 
out in my answer to another member opposite, that we have an 
audit responsibility. KPMG audits . . . very early on in their 
working papers they discovered certain things. The Provincial 
Auditor brings to my attention certain things. 
 
SIGA, according to our agreements, has the responsibility 
during the course of the year to make sure that they have the 
controls in place to comply with the audited statements. They 
know we will look at those as a course of an audit as any other 
organization. We are now sending in a team of auditors to 
review all of the information that’s been presented to KPMG 
and our Provincial Auditor. If there are any concerns that we 
have that they’re not living up to the terms of our agreement, 
we have strategies and measures in place to take care of those, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, as a result 
of the information forwarded to you to date, do you have any 
indication as to who it was that signed the cheques for Mr. 
Lerat’s credit card bills? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we have 
an agreement in place with SIGA. The Provincial Auditor will 
go in with the review team and look at all the particulars that he 
is talking about. We will be looking at that with an eye to 
making certain that all of their measures that are taken from 
here on in will comply with every step of that agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

As I mentioned, the two issues that were brought to my 
attention, Liquor and Gaming Authority, who is a regulator and 
has a legal responsibility, steps in to make sure compliance is 
occurring. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, were these cheques for Mr. Lerat’s credit card bills, 
were they signed by board members or were they signed by Mr. 
Dutch Lerat himself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
mentioned to the member opposite that we have, through 
KPMG, an external auditor that goes in, takes the papers of 
SIGA on a yearly basis and goes through those working papers. 
Very early on in those working papers, he brought to the 
attention of our provincial . . . the Provincial Auditor, who then 
alerted the Liquor and Gaming Authority of the two details I 
shared very early on Friday morning. 
 
We then said there are directives that have to take place. They 
know to cancel the credit cards and debit cards. We have 
suspended the licence for Mr. Dutch Lerat. We are asking the 
SIGA board to share with us all of the information to go 
through the review. Those are the purview of the SIGA board, 
Mr. Speaker; we’re asking that they would co-operate with us 
so that we can put measures in place to make certain . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, who was reviewing and monitoring SIGA’s bank 
statements on the account that Mr. Lerat had access through 
with his debit card? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for his question. I can understand that the member 
would not have the working level familiarity with an auditing 
process. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, a SIGA board, in terms of an agreement 
with us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that the auditor for SIGA has a responsibility to prepare a yearly 
report. That report is shared with the Provincial Auditor. The 
day-to-day internal controls and operations are responsibility of 
SIGA to comply with the terms of our agreement and to comply 
with the information the Provincial Auditor requires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to conduct a full review to find out 
all of the details that the member opposite is talking about, to 
find where the systems need to be in compliance with our 
regulations and procedures and controls. And we would be 
living up to the directives that we have issued to the SIGA 
board, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I spent almost 20 years of my life working with 
non-profit corporations. SIGA is, as I understand it, a non-profit 
corporation. And I can tell you, none of those that I was 
involved with were operated in a fashion such as this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Madam Minister, who reviewed those 
bank statements? Did the boards review them? Did the audit 
committee review them? Or did they just simply go to Mr. 
Dutch Lerat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know, 
as he knows, that there are organizations that on a yearly basis 
operate in compliance with the auditing requirements and the 
internal controls. It’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, and no one’s saying 
to the contrary, that some of those have either broken down or 
would not adhere to or have been in place in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s why Liquor and Gaming Authority has a legal 
requirement and regulatory responsibility to go in, to conduct 
the review with the Provincial Auditor so that we can go in, see 
what did occur, what are the details of this situation, and to 
make certain that we have controls in place that this will not 
occur again. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, who is on the audit committee of the SIGA board? 
How often do they meet? And, Madam Minister, what is the 
reporting procedure of the CEO to the audit committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member opposite for the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a legal agreement and arrangement in 
place with the SIGA board and the First Nations gaming 
agreement. We believe in the principles of the agreement and 
we believe that the auditing systems that are in place have 
worked. 
 
Very early on in the working papers of KPMG the information 
was given to us, we know that there is something that needs to 
be put in place to make sure that they comply with auditing 
requirements and regulations, be it internal or external. 
 
We now have put in place a team that will go in and work, Mr. 
Speaker, in a co-operative way to determine what has occurred. 
In the course of matters, if the Provincial Auditor in reviewing 
those or the Justice department, as we would do with any other 
organization or corporation, find something that we need to take 
further action on, you can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, we will do 
just that. 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, what is the procedure for the audit committee 
reporting to the board? And what is the procedure of the board 
for reporting to the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member 
opposite has asked the same question in a number of different 
ways. I will answer the same question in the same way, Mr. 
Speaker. I will answer the question like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, according to our gaming agreements, 
signed agreements that allow for auditing procedures to occur. 
SIGA board has auditing requirements that must occur. The 
books of SIGA, and all of the information on the actions of the 
board of SIGA, are presented to their external auditor, KPMG. 
 
We are now requesting that all of that information be looked at 
and be reviewed to find out exactly, as he asks, where has the 
system broken down? What procedures are in place? What 
procedures have not been in place to allow this to occur, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
When we find that, I believe in a co-operative mode, we could 
work together to restore the integrity of the gaming . . . 
(inaudible) . . . in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, do you 
even know if the SIGA board has an audit committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said to the member 
opposite, SIGA has given all of that information and their working 
papers to KPMG. Very early on in the auditing processes, we’ve 
discovered this. They are sharing that information with the 
Provincial Auditor. He has brought two items to my attention. We 
have taken immediate action on those items that have been 
brought to my attention. 
 
All of those kinds of questions, and many more questions, Mr. 
Speaker, we would want to have addressed, and that is why we’re 
asking of SIGA, in a co-operative way, to let us go in. Let’s work 
together to see what has worked well, what has worked properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years when the audited 
statements were clean statements — let’s see where things 
broke down. Let’s work together to put in place measures — 
the internal controls — to make certain it does not occur again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, on 
Friday you said that it spite of these unauthorized expense 
claims, SIGA has many auditing controls in place. You said, 
and I quote: 
 

We believe in all these controls and that they’re working 
and . . . that the integrity of that operation is without 
question. 

Yet you have just admitted that you don’t know how Mr. Lerat 
got a credit card, or pardon me a debit card. You don’t know 
who approved the expense claims. You don’t know who signed 
off on the credit card bills. You don’t know who reviewed the 
bank statements. You don’t know what the financial reporting 
procedures are. You don’t know who’s on the audit committee 
or even if they have an audit committee. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you say that the controls are in 
place? How can you say the integrity of the operation is without 
question when you really have no idea what’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite is taking a quote from a part of the 
statement I made Friday that talks about the number of ways 
that the Liquor and Gaming Authority, the body responsible for 
auditing the operations of casino gaming, goes about doing that. 
 
Because this has occurred at the SIGA board, I wanted to assure 
the public that there are a number of ways that we audit and 
control the operations of gaming so that people in the province 
would know if they were casino gaming that we have those 
controls in place. 
 
The issue at hand, Mr. Speaker, is this year’s audit, because 
we’ve had a number of years of audited statements, that have 
occurred in the same manner, that have given this operation a 
clean bill of health. 
 
The issue at hand, Mr. Speaker, is SIGA’s audited statements 
for this year, which we will review and we will report in good 
course what we can do to make certain these things . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, the bottom line is the SIGA 
agreement was established by your government. You are 
responsible for the financial integrity of this organization, and 
you failed — you weren’t minding the store. 
 
You didn’t live up to your responsibility to ensure the proper 
audit controls were in place. And even now you can’t seem to 
answer the most basic questions about their financial 
procedures. 
 
Madam Minister, SIGA takes in millions of dollars a year in 
casino revenue. It is your responsibility to ensure that money is 
administered properly — so it gets to the First Nations people, 
where it is supposed to help. 
 
Madam Minister, why weren’t you paying attention to your 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. And the premise that she states the question is exactly 
the reason why we have a First Nations gaming agreement with 
strong principles in place — to share the economy of the 
economic development of gaming with all people in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an auditing responsibility that’s outlined 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

within the agreement. The responsibility states an outside 
auditor, KPMG, will go in; they will do the auditing; and very 
early on in the working paper stage they discovered these 
problems and concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they shared them with our Provincial Auditor, 
who on last Wednesday morning shared those concerns late in 
the morning with me. I gave the FSIN and SIGA a chance to 
understand that information from our Provincial Auditor, who 
shared that with me in a letter on Wednesday, and Friday 
morning I took action. Mr. Speaker, I say this government took 
swift action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has been unable to give answers to the very basic 
questions on her portfolio. Now we have a financial disaster on 
our hands. 
 
Madam Minister, do you understand the workings of your own 
portfolio? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
opposite knows that we’re a political body and we have 
political responsibilities. I also know the member opposite 
knows that Liquor and Gaming Authority is the regulator and 
has legal responsibilities outside of political involvement in . . . 
and involvement in this issue, to take control of this issue, to 
watch those issues as the auditor reports them to us, Mr. 
Speaker, in compliance with the agreements that are in place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, then I know that she knows all of those 
questions can be answered. The regulating body, Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, has had that in place for years, has had a 
clean audit in this regard in years past. 
 
This year on Wednesday, in the middle of the morning, we 
discovered by the Provincial Auditor that he has concerns. 
We’ve taken swift and direct action on those concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — For ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — We will require leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskPower Establishes Open Access Transmission Tariff 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are here today to talk 
about an important development in Saskatchewan’s electricity 
sector, one that will open up new markets for SaskPower and 
lay the foundation for change in Saskatchewan’s electricity 
marketplace. 

I’m pleased to announce a Saskatchewan transition system will 
be open to wholesale energy purchases and sales by mid-2001. 
This change will occur through an open access transmission 
tariff or OATT, that SaskPower will prepare and publish in 
accordance with industry practice. The tariff is expected to be in 
place by July 1 of next year. 
 
Simply stated, the tariff is an open offer of transmission service. 
For a fee, suppliers outside Saskatchewan will be able to use 
our transmission system to transport electricity to other 
jurisdictions as well as to SaskPower’s two wholesale 
customers, the municipal utilities in Saskatoon and Swift 
Current. 
 
The tariff will provide similar access to independent power 
producers in Saskatchewan who are connected to the 
SaskPower grid. Moving electricity this way is known in the 
industry as wheeling. Wheeling is driven by the principle of 
reciprocal access. If you want access to our system, you must 
allow us the same access to yours. 
 
Having transmission tariffs in place here in Saskatchewan will 
provide SaskPower with reciprocal access to new trading 
opportunities across North America and lay the foundation for 
change in Saskatchewan’s electricity marketplace. 
 
How will this tariff work in practice, Mr. Speaker? 
Saskatchewan consumers will continue to receive safe, reliable, 
and cost-effective electricity from SaskPower. SaskPower will 
use inner computer analysis of actual and forecasted loads as 
well as generation availability to determine the amount of 
transmission available for third party use. This will ensure that 
there is no overbooking of the transmission system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower will establish and manage a 
scheduling system for available capacity. This system will be 
consistent with industry practice. The rules will be the same for 
everyone, and each supplier will have equal opportunity to 
advance a competitive bid with the best bid securing an access 
contract for a given period. 
 
SaskPower’s own supplies for out-of-province trading will not 
take priority over that of any other eligible transmission user. In 
fact, they cannot take priority according to industry standards. 
 
The corporation will take about a year to set up this tariff 
system. They will develop policies and procedures, determine 
hardware, software, and staffing requirements. They’ll discuss 
the tariff with potential users of transmission access, and they’ll 
complete negotiations with other jurisdictions. The end result 
will be a tariff that aligns the province with other jurisdictions, 
and offers expanded business opportunities for Saskatchewan’s 
electric utility. 
 
Tariffs such as this have become the standard for doing 
business across the complex interconnected network that this is 
the North American electric grid. The electricity industry is 
changing across North America including the rules for 
interconnected transmission access. SaskPower must keep pace 
with this change or risk losing the right to trade in other 
markets. 
 
For SaskPower this tariff also meets an immediate need. As I 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

mentioned earlier, it will impact SaskPower’s two wholesale 
customers — the cities of Saskatoon and Swift Current. Under 
The Power Corporation Act, SaskPower has the responsibility 
and exclusive right to supply, transport, distribute, and sell 
electricity in Saskatchewan with the exception of two specific 
franchise areas — the city of Saskatoon and the city of Swift 
Current. The tariff will enable these two customers to 
investigate other supply options. 
 
But Saskatchewan communities and residents as a whole will 
continue to benefit from a common ownership of our electricity 
system through Saskatchewan Power’s commitment to provide 
safe, reliable, and cost-effective service. 
 
These innovative supply provisions that we’ve done in the last 
couple of months at the QE (Queen Elizabeth) power station 
and at the co-generation project at Potash Corporation’s Cory 
mine will also, along with the introduction of this tariff, be part 
of our government’s commitment to build a Made in 
Saskatchewan solution to the changing electricity market of the 
21st century. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I do believe, 
Mr. Speaker, this is the beginning of some good things for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we welcome the beginning of 
what this particular announcement says. 
 
It does say on the particular document that was handed out, that 
the minister says he was pleased to make this announcement. 
Well that’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that they were actually 
pleased about this. I have a socialist friend — more than one — 
and incidentally, Mr. Speaker, these friends are socialists but 
they no longer vote for the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
because the NDP doesn’t stand for anything that they used to. 
 
Anyway the point of that statement, Mr. Speaker, was that this 
socialist friend of mine loves to tell a story about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — He loves to tell a story about Tommy 
Douglas flying over Saskatchewan and saying one of the 
greatest moments of his life was to see all the farmyards having 
electricity. Which is an amazing statement considering that he 
seems to imply that if it hadn’t been for Tommy Douglas, these 
people would still be out in the dark. 
 
But it’s amazing. Alberta, Manitoba, BC (British Columbia), 
Ontario — all got away without Tommy Douglas, and they all 
had power, and most of them earlier than this. 
 
But this is an interesting statement, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen 
what’s happened in telephones where our long-distance rates 
have gone down once SaskTel finally no longer had the 
stranglehold on the throats of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we look at this and I’m sure the people in Saskatoon and 
Swift Current are looking at this and saying, finally we can 
negotiate our power with someone, instead of having been told 

for decades and decades, this is what you will pay or we’ll turn 
off your power. 
 
These two communities can now finally go throughout the 
market and find the cheapest electricity that they possibly can. 
It’s an exciting moment in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
support it. And we’re hoping it’s going to go further; that all the 
rest of us will someday be able to do the same thing in this 
province, that at that time will not be a socialist province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of an open 
and accountable government, Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased 
and happy to table a response to question 180. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 180 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, even 
though the question was more appropriate for the federal 
government, being an open and accountable government we’re 
pleased to find the information out and answer. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 181 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert question 182. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and move 
second reading of the Bill that amends The Income Tax Act. 
 
Last year, specifically in the March 1999 budget, Mr. Speaker, 
the government began a process to reform Saskatchewan’s 
personal tax system. Our objective was to achieve a simple, fair, 
and more competitive tax system that would be more responsive 
to the needs of Saskatchewan people and would strengthen the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The report of the Personal Income Tax Review Committee and 
the public’s response to that report emphasized that any reform 
of the tax system must create growth and opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people and any tax reduction must also be 
sustainable. Saskatchewan people place the highest value on 
fiscal responsibility meaning no deficits, no increased debt, and 
the maintenance of quality public services such as health care 
and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tax reform plan meets these challenges with a 
significant and sustainable tax reduction for Saskatchewan 
people. This Bill will launch a new era of simple, fair, and 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

competitive taxation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Firstly, we will begin this transition in 2000, in this year, Mr. 
Speaker, by cutting the rate of the Saskatchewan flat tax in half 
— from 2 per cent to 1 per cent, effective July 1 of this year. Or 
put another way, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the rate from 2 per cent 
to 1.5 per cent for the entire year of 2000. 
 
(1430) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on July 1, Saskatchewan income taxes are 
going to drop, they’re going to go down. And beginning on July 
1, Saskatchewan taxpayers will save over $120 million in 
provincial income taxes for the balance of 2000, or about $350 
for an average family. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the income 
tax savings, there’s a new Saskatchewan sales tax credit that 
will provide a further $32 million in annual benefits to our 
residents. 
 
This Bill introduces the Saskatchewan sales tax credit as a 
means of improving the fairness of the provincial sales tax for 
lower-income Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The credit will provide a quarterly, 
non-taxable benefit to help offset the increased sales taxes 
payable as a result of the sales tax reform announced in the 
budget. That credit will be integrated into a single payment with 
the federal goods and services tax credit. Mr. Speaker, anybody 
that gets a GST (goods and services tax) credit cheque will 
begin to get a PST (provincial sales tax) tax credit cheque 
included in one cheque. And we will have that administered by 
the federal government, rather than sending out cheques 
ourselves, but we’ll provide the money to pay the PST tax 
credit. 
 
That credit, Mr. Speaker, takes effect April 1, 2000 — so it’s 
already in effect — but the federal government cannot actually 
deliver those cheques until October 1. But on October 1, when 
people get their GST cheques, they will also get the first three 
cheques of the PST cheque. That is the cheques that they’re 
entitled to for April 1, July 1, and October 1 will all come on 
October 1 with their GST cheque. So, Mr. Speaker, that will be 
effective this year, as well as the flat tax reduction on July 1. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, you will recall that the post-secondary 
graduate tax credit was introduced in a Bill tabled by the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. The 
amendments to The Income Tax Act allow for the credit to be 
deducted from the income taxes otherwise payable by recent 
graduates. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, effectively, is the 
income threshold at which a recent graduate of a post-secondary 
institution will begin to pay provincial income tax will go up to 
about $11,000. Other people will have a tax credit of $8,000, 
but new post-secondary graduates will have a tax credit of 
approximately $11,000 before we start to charge income tax. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does three things: it reduces the flat 
tax on July 1; secondly, it provides people with a sales tax 
credit if their household income is less than $35,000; and 

thirdly, increases the tax credit for graduates of post-secondary 
institutions to try to encourage them to stay in Saskatchewan 
which is a goal that we all have. 
 
I’ll be pleased to answer questions concerning these positive 
amendments to The Income Tax Act when the Bill comes 
before the Committee of the Whole. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of the Act 
to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
The Speaker: — Could I clarify with the minister please — is 
that Bill No. 81 or Bill No. 82? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that was Bill No. 81 which is 
the Bill that introduces the income tax — a Bill to amend The 
Income Tax Act. I’m sorry — that was Bill No. 82, Mr. 
Speaker, an Act to amend The Income Tax Act, second reading, 
Bill 82. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister has a number of tax Bills that he’ll be presenting 
for second reading today and I think his comments, and in all 
likelihood my comments, will apply equally to all four of the 
. . . all five of the Bills. 
 
At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP’s tax 
philosophy can be summed up with very few words: Do you 
have any money? Send it in. Because that is exactly what this 
budget did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talked a lot about lowering taxes, but the thing that 
he did do, Mr. Speaker, on budget day, was increase taxes. He 
talked about sometime in the future, over the next two or three 
years, there might be some reductions in income taxes. But the 
thing that he did do was he increased the PST on each and every 
one of us. 
 
The minister talked about growth and opportunity. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at the growth and opportunity in 
Saskatchewan, you have to say, where is it? Why do we still 
have the same population in Saskatchewan today that we had in 
the 1920s? After 47, 48, 49 years of CCF-NDP (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) 
government, our population has remained stagnant, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The reason is, is because the members opposite have no vision 
on how to make a province grow, how to create growth and 
opportunity. They know how to take your money, Mr. Speaker, 
but the government, especially this socialist government, has no 
idea how to create wealth; how to create an economy that 
grows, that provides jobs for its young people, that keeps its 
young people at home and builds this province. 
 
The biggest export that we’ve had under CCF and NDP has 
been our children, Mr. Speaker. They have been our largest 
export. They have left this province ever since this government 
has been elected. And it continues today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about the maintenance of public services. 
Well I gather then that he hasn’t had opportunity to visit our 
health care system, because that certainly isn’t being maintained 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

the way the people have become used to health care and expect 
their health care to serve them. 
 
The minister obviously hasn’t been driving our highways. He 
must fly back and forth from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, because 
if he drove the highways of Saskatchewan he would understand 
that there has been no maintenance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just last week we had the teachers vote to go 
on strike, Mr. Speaker, again because this government has been 
failing to provide for services. 
 
The minister talks about fairness. Well his idea of fairness is 
that everybody pays more taxes, as an example of his PST, Mr. 
Speaker. And it doesn’t matter whether you are the least able to 
pay, your power bill is affected, your telephone bill is affected, 
your gas bill to heat your home is affected, and your fuel taxes 
are affected, Mr. Speaker. That’s his idea of fairness — no 
matter whether you have the ability to pay or not, you will pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a good many other things I could say 
about this particular piece of legislation but my colleagues also 
want to have the opportunity. I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Income Tax Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise and move second reading of Bill No. 81, that introduces 
The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in moving second reading of The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2000, our government is committed to a 
personal tax system that is simple, fair, and competitive. 
 
Saskatchewan’s personal tax system must be more responsive 
to the needs of Saskatchewan people as we enter the 21st 
Century. 
 
The tax system must be effective in creating growth and 
opportunity, helping to create a stronger Saskatchewan 
economy for our children. The personal income tax reform 
contained in this Bill achieves these goals by providing a 
significant reduction in provincial income taxes in conjunction 
with a conversion to a new method for calculating income 
taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provincial income tax has been based in the past 
on federal tax. Its determination relies heavily on both the 
federal tax rate structure and the federal tax credits. Under tax 
reform provincial income tax will be based on a provincial tax 
structure applied to taxable income and the deduction of 
provincial tax credits. But it will continue to be administered on 
the province’s behalf by the federal government through the 
Canada Customs and Revenue Agency commonly referred to as 
Revenue Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces the second stage of the income 
tax reform that we announced in this year’s budget. A few 
moments ago I announced . . . or described the first stage of 
income tax reform which reduces the Saskatchewan flat tax 
from 2 per cent to 1 per cent effective July 1 of this year, and 

provides an income tax reduction of over $120 million in the 
2000 tax year — about a $350 per family tax saving. I’m sorry 
that the opposition does not support that, Mr. Speaker, but 
apparently they do not. 
 
The second stage of income tax reform takes effect on January 
1 next year, 2001. And that eliminates the flat tax, eliminates 
the debt reduction surtax, eliminates the high-income surtax, 
and eliminates the basic tax on federal tax. 
 
So as of January 1, Mr. Speaker, we will be abolishing the flat 
tax introduced by the Conservatives in the 1980s. We will be 
eliminating the high-income surtax and we will be eliminating 
the debt-reduction surtax. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . the people of the province will be 
interested to know whether the official opposition will support 
us in eliminating those taxes, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re 
waiting to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the existing tax system, the existing income tax 
system apparently supported by the members opposite, is very 
complicated. It’s a complicated layer upon layer of taxes, 
surtaxes, like the flat tax, the debt-reduction surtax, and the 
high-income surtax, that we’re going to abolish over the 
opposition of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That system is very complex. We’re going to replace it with a 
single set of lower tax rates that would be applied directly to 
taxable income and will result in a tax reduction for every 
citizen and every family in this province even without the 
co-operation and over the strong opposition of the opposition. 
 
This simple calculation, Mr. Speaker, will make it easier for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to understand the provincial income 
tax calculation and will bring about substantially lower income 
taxes. The new tax system will also provide distinct provincial 
tax credits. These credits will generally parallel the existing 
federal credits although it will increase, Mr. Speaker, credits 
that we’ve enjoyed thus far. 
 
For example, the provincial basic personal and spousal 
exemptions will be $8,000, significantly higher than the federal 
amounts. As well the provincial income tax system will add a 
supplement to the existing age credit so that seniors get an 
additional tax credit, and will introduce a new dependent-child 
tax credit. 
 
The dependent-child credit allows the income tax system to 
provide to all Saskatchewan families universal recognition of 
the costs of raising children. Saskatchewan is the only 
jurisdiction in Canada, other than Quebec, to offer such support 
for families. 
 
One of the features of the new income tax system, Mr. Speaker, 
is it gives the biggest tax reductions to low-income people. In 
fact the new provincial credits ensure that 55,000 low-income 
seniors, single parents, minimum wage earners, and working 
families will no longer pay any Saskatchewan provincial 
income tax. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 
although we hear a lot from the opposition about tax cuts, and 
they don’t admit that the income taxes are coming down — 
even though they are. And people will see it on their 
paycheques in July, Mr. Speaker, and they’ll realize that what 
the opposition says is not true. 
 
But the distinguishing feature of this set of tax cuts in the new 
income tax system that we’re bringing about, Mr. Speaker, is it 
provides substantial benefits for lower income people. And I 
might just say for the information of the House and the public 
that the difference between our plan for a new tax system and 
the plan of the members opposite is they want income tax cuts 
for the wealthy, Mr. Speaker — that’s what they want. 
 
Their plan set out in the last provincial election contained large 
income tax for the wealthy — nothing for the seniors, nothing 
for the low-income people, nothing for the single parent, 
nothing for the minimum wage earners, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t like to talk about that side of the equation, and they don’t 
like to talk about the PST tax credit that was introduced in the 
last Bill that people are going to get. 
 
All they want, Mr. Speaker, is — in typical conservative 
fashion — tax cuts for the rich and they’re very mad that we 
don’t have tax . . . the largest and only tax cuts for the rich. And 
that’s the reason for the vociferousness of the opposition, from 
the members of the opposition. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the new 
Income Tax Act, 2000 continues some aspects of the system. 
One will be continuation of the Saskatchewan sales tax credit 
that we’re introducing for low-income people over the 
opposition of the members’ opposite and which definitely 
improves the fairness of the income tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conversion to the income tax calculation 
which will be lower income tax rates for all Saskatchewan 
income tax payers is being phased in over three years in 
conjunction with the significant income tax reduction. 
 
Those new tax rates and credits mean that the second stage of 
the government’s tax reform will provide Saskatchewan 
residents with approximately $190 million in new tax savings in 
2001. And, Mr. Speaker, that is over and above changes to the 
sales tax. When the members opposite get up and say that 
somehow there’s a tax increase because the PST has been 
expanded, Mr. Speaker, that’s $190 million net tax saving even 
taking PST expansion into account. 
 
The members opposite don’t tell the public that and they’re not 
being completely factual with the public, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
my duty, it’s my duty, Mr. Speaker, to report as Minister of 
Finance to the public that in 2001, we will see $190 million new 
tax savings. Another $50 million in 2002. And a further $80 
million in 2003 when the new system is fully implemented. 
 
And the result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that the tax reform 
announced in the budget will result in an income tax reduction 

of over $440 million — $440 million less income tax paid each 
and every year; $440 million income tax cut, Mr. Speaker, 
when it is fully in place in 2003. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Biggest cut ever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that, as my seatmate has said, is the 
largest income tax cut in the history of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it provides an income tax cut of about 
$1,000 for the average family. And the members opposite can 
get up on their feet and say whatever they like. But I’ll say this, 
Mr. Speaker: the contrast between their record in the 1980s and 
the record of this government is that we have cut income taxes 
in 1995, 1996, and 1999 . . . no, 1998, Mr. Speaker. We have 
cut income tax. 
 
What did they do when they were in office? They introduced 
the most regressive part of the income tax system, being the 
Saskatchewan flat tax introduced by Grant Devine with their 
full support, and increased three times, Mr. Speaker. And what 
we are doing today, among other things, is enacting that that flat 
tax, that regressive tax will be abolished as of January 1. 
 
And what these members opposite will do, Mr. Speaker, is get 
up on their feet and yell and scream about taxes in order to 
obscure their own record and obscure their own opposition to 
progressive income tax reform which includes the abolition of 
the flat tax because, Mr. Speaker, all they want is a tax cut for 
the rich. That’s all they really want, in typical fashion. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to bring in a new tax 
system — over the opposition of the members opposite — 
which will be simple, it will fair, it will be competitive, and it 
will enhance progressivity for low-income people. Most 
importantly, it will serve Saskatchewan well in helping to build 
growth and opportunity in the 21st century. 
 
And I’ll be pleased, Mr. Speaker, to answer detailed questions 
concerning The Income Tax Act, 2000 when discussing this 
Bill at Committee of the Whole. And with that, I move second 
reading of The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
earlier, the minister’s comments for this Bill would be identical 
to the comments he had made to the previous one, and I was 
correct. 
 
The minister talks about perhaps not providing all of the facts. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government’s attitude towards that 
minister’s budget was if they don’t ask, don’t tell. And indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, I can certainly understand that attitude because if I 
had their record, I wouldn’t want to talk about it either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, what is their record? The 
minister wants to go back into the past. Seven billion dollars of 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

debt at 24 per cent — that was the Premier’s record from the 
1970s, Mr. Speaker, that was the Premier’s record. 
 
They don’t like to talk about that one, Mr. Speaker. Because at 
24 per cent, it only takes three years to double the amount of 
your debt. 
 
What else don’t they want to talk about, Mr. Speaker? They 
don’t want to talk about the downloading of the tax burden that 
they have placed on the municipalities of this province, not only 
to support their own municipal road structure, Mr. Speaker, but 
the downloading of the costs of education on every property 
taxpayer in this province, whether they are rich or poor, Mr. 
Speaker. They have no concern as to the ability of that taxpayer 
to pay; they simply download and force them to pay for it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And now we even see them trying to get the people living in the 
municipalities to fix the highways, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
downloading their responsibility because indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not a responsible government — this is an unresponsible 
government. 
 
They have never accepted responsibility for a single one of their 
actions since they were first elected in 1991, Mr. Speaker. No 
responsibility. It’s either the previous administration’s, or the 
federal government’s responsibility, but it’s not a single 
member on that side’s responsibility for anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about a deductible of $8,000 per 
spouse and brags about how great that is. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
our neighbour next door, their deduction is 50 per cent bigger 
— $12,000. But yet theirs is great; it’s going to keep people 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about Saskatchewan and Quebec being 
similar in a certain manner. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s much 
more appropriate to compare Saskatchewan and Newfoundland 
with the highest taxes in Canada. That’s the record, Mr. 
Speaker, that they don’t want to talk about. 
 
When the minister talks about his tax reduction, he’s talking, 
Mr. Speaker, about a cup of . . . less than a cup of coffee a day 
in tax reduction. That’s what he’s talking. I think it works out to 
about half a cup of coffee a day in tax reductions and he wants 
to brag about that when our neighbours, Mr. Speaker, on either 
side, are in a much more competitive position than we are in 
growing and providing jobs for our young people. 
 
This minister, Mr. Speaker, this government has failed the 
people of Saskatchewan and most particularly have failed the 
young people. And their tax policies reflect that, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not providing what this province needs to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget, as I 
indicated, introduced sweeping tax reform as part of a larger 
plan to reduce income taxes and position Saskatchewan for 
growth and opportunity in this century. 
 
Our tax reform plan provides a $206 million income tax this 
fiscal year growing to $442 million income cut by 2003. This is 
the largest income tax cut in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I indicated earlier, it moves Saskatchewan from the current 
tax on tax system of calculating income tax to the more direct 
tax on income as recommended by the Personal Income Tax 
Review Committee. 
 
Our tax reforms, Mr. Speaker, will abolish bracket creep 
because the income tax brackets will be indexed to inflation as 
will be the personal tax credits. So we will not be increasing 
taxes by not responding to inflation in the system. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, will provide a higher basic personal tax credit for all 
Saskatchewan people as well as higher credits, specifically for 
seniors, parents, and spouses. As a result, tax reform will take 
55,000 low-income earners off the tax rolls altogether. 
 
And I think that we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, starting in 
July when people look at their paycheques, if they have income 
tax deducted, they will see that less income tax is being 
deducted. And when they see that, Mr. Speaker — and that 
really is the proof of the pudding, seeing the paycheque with 
less income tax off — they’ll realize that what the opposition is 
saying is not factual, Mr. Speaker, because they themselves will 
see their income tax cut. 
 
So we get a lot of rhetoric from the members opposite. I’m 
sorry if they’re offended when I address the record of the 
Devine government in increasing income taxes and bringing in 
the flat tax. 
 
But I think it’s my duty, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Finance, to 
put these things in perspective, to report that we did have a flat 
tax introduced in the 1980s under the Conservatives. I think the 
public have the right to know that, and they have the right to 
know that we’re abolishing the flat tax on January 1. We’re 
reducing it on July 1 but abolishing it on January 1 over the 
opposition of the members opposite for some reason. 
 
This plan that we have, Mr. Speaker, will not only abolish the 
flat tax but it will also remove 55,000 low-income people off of 
the tax rolls altogether. And as well, the tax payable on capital 
gains will fall to a level closer to Alberta’s and well below 
Manitoba’s. 
 
So I was interested to hear the member opposite talk about job 
creation. I believe, Mr. Speaker, in the first five months of this 
year, Saskatchewan has led Western Canada in job creation. I 
believe there are 18,000 more people working in Saskatchewan 
today than there were a few months ago. 
 
But whether we’re first or whether we’re second — I hear the 
members opposite disputing that — the fact of the matter is this: 
the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that since the budget 
address was delivered in this House on March 29 of this year, 
there are 18,000 more people working since that time than there 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

were at that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that when the opposition gets up and preaches their gloom 
and doom and their opposition to abolishing the flat tax and 
this, that, and the other thing, they have to bear in mind that the 
flat tax is a regressive tax that we want to abolish. And we have 
to bear in mind that in fact people are working in 
Saskatchewan, and in many areas they complain of a labour 
shortage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you’re kind of damned if you do and damned if you don’t. 
When there aren’t enough jobs for the people, the opposition 
complains. Today in some areas there aren’t enough people for 
the jobs. They complain about that as well. 
 
But what we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, and this 
is the third piece of legislation today we’re looking at, is trying 
to introduce an income tax system where the taxes are simpler 
by getting rid of the flat tax, the high income surtax, and the 
debt reduction surtax where it’s more fair because we get rid of 
the flat tax brought in by the members opposite in the 1980s. 
And it’s more competitive because our income tax system will 
become closer to that of our neighbours. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, when fully implemented, the 
sum total of these changes is an income tax cut of $442 million 
a year, Mr. Speaker. That’s a thousand dollars less income tax 
for the average family. 
 
And one thing that the members opposite do not refer to is the 
fact that in coming up with this tax plan we appointed a 
committee of experts, namely Dr. Jack Vicq of the University 
of Saskatchewan, Shelley Brown, and Charlie Baldock who are 
chartered accountants. And they gave us some advice on how to 
reform the system, and they said, and I’ll quote, they said: 
 

The committee believes that an annual personal income tax 
reduction of this magnitude exceeds the fiscal capacity of 
the province. 

 
They said: 
 

You can’t just cut income taxes by the $442 million a year. 
You also should charge the PST on more items. 

 
And then and as part of a package people would get, Mr. 
Speaker, an income tax cut. So that’s what this Bill does. And I 
would point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are nine provinces in 
Canada with the sales tax, and at 6 per cent, Saskatchewan’s 
rate is the lowest of those nine. 
 
If you go to Manitoba, it’s 7 per cent; if you go to Ontario it’s 8 
per cent. And so at 6 per cent ours is lower, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s certainly lower than it was when our government took 
office. When we took office in 1991 it was 7 per cent. So we’ve 
gone from 7 per cent to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and it will 
remain there. 
 
(1500) 
 
But we will not tax what some provinces tax. We’re not taxing, 
for example, restaurant meals, children’s clothing, electricity or 
natural gas, and several other items that will be taxed in other 

provinces. 
 
A final feature of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a formal change in 
name for this particular tax. The proper name, in law, is the 
education and health tax, but over time people have come to 
refer to this as the provincial sales tax, or PST. And one of the 
things this Bill does is to change the name to provincial sales 
tax, PST, in keeping with that and in keeping with the 
recommendations of the Gass Commission. in the early 1990s, 
that suggested that all taxes should be paid into the general 
revenue fund as this tax indeed is. 
 
One of the other things that this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is to 
introduce the Saskatchewan sales tax credit. That is effective 
April 1 of this year, as I indicated earlier. And what it does is to 
offset the effect of the expanded sales tax for low-income 
people, that is families earning less than $35,000. And what it 
will do, Mr. Speaker, as I described earlier, is pay people a PST 
tax credit along with the GST tax credit. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to observe that the 
members opposite will of course characterize this as a tax grab. 
They will say that you can have the income tax cuts 
recommended by the committee without changing the PST. And 
all I would say to that, Mr. Speaker, is that the income tax cuts 
that have been described today are far in excess of the sales tax 
expansion. To be exact: income taxes going down by $440 
million; sales taxes by 160 million. 
 
But as any one can see, Mr. Speaker, when you cut income 
taxes by 440 million and expand sales tax by 160 million, that 
amounts to a net tax reduction of about $180 million a year . . . 
$280 million a year, Mr. Speaker, $280 million a year net 
income tax reduction. 
 
And nobody should try to fool the public by saying that taxes 
aren’t coming down because they certainly are. And I want to 
repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the net effect of that will be $1,000 
less provincial taxes for the average Saskatchewan family by 
the year 2003. That starts on July 1 of this year when the flat tax 
will be cut in half. 
 
On January 1 coming up the flat tax will be abolished, the debt 
reduction surtax will be abolished, the high-income surtax will 
be abolished. And we will go to lower tax rates for all 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker; that’s what we’re doing. 
And those that are critical of that should at least deal with the 
facts squarely with the public and talk about the fact that 
income taxes are being substantially reduced and make 
reference to that. 
 
And I might say that what it means is this, Mr. Speaker. In 1993 
our provincial taxes, taking into account personal taxes, were 
the second highest in Canada. This year they are the fourth 
lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker, compared to other provinces. 
We’re making progress and at the same time balancing the 
budget and reducing the debt. We’ve gone from the second 
highest personal taxes to the fourth lowest in the last seven 
years. 
 
And we will do more. Under the budget, we’ll do much more. 
We’re going to bring about a system that is simple, that is fair, 
and it’s competitive. That’s what the budget was all about, and 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Bill No. 84 allows us to pursue our goal of a simple, fair, and 
competitive tax regime for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I’ll certainly be pleased to answer questions from the members 
opposite when we go into Committee of the Whole. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of 
The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is a little foggy on his facts perhaps. 
 
The minister perhaps needs to be . . . it clarified to him that the 
members on this side of the House have never been in 
government, have never formed government. But we’re 
certainly looking forward to doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does have a 
record though of being the second highest taxed province in 
Canada — second highest taxed province because of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They’re the ones responsible 
for the tax increases that we have had for the last nine years. 
And we have yet, Mr. Speaker, we have yet to see a tax 
reduction from this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s happening on the federal scene though may 
have some application to what’s happening in the province. The 
federal government is talking about lowering their tax base — 
the rate that they charge. If that was to happen, Mr. Speaker, 
that would mean the provincial base would also lower. And 
heaven forbid that the Minister of Finance should have to forgo 
those monies. 
 
So in this budget he starts to change things so that he doesn’t 
have to follow the federal tax reductions so that he can do 
whatever he wants at his time frame, which is very minimal 
reductions, Mr. Speaker. Very minimal. A rate, if it happens — 
because it hasn’t happened yet — if it should happen, would 
amount to half a cup of coffee for each taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan. A half a cup of coffee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about $440 million a year in tax 
reduction some time in the future — some time in the future. 
Sort of like the promise they made of $2.5 billion for highways, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well at some point in the future the province will have spent 
$2.5 billion on highways. But who knows how long it might 
take — 15 years, 20 years, 25 years. No one knows. And the 
same with the tax reductions from this government. The 
taxpayers today in this province may not live long enough to 
see that. Perhaps their children will, but I’m not sure if the 
current taxpayers ever will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The minister likes to also forget about 
what his previous administration left for debt in this province. 
Almost $7 billion at astronomical interest rates — astronomical 

interest rates. His mentor, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Blakeney, ran off to 
New York and borrowed money at 18 per cent to buy holes in 
the ground, Mr. Speaker, that were of no additional value to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Didn’t create one job. Not one job. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Didn’t create one job, as my colleague 
says. 
 
The minister further goes on to brag about the number of jobs 
created in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in the nine years they 
have been government, they have in total — in total — only 
managed to match what Alberta has created in jobs in one year, 
Mr. Speaker, and they have created many more jobs over those 
remaining eight years, Mr. Speaker. The minister is so far 
behind in job creation that he’s being lapped and thinks he’s 
ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talks about the Vicq report. Well the Vicq report was very 
interesting because it says, lower the PST. Very clearly. Lower 
the PST to 5 per cent and then you can expand the base. 
 
But the minister was a little quick in his reading. He missed the 
lower part and went to strictly expand the PST, Mr. Speaker — 
very, very selective reading on the part of the minister. The 
same as his income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker — very, very 
selective for sometime in the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, sometime in the future we will continue this 
debate. I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Income Tax Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise and move second reading of the 
Bill that introduces The Income Tax Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2000. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, provides for consequential 
amendments to The Income Tax Act, 2000 and The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have described earlier to members, in order to 
implement the personal income tax reform announced in the 
budget, The Income Tax Act, 2000 is replacing The Income 
Tax Act. 
 
The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act, which provides a 
tax credit to be deducted against the income taxes otherwise 
payable by recent graduates, currently refers to The Income Tax 
Act. References to The Income Tax Act, 2000 must now be 
added to The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act. The 
amendments contained in this Bill will do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial corporate income tax system 
currently provides an investment tax credit for qualifying 
manufacturing and processing equipment. This credit is linked 
to the amount of education and health tax that has been paid on 
the assets. This credit is continued in the new Income Tax Act, 
2000, which contains necessary references to The Education 
and Health Tax Act. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

With the change in the name of The Education and Health Tax 
Act, the income tax legislation must now refer to the new name, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Act. The amendments contained in 
this Bill will make the necessary changes. 
 
Now as you can see, Mr. Speaker, these are really housekeeping 
amendments simply changing the names of various pieces of 
legislation in legislation that refers to those Acts. I’ll be pleased 
to answer questions concerning the amendments purposed in 
this Act when discussing this Bill at Committee of the Whole. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 
Income Tax Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the word, ditto, would apply in this particular case in 
response to the minister’s comments. 
 
So to the applause of my colleagues on the opposite side of the 
floor, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Post-Secondary Graduate 
Tax Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to outline the key provisions of the proposed new 
Act, The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit, to the members 
of the House. 
 
And if I could begin with a little background, Mr. Speaker, it is 
this government’s policy to promote the widest possible access 
to quality post-secondary education and skills training for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
To that end, we have consulted with Saskatchewan people this 
year on how best to improve financial access to post-secondary 
education. These public meetings were held all over 
Saskatchewan and in my judgement, Mr. Speaker, were very 
successful. 
 
I particularly appreciated the attendance by many of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly at the meetings in their 
areas, and I also appreciated the attention and interest of 
opposition members, most notably the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. We all heard some good ideas from 
many people as we attended those meetings. 
 
(1515) 
 
One thing we heard very clearly is that we must reward success. 
We heard that Saskatchewan people want increased support for 
students and their families. We also heard clearly, that enhanced 
financial access must be done in a financially prudent way in 
the taxpayers’ interest. One of the most effective ways we can 
do just that, Mr. Speaker, is through the proposed graduate tax 
credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this graduate tax credit adds more than $3,100 to 
the amount that post-secondary graduates can earn before they 
begin to pay Saskatchewan tax. That, Mr. Speaker, is attractive, 

particularly in the context of the tax changes just outlined by 
my colleague, the Minister of Finance. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I repeat that the graduate tax credit adds 
more than $3,100 to the amount that post-secondary grads can 
earn before they begin to pay Saskatchewan tax. The credit is 
worth up to $350 off the tax bill of graduates working in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, everyone who graduates from eligible 
post-secondary programs, beginning in January 2000, will be 
eligible for this one-time provincial credit. They do not have to 
claim it immediately. The credit can be carried forward to up to 
four years after graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this unique graduate tax credit, the first of its kind 
in Canada I might add, is just one more reason Saskatchewan is 
one of the best places in Canada to be a student. 
 
Saskatchewan offers a wide range of high quality 
post-secondary programs. For those who need and use financial 
assistance, Saskatchewan’s debt forgiveness policies are among 
the most generous in the country. 
 
As noted in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, everyone in 
Saskatchewan knows that higher education and job training are 
key to ensuring a bright future for our children in the 21st 
century economy. 
 
The provincial budget supports the important priority we have 
placed on higher education. The graduate tax credit is one 
initiative of several supporting this government’s priority on 
education, Mr. Speaker. It is rewarding students for success, a 
recognition of achievement that many people in Saskatchewan 
requested. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is important to understand that 
post-secondary graduates are choosing to stay and work in 
Saskatchewan. And while many find success elsewhere in 
Canada, many graduates from other provinces find their success 
in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the most recent Statistics Canada 
employment survey of post-secondary graduates shows that two 
years after graduation Saskatchewan has a net gain of 4 per cent 
graduates — 4 per cent more graduates, Mr. Speaker — 4 per 
cent more Canadian graduates working in Saskatchewan than 
we graduated in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a record about which we should all feel 
pleased and proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the free flow of 
Canada’s most educated and best trained, Saskatchewan is a 
winner. This government is building on that kind of success, 
building for the future by increasing the budget for higher 
education and placing a priority on access to post-secondary 
education and skills training. 
 
As Chair of the Ministers of Education Council Canada, I am 
very proud of our ability to educate Canadians. This is, Mr. 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Speaker, one of the cornerstones of democracy, and I know that 
of all people you particularly will appreciate the significance of 
higher learning in the sustaining of democracy in our province 
and our nation, and a key reason why Saskatchewan and 
Canada enjoy the highest quality of life anywhere in the world. 
 
When Saskatchewan post-secondary graduates look at their 
student debt, they are looking at mostly federal debt where there 
is little forgiveness. Saskatchewan has long been rewarding 
success through its student debt forgiveness policies. 
 
Now when graduates look at establishing themselves in the 
workplace, they will be able to increase their earnings by more 
than $3,100 before they begin to pay Saskatchewan tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education and student 
financial assistance have become part of the national agenda 
through the work of the Council of Ministers of Education, 
Canada. I have the honour to chair the CMEC for the next two 
years and to represent Saskatchewan’s interest in this national 
forum. I’m proud that Saskatchewan is able to lead that agenda 
by example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, implementing this new tax credit requires the 
introduction of new legislation. The Post-Secondary Graduate 
Tax Credit Act provides the authority for the introduction of the 
new tax credit. The Bill stipulates that application procedures 
and forms as well as specific program eligibility criteria will be 
prescribed in the new regulations. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that apprentices are eligible as 
are those taking any courses of more than six months duration. I 
will be pleased to discuss the specific clauses of the Bill in 
more detail during Committee of the Whole. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me simply say that this government 
is listening to the people of Saskatchewan. This Act recognizes 
the need to support students and their families and be fiscally 
responsible to taxpayers. We’re supporting success in 
post-secondary education and skills training through this 
innovative approach. 
 
It’s not a stretch at all, Mr. Speaker, to say that we are in the 
future business in higher education. This proposed legislation 
facilitates that most important investment. I am proud to move 
second reading of Bill No. 85, The Post-Secondary Graduate 
Tax Credit Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I agree that in general in Saskatchewan our students 
get a good quality education, and that’s very important, Mr. 
Speaker, when they go outside of this province looking for jobs 
because they can’t find those good quality jobs in this province 
under this administration. 
 
The minister talks about a tax credit for tuitions of $350, Mr. 
Speaker, which amounts to about $3 million a year, $3 million a 
year — a significant amount of money, Mr. Speaker, but is 
substantially less than what their campaign promises, their 
campaign promises promised. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP promise was $20 million a year. The 
Liberals, the co-partners in the coalition, Mr. Speaker, promised 
$30 million a year. But the $3 million that the minister is giving 
is close to another number, Mr. Speaker, that I think is equally 
important and relevant to students and that’s the federal 
millennium scholarship which turns over $10 million, Mr. 
Speaker, in theory, to students in this province. 
 
Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, the minister and his 
government have taken that entire amount of money away from 
the students and simply absorbed it into their own budgets. The 
students, Mr. Speaker, do not get a single red cent — red cent, 
Mr. Speaker — out of that millennium scholarship fund. It does 
directly to the coffers of the NDP government. 
 
So while the minister may want to sound generous in returning 
$3 million, why doesn’t he also return, Mr. Speaker, the other 
$7 million that he’s taking out of the students’ pockets, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government talks, the minister talks about his 
support for education. Well what about Convocation Hall at the 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan)? It’s ready to fall down, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a heritage building and if something isn’t done 
about it in the next year or two, it will be demolished. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government is taking money out of the 
pockets of students while trying to claim a benefit with 
returning a small portion of that. I think that is unconscionable, 
Mr. Speaker. That millennium scholarship fund belongs to the 
students and should be there for the benefit of the students, not 
for the benefits of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 55 — The 
Land Titles Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
four Bills before us today in adjourned debates that are all 
component parts of the government’s so-called LAND (Land 
Titles Automated Network Development) project, and rather 
than add to the comments of my colleagues on each of these 
Bills separately, Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this 
opportunity to indicate that we’ll have some very specific 
questions for all of those Bills and the LAND project in general 
in Committee of the Whole. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, on a general note, it’s worth looking 
at the so-called LAND project of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to execute this particular LAND project 
that basically computerizes our entire land titles system, the 
government had a number of options to pursue in terms of the 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

best way to do that. Not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, amongst all 
of the options, the government has clung to the option of 
creating still another Crown corporation in the province of 
Saskatchewan — a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One more, one more late addition to the family of Crown 
corporations, a family that was created by a taxpayer-funded 
NDP shopping spree in the 1970s and early ’80s. Mr. Speaker, a 
dysfunctional family that included the purchase of, as the 
member for Cannington has pointed out, basically holes in the 
ground, potash mines, jobs that already existed in our province. 
 
It included existing forestry operations and even salt mines, Mr. 
Speaker. The family of Crown corporations included even salt 
mines. It’s like a very disturbing flashback, Mr. Speaker, to the 
1970s, a time in this province when members opposite and 
members of their party went on a taxpayer-funded shopping 
spree that forever put this province at a fiscal and economic 
disadvantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and now we have another Crown corporation in 
the province of Saskatchewan as a result of the LAND project 
that this Bill relates to and that the three other Bills that I 
mentioned relate to. 
 
So how’s it working so far, Mr. Speaker? How’s this latest 
Crown corporation episode working in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Well in 1997 in the budget the provincial 
government estimated that the LAND project, this new Crown 
corporation, would cost taxpayers about $20 million. A year 
later in 1998 the Bill was up to $31.5 million, Mr. Speaker, for 
this latest foray, this latest socialist intervention into the 
economy of the province. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we find out that the bill for this LAND 
project which this Bill, the land titles Bill, deals directly with, is 
somewhere between 45 and $50 million of taxpayers’ money, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s about a $30 million overexpenditure from 
what was budgeted for this LAND project — a $30 million 
waste by the members opposite. 
 
And as we look at these four Bills, Mr. Speaker, and consider 
this LAND project and this new Crown corporation, this latest 
addition to the family, we can’t help but wonder, how many 
potholes would $30 million fix today on Saskatchewan 
highways, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — How could our health care in the province be 
improved with 30 million more dollars that have been wasted 
on this LAND project, on the establishment of still another 
Crown corporation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many drugs like Aricept could be added to 
the Formulary in this province for $30 million of taxpayers’ 
money? 
 
These are the important questions that people are asking today 
as they look at this LAND project, and these are the questions 
that we’re looking at as well, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be asking 
them in detail in Committee of the Whole for all four Bills that 
are related to this project. 

And so with that I will conclude the adjourned debates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to clarify with the hon. member 
that you moved this Bill to committee? 
 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 57 — The 
Land Surveys Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had ample time we feel to have talked on this Bill, but at 
this point we’d like to move to committee because we have a 
number of questions to ask there. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 58 — The 
Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The same goes 
for this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had we think a number of 
occasions to talk on this Bill but again we will have concerns in 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 56 — The 
Land Titles Consequential Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 
2000 apportant des modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Land Titles Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this Bill we are going to have a number of questions that 
we need clarified in committee, but we feel that we have spoke 
on this Bill to this point, and checked with concerned citizens 
out there who have a number of questions. At this time we’d 
like to pass it on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 79 — The 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 79, The 
Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act, 2000, there are a number 
of things that we want to deal with in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Before it gets to that point though, I do want to say a little bit 
about it regarding the Centre of the Arts and all the fine work 
that has been done there and the fine entertainment that has 
been brought to this city, and including the province, because of 
the facility of the Centre of the Arts. 
 
Over the years, it has become well-renowned and known for its 
catering and convention facilities, along with different 
performances such as The Phantom of the Opera and Cats and 
Tommy and Jesus Christ Superstar — and upcoming events 
such as Annie and Beauty and the Beast. 
 
So it really is a, it’s a real showcase for our city of Regina, and 
it’s really done some fine work. 
 
Just a couple of things that I want to talk about. It’s indicated 
that this government . . . It’s interesting that this government 
has noted how important it is, in this piece of legislation, that 
local control be given to the people in that area. And that’s 
certainly what this Act is looking to do is to give more local 
control or direct control to the board of the centre. 
 
I believe that in the past the board consisted of about 50 
members and they’re looking at gearing it down to around 12, 
which we certainly do think would be a lot easier to control and 
to work with. I can’t imagine trying to get 50 board members in 
and making any decision regarding that. 
 
As far as giving the board some more control — it’s a real good 
idea. They can hopefully become more self-sufficient again; 
and accountability is also an option when you get into that 
giving them more control. 
 
Of course, we can’t help but wonder why the legislation 
allowed for such a big board in the first place. And we’re 
wondering why after 30 years that they’re moving towards a 
smaller board. But we do agree with it. 
 
The terms of the board also are being changed. They’re moving 
from four one-year terms to three three-year term . . . to three 
three-year terms which should allow more continued continuity 
within the board which is something that is a very good idea. 
 
The board will also be allowed to create its own bylaws so that 
policy decisions can be implemented. More responsibility and 
authority will also be given to the board especially as it pertains 
to the hiring and supervising of staff and the executive director. 
They are standard business practices but one that should 
perhaps be exercised with caution. We’d hate to see that the 
centre become too self-governed and become a bureaucracy 
amongst itself. So there are potential dangers. 
 
In the age of cutbacks, downsizing, and layoffs, there are little 
doubt that the cash crunch has been felt by many, many 
businesses, and no doubt the centre has felt these also. So we 
would have seen that the . . . first-hand, since entertainment is 

often one of the first areas to be affected, that they have seen 
some of the crunches. 
 
Thirty-year legislation that has been given the Centre of the 
Arts . . . didn’t give the Centre of the Arts much wiggle room 
when it came to looking at other options of seeking financial 
support. So this is one area that will be of interest. 
 
Bill No. 79 addresses this very important issue as it allows the 
centre to provide its continued viability and sustainability. 
Financial support can now be sought from a number of sources 
and the board can do . . . can be allowed to make investments 
which prior was unable to. 
 
But I would make sure that the board does . . . seeks proper 
financial advice when it goes to this — and not provincial 
government after some of the fiascos that this provincial 
government has been through such as a SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) or 
situations like that. 
 
One issue that might need further clarification on is perhaps the 
Bill’s recognition that the Centre of the Arts is an agent of the 
Crown and as such can sue or be sued. It’s unlike the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. And I find it interesting that the WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) can’t be sued but the Centre of 
the Arts can be. So there’s an area there that we would like 
further clarification on. 
 
Overall we’re encouraged with the direction that Bill 79 takes. 
This will serve to strengthen and clarify the centre’s existence 
as an entertainment showcase here in the province. 
 
There are a couple of areas, as I mentioned before, that we’d 
like to address in further detail but of course we’ll do that in 
Committee of the Whole. So I move to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 69 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 69, The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2000, in general principle we 
agree with. We agree with the thrust of this legislation. 
 
However, whenever we speak about municipal legislation, 
whether it’s urban or rural, red flags go up after the past three or 
four months that we have been through with the provincial 
government and dealing with rural amalgamation or . . . not 
rural amalgamation but municipal amalgamation. So any time 
we get into an area like that certainly red flags go up. 
 
With the introduction of nearly every new piece of legislation 
this year that had anything to do with local government, our 
phones have been ringing off the hook. And we’ve been hearing 
lots and lots of concern on this one as well. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

Normally we get very few calls on something like this, but with 
the Garcea report and the Stabler reports and the movement that 
this government seems to have in its mind as far as 
amalgamation of local governments, we’ve seen a lot of 
concern. 
 
We do support much of the thrust of this Bill, such as getting 
rid of the business tax. And that’s an area that we’ve talked 
about many, many times. We campaigned on that very issue of 
eliminating the business tax because it is good for business; it 
will create business; it’s good for the province. 
 
Imposing a base tax. And there’s been more and more talk of 
that, of allowing municipal governments to have the option of a 
base tax if they think that is the direction that their municipality 
would go. And as said many, many times, as the government 
closest to the people, they’re the ones that probably should 
know which direction to go in that level. 
 
Both will go far in making our business community stronger, 
which of course makes our province stronger. 
 
I think with that, that covers most of the areas that we wanted to 
talk on. We’ll be dealing much greater with it in Committee of 
the Whole, and many more questions on this piece of legislation 
in Committee of the Whole. So I move it to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 68 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
colleague from Indian Head-Milestone has really touched on a 
number of the issues that are in all of these municipal Bills. 
 
And I think he also touched to a degree on the distrust for this 
government when you see a municipal Bill brought forward. I 
think all the people in Saskatchewan, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, are very concerned about what the government 
is up to now, and this year with forced amalgamation I think 
bore that suspicion out and may still be down the road. We 
aren’t really all that sure of that. 
 
I thought maybe when we saw a municipal Bill come forward 
this year, maybe actually what the government was finally 
doing was actually removing the impediments to block 
volunteer amalgamation, Mr. Speaker, which actually, if the 
Minister of Municipal Government really cared what he was 
doing and for that matter knew what he was doing, that’s 
probably what he would have done first rather than to stir up a 
hornet’s nest by coming around and saying, I, I, I will force 
amalgamation on all of you. 
 
And you have to once again, Mr. Speaker, forgive people in this 
province for not trusting this government. They were elected in 
’91, didn’t mention a word about hospital closures, and in the 

next breath I believe they closed 52, then 53, and then it went 
on to close the Plains with one of the more ridiculous moves 
this government has made. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone has 
touched on a number of the areas that may have had concern, 
but I think in essence we really agree with a lot of the things in 
this Bill, although we will have some questions when it goes to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 67 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2000 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re so eager, 
Mr. Speaker, that all of us want to get up and talk on this Bill. 
But having talked about it a number of times in the past, we’re 
probably all of us could get our chances to ask questions at 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 50 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 modifiant 
la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of my 
colleagues have done a fine job of articulating some concerns 
and questions that we’ll have on this Bill and we’ll be asking a 
lot of those questions in committee. 
 
And I would move that this Bill be moved to committee at this 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 51 — The 
Interpretation Act Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 51 is really 
attendant to Bill 50 and so the same would apply. And that is 
that we do have a number of questions for this Bill in 
committee and we will allow it to move to that stage at this 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
stand to speak on this Bill again today because a number of 
people from my constituency have agreed that this Bill is going 
to have a large impact on our area. 
 
Doepker Industry also was — I was looking at the replies and 
some of the comments the government has been making about 
this Labour Relations Board, saying how wonderful it is for not 
only for their company but for other companies in this province 
— and they definitely are objecting to the government’s stance 
on this. 
 
We’ve had an opportunity to meet with many of the other 
manufacturers, implement manufacturers who will be 
expressing their concerns to this government in the near future 
when it comes to understanding what’s happening in business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would at this moment take my seat. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into debate on the construction and labour relations Act 
— Bill No. 59. And I guess the way I would start is well, well, 
well. We went from forced amalgamation to forced 
unionization. And I guess it’s just very typical of what people 
have come to expect from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 1983 the government has allowed construction firms to 
operate both union and non-union arms. This practice of double 
breasting has been in place, Mr. Speaker, now almost 20 years. 
And in those 20 years there hasn’t been a single strike in the 
construction industry — not one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the rationalization here is a little difficult to follow. If things 
were so difficult and if there were so many problems out there 
with respect to labour and labour organizations, why had there 
not been a strike in almost 20 years? What is it that has caused 
the government to decide that at this point they need to bring 
this legislation in? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of very good reasons, the 
first of which is that we know the NDP did not like the original 
legislation. This is a way for them now to discontinue the 
practice of spinoffs. This is a way for them, as some of my 
colleagues have mentioned, to pay off their big union friends, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Something that’s been in place for over 20 years that hasn’t 
resulted in a single strike in the construction industry is now 
going to be virtually rewritten overnight. I don’t think this 
government understands the chaos that they’re going to cause in 
the construction industry. The chaos will include, Mr. Speaker, 
people leaving this province — businesses, construction 
companies leaving this province, fewer jobs for our children, 
fewer jobs in the future. 

Interestingly enough, we even have the editorialists, Mr. 
Speaker, who don’t understand the need for this type of 
draconian legislation. And I’ll just read one quote from a 
column by Murray Mandryk, and I quote: 
 

But if the problem in the non-union shops is as severe as 
Crofford suggests, severe enough to legislate an end to 
them, one might think the minister would be obligated to 
present evidence backing her concerns. 

 
Well, she didn’t. And she didn’t just like they didn’t present any 
evidence that forced municipal amalgamation was going to 
accomplish what they thought it would. 
 
This is a blatant, blatant effort to pay off the unions that 
surprisingly enough, Mr. Speaker, still support this government 
after all that they have suffered at the hands of this government. 
 
Interestingly enough, even the unions themselves agree that this 
is forced unionization. The united brotherhood of carpenters of 
America wrote a letter to its members bragging that this will 
now give them the ability to force several of the large 
contractors to work totally union. 
 
Typically we don’t get union . . . unions and employers 
agreeing a lot on, Mr. Speaker, but they have. This government 
has, and it’s done this in a couple of . . . on a couple of 
occasions in the past, they have that uncanny ability to unite 
people with competing interests in terms of their interpretation 
of what it is that they do. And across the board apparently we 
have unions and we have employers agreeing that this is, in 
fact, forced unionization. 
 
The Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, very much agrees with that 
consensus as well. I’ll quote an article from The Leader-Post 
that . . . as follows: 
 

The effect will be to create new union shops even if 
workers in these firms would rather remain independent of 
union status. As a result, many will become union 
members by decree instead of having the right to vote for 
union status. 
 

So there we have it, Mr. Speaker. Nothing short of a draconian 
piece of legislation that will force people, even those who value 
the right to choice, the right to choose, force them to do what 
this government wants them to do. 
 
Now the government in its arguments in support of this 
legislation talks about this will create harmony, labour 
harmony. Well we know from previous experience, Mr. 
Speaker, particularly in the health care field, whereafter they 
interfered with labour, there wasn’t a great deal of harmony. 
And if that’s the kind of harmony that they’re referring to, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think we really need it. 
 
Another argument that they will use is that this promotes a fair 
wage policy. And yet it has been proven over and over and over 
again, Mr. Speaker, that in fact a lot of the salaries paid in open 
shops are better salaries than what they are in the union shops. 
In some situations we have apprentices who are far better off, 
far better off in the open shops, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

The government also will tell you that this is a way of stopping 
companies from getting around the spirit of the rules governing 
unions. And yet if that was the case, Mr. Speaker, if we had 
people out there, firms out there blatantly ignoring the rules or 
blatantly disregarding the rules, wouldn’t you think that we 
would have had a complaint, at least one, to the Labour 
Relations Board in the last 20 years? But no, we haven’t. 
 
So obviously the degree of dissatisfaction and the number of 
people skirting the rules out there has been grossly exaggerated 
by the government. 
 
To get back to one of my earlier points, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
really have to understand why it is that the government feels it’s 
necessary to go to the degree that they have with this piece of 
legislation. And quite frankly, it is . . . this is a payoff, Mr. 
Speaker — $300,000 from various unions in the last provincial 
election. 
 
A good sum of this money, Mr. Speaker, came from the 
construction trades. So this is a tit for tat, favour for favour, 
without any regard to the consequences that it’ll have on the 
businesses in Saskatchewan, construction firms, and on the 
people that they employ. 
 
Now there should be some very, very clear distinctions made 
here, Mr. Speaker. This payoff is to the union leadership. This 
payoff . . . these are to the people who are, who are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would just ask the hon. 
member to kindly choose his words a little more judiciously. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point I was 
trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that in the long term this 
legislation will have no direct benefit to those workers who 
value the right of choice. Those are the people who in the end 
will be harmed by this legislation. Their right and their ability 
to be able to make their decisions about whether they want to 
belong to a union or not will definitely be compromised with 
this legislation. 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got a couple of 
different things happening here. We’ve got a Bill that the 
government wants to pass in order that they can accomplish 
their forced unionization in this province, giving very little 
regard as to how that will affect the construction firms and the 
employers and the employees as I’ve indicated. 
 
But yet, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this legislation would 
not affect out-of-province companies. So consequently these 
out-of-province companies will be able to come into this 
province and they will have an unfair advantage over 
companies that were forced to unionize in this province. And 
we will lose even more jobs, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this 
legislation. 
 
I think if we were to sum up the difficulty that we have with 
this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it would be that 
it takes away completely the right of the individual to determine 
whether they want to be a part of a union or not. 
 
We have talked about and called for an enhanced democratic 
process around certification — secret ballots, things that will 

guarantee and respect the rights of workers to make their own 
decisions. This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, takes that 
completely away from them. 
 
And I guess what’s really interesting to note as well, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the government has put themselves in the 
position of doing something that the unions themselves could 
not do. They themselves could not force or convince all of these 
employees to become members of their unions, so now they’ve 
come to this government, and this government will in fact do 
what it is that they’re asking them to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we still have a number of issues that we would 
like to further explore with respect to this particular legislation. 
We would ask that we get a little more time to do that. So at this 
point I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 42 — The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
number of questions and concerns about the piece of legislation 
before us, Bill No. 42, surrounding cattle marketing and 
check-offs, and the whole area of that is an issue obviously with 
producers, cattle producers, in the province. 
 
We feel that those questions and concerns can be addressed in 
committee, and we’ll be allowing the Bill to proceed further. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would want to move the following motion 
as well: 
 

That we go to item number 5, Bill No. 231, The 
Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d move that now. 
 
The division bells rang from 4 p.m. until 4:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 19 
 
Heppner Julé Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Harpauer Wiberg 
Hart Allchurch Stewart 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — 28 
 
Trew Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Lautermilch 
Thomson Lorje Serby 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

Belanger Nilson Crofford 
Hillson Kowalsky Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 42, The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote I’ll invite the 
minister responsible for the Research Council to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
right is the president and CEO of the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, Jim Hutchinson; and to my left, Lisa Wallace, who is 
director of corporate performance branch within the department. 
 
Subvote (SR01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. It’s been a year since 
I’ve had an opportunity to speak to you about the Research 
Council. And this year it’s kind of interesting. I see that we 
have a Bill coming up for Research Council for the first time I 
believe since I was elected. 
 
But before we get into that, we have an opportunity to discuss 
the last year in review for the Research Council, and one of the 
more interesting things I read in the annual return was the 
corporate performance branch. Maybe you can give me some 
indication of how that area of the Research Council is 
operating. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very glad the 
member has asked that question. The corporate performance 
branch is new to the Research Council, and the goal was 
certainly to enhance the abilities, the performance of our staff, 
so that we can serve industry and the people of Saskatchewan in 
a more positive way. 
 
Some of it deals with training of course, and surveying the 
performance of the different areas within the corporation. And I 
think it’s fair to say that . . . and the president tells me that they 
are very happy with the branch and how it’s been performing 
thus far. 
 
I think the bottom line is the corporation is there to serve 
industry, to serve the people of Saskatchewan in terms of 
enhancing technology and development of research, and 

through that, economic development opportunities for 
Saskatchewan. So as we can enhance the abilities of the 
employees within the corporation to serve those needs, that is 
always a positive move. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is this branch . . . is 
this located in the Saskatoon office? How many employees are 
there in that and what is their goal for this year then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are five 
employees within the branch. It is located in the Research 
Council’s offices. And I am told that the goal for this year is 
one of understanding how . . . the improvement and 
performance of the people within the department. I’m not sure 
that Ms. Wallace would describe it in that way, but that’s my 
simple way of describing it for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, one of the issues that 
we’ve been hearing about lately in the news is the water quality 
in rural Saskatchewan. And I think . . . I believe Mr. Hans 
Peterson was discussing the problems, the concerns that he may 
have and that people may be experiencing in our areas. 
 
Can you maybe update us and tell us what the Research Council 
has been looking into and what work they’ve been doing in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to answer the 
question, within the Research Council, we still provide 
analytical services for individuals. 
 
Mr. Peterson, who used to work within the corporation, has left 
the Research Council and is working . . . and we still work very 
closely with him in terms of providing to municipalities, 
analysis and the kind of information that would ensure that we 
have a safe quality of water. And the Research Council sees this 
as very much a priority and a very important component of our 
work. 
 
The safety of people’s drinking water is of paramount 
importance not only within the Research Council, but the other 
arms of government who have responsibilities in that area. But 
basically, upon request, we do analytical research or analytical 
analysis of water samples. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, has Sask Water asked 
you to work with them at any of the water treatment plants in 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that is a role that the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation does on its own. They have 
their own research. They have their own in-house capacity, so 
we’re not working with them in that respect. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, then you haven’t 
been contacted by Sask Water to do an overall project on the 
quality of water in rural Saskatchewan after the outbreak in 
Ontario that caused a lot of fear in that province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we work with Sask 
Water in terms of dealing with reservoirs, what kind of a 
resource is there, and doing an analysis of sort of, you know, a 
larger source reservoir. 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

The Department of Health is responsible for the analysis of 
existing water systems and water treatment plants. That’s not 
the responsibility of the Research Council. But we work in 
areas where we are requested from Sask Water. I might say we 
have a very positive working relationship with them in that 
regard. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I understand that the 
Research Council wouldn’t initiate a project like this, but I was 
. . . we were just wondering if this is something that the other 
department had contacted the Research Council to begin some 
work on. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government’s contribution to SRC 
(Saskatchewan Research Council) is going up by 7.5 per cent 
this year. And can you give us an idea of where that increase 
will be going to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, this is as a result of 
the Petroleum Research Centre that’s been established here in 
Regina. And what the increase is for is rent and for moving 
expenses to the new facility that’s located on the U of R 
(University of Regina) campus grounds, as the member will 
know. 
 
This is quite a large undertaking that’s been jointly put together 
by the Department of Energy and Mines, the Research Council, 
the U of R, and the federal government. It’s very much . . . we 
recognize the costs of the transition in moving the Research 
Council to that facility, but very important in terms of the future 
of heavy oil and the understanding of that resource in the 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Petroleum 
Research Centre, I believe SRC has about $1.5 million invested 
in it from what I understand. And I was just wondering what 
rent you are paying now in this new centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the rent for the 
space as it relates to the Research Council’s expenditure will be 
$900,000 per year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you compare that to what 
they were paying in the old facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The rent in the old facility was 
$330,000, so it is quite a difference. But then again we’re 
moving into new space. The ability to do the kind of work that 
the Research Council is required to do and will be required to 
do under this new program, is very much responsible for the 
difference. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, then the new Bill is 
brought forward that’s going to allow the Research Council to 
do lending and do different work that will . . . the work that will 
be done in that facility, is that’s what you’re indicating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, the new Bill and as it relates to 
the Petroleum Research Centre, those are two separate and 
non-related items. We will be discussing the changes to the Act 
as it relates to investment, frankly, in terms of the Research 
Council’s ability to be involved in, I guess, turning some of the 
knowledge and some of the understanding that we have 

developed there into a form of equity if the situation arises. 
 
But that has really nothing to do with the rent; it has nothing to 
do with the Petroleum Research Centre at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the work that’s being done in the 
Petroleum Research Centre then, is there a large increase in the 
number of contracts that are . . . been awarded in the last year 
and that you’re seeing in the future? They will be . . . that work 
will be done within that centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It’s a multi-faceted kind of an 
arrangement that works there. The Department of Energy and 
Mines has a research incentive program that was part of our 
budget cycle. What we’re looking for, frankly, is an investment 
by private industry, partnering with the Research Council and 
partnering with government entities in terms of research as it 
relates to heavy oil. 
 
So there can be a combination of different financing 
arrangements to have a project work. This is certainly not our 
intention to have it government funded totally through the 
Research Council or the Department of Energy and Mines. 
What we’re looking for really here, is a partnership. 
 
In terms of the numbers of contracts and the work that has been 
approved and that will be approved, I would want to say that 
there are a number of areas — there are a number of discussions 
ongoing. The research centre is relatively new. The facility is 
just being built as you will know. 
 
And so we are just in a process of working as a board — and I 
guess when I refer to we, I’m referring to the Board of Directors 
of PTRC (Petroleum Technology Research Centre) — in 
discussions with industry to determine what kinds of projects 
they would want to be involved in. And the Research Council 
of course brings some existing work from their activities in 
heavy oil. 
 
And R&D (research and development) and technology has been 
available for many years. They’ve been very much leaders in 
heavy oil technology and will continue to be. But as this 
process unfolds, I can’t say that I could give you today a long 
list of new projects that have been signed at this point, but 
we’re certainly working towards some. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, last year when we 
spoke we talked about the areas of growth within the Research 
Council and we know that there’s many different facets of the 
council. And I believe last year we talked about 
agri-biotechnology as being one of the larger areas. This year 
has there been a continuous growth in that area, or what area of 
the Research Council has seen the largest growth in last year? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think if I could, 
we’ve talked of one of the areas where the Research Council 
will be growing — the Petroleum Research Centre here in 
Regina. There are other areas that this sort of growth transition 
is taking place. There’s a new pipe flow technology centre that 
has been developed in Saskatoon. This is working with slurries 
as it relates to uranium mining, perhaps the heavy oil — tar 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

sands kinds of oil. So there’s certainly some growth in that area 
with respect to biotechnology. 
 
We’ve opened, I think it was in March, last March, the new 
fermentation plant which I think has some very, very great 
potential. And as well GenServ Laboratories that deal with 
plant genetics as the member will probably be aware of having 
been a member on the board. These are not brand new items but 
certainly these are areas where we feel there is a lot of potential 
for growth for the council. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, can you tell us 
what area the council has seen the most private contracts where 
they’re actually making the most money, if we were to say it in 
those words? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 
officials that the . . . I think the biggest area in terms of private 
sector investment would be in the pipe flow technology centre 
because it is such a broad, varied group of people that they’re 
doing work for. They’re doing work, as I’ve indicated a little 
earlier, for the oil sands; they do work with potash companies, 
the potash sectors, with uranium, heavy oil, pump 
manufacturers. And all of these people have an interest in 
ensuring the success of development of that knowledge in that 
area. 
 
The geo-chem lab has increased in revenue flow from 600,000 
last year to about 1.2 million this year, so that’s a fair large 
amount of growth. 
 
But I should say, just as a general principle, what we are 
attempting to do is, more and more, make the Research Council 
responsive to industry’s needs so that they can attract the kind 
of investment and development of the technology, and utilizing 
our resources and our knowledge base within the Research 
Council to attract that investment. 
 
It varies, as you will know, from industry to industry in terms of 
what cash flow are there, what their technology requirements 
are. So it’s kind of a static and a moving target to a degree. 
 
But I think fair to say that we see a lot of potential in terms of 
the pipe flow technology centre, the laboratories, analytical 
chem lab, Bova-Can, and the other areas that I know you’re 
quite familiar with. There are still, in terms of technology, on 
that side some very positive growth opportunities we believe. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. Obviously 
the Research Council and your department must consider the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre as one where there’s 
going to be a considerable amount of growth or else you 
wouldn’t have gone into a facility where the rent cost was 
considerably more. So I’m sure that’s one area that is an open 
area of growth for you. 
 
I think it was two years ago we were discussing the Research 
Council, and at that time you were excited about the benefits of 
the 15 per cent royalty tax credit that the government had 
introduced. And the same year they’d introduced the 15 per cent 
R&D tax credit that could be added to the federal tax credit, and 
you thought that you were going to see a blossoming of 
technology in research and development. 

Can you give us an idea if that has happened? I asked you this 
question last year and you told me it was too soon to know. So 
I’m hoping this year it’s not still too soon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, one of the . . . I 
think one of the areas that we have been having difficulty with, 
if you go back to last year, the beginning of the year, the first 
quarter, certainly the price of oil was very much depressed — 
11, $12 a barrel. 
 
What industry has been telling us, and I think it’s quite clear if 
you follow the stock markets, you’ll find that the equity markets 
have not been investing very heavily in the whole resource 
sector whether it’s oil, gas, or potash. The price of oil certainly 
has had and has taken a very dramatic upturn; oil now, you 
know, is $32, $30 a barrel. So for a while there certainly was a 
bit of a cash flow squeeze. 
 
But I think some of the areas that have been attracting private 
sector investment would be . . . and the example I think I would 
want to use is the Weyburn Pan-Canadian CO2 (carbon dioxide) 
project which is attracting investment not only from industry, 
from government through the program, but there’s international 
investment being attracted to monitoring that particular project 
because it’s such a large-scale project, and we need to know 
from the get-go I guess just how CO2 interacts in that kind of an 
environment when it’s injected into that pool. 
 
So that is one area I think that I could point to as being very 
successful in terms of the R&D incentive project because that 
will be very much part of what finances that monitoring project. 
 
I’ve talked with people from the United States, from Dakota 
Gasification who supply the natural gas, Senator Schafer, the 
Governor of North Dakota, who is very much interested in the 
project and its success. So I think you’ll see that these kinds of 
studies, these kinds of initiatives are not only going to attract 
industry investment here in Canada, but I think it’s attracting 
interest from other governments around the world as well. 
 
It’s a very big-scale project, but it’s certainly one that I think 
the R&D project has fit into very well — the incentive project. 
And I think that the future will show that it’s a very relatively 
small investment in terms of the amount of return that we’re 
going to get from the knowledge that we’ll get on that project. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the CO2 project in that area is one that we’ve 
discussed for a number of years, and so I’m sort of reading from 
your answer that as yet you’re still not real excited about the 
return that’s come on the tax credits and the royalty taxes. But I 
guess there’s always hope. But I’m sure if somebody can do it, 
the actual research centre itself will be able to benefit from it. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us an idea of how much money the 
research centre gained from royalties last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the 
amount that we’ve received in royalties is something like 
$7,500. It’s really minimal. And that’s from TecMark branch of 
the Research Council, which is what I think we’ll be talking 
about just in a very short period of time. Because what we are 
wanting to do is take advantage of some of the expertise within 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

the corporation, either in perhaps a small equity position or an 
agreement on royalties for what we’re able to share with 
industry. 
 
Because right now we haven’t got the opportunity to be able to 
take advantage of I guess, frankly, the worth of the company. 
They work basically on an hourly rate on a fee-for-service basis 
and it may be that there are some instances where a small equity 
investment, it’ll return either profits on that equity or some form 
of royalties. But the amount is very, very small. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I just have one last 
question. When I was looking at the annual return, page 30 
under investments, it says investments which are recorded at 
cost have a market value of zero in 1999. But what I was 
questioning, why there was $1,148,577 on March 31, 1998. 
Could you tell me why there was a difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the 
member if it would be okay if we get back to her with an 
answer to her question. As you can see, we have some people 
away sick today so we’re very short-staffed here. But we will 
undertake, in writing, an answer to your question within the 
next few days. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1645) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 76  The Research Council 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the minister 
responsible to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s 
really not much change since the last time we were before the 
committee. Mr. Hutchinson is back and Ms. Wallace is back as 
well. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister, and welcome again to your officials. And I apologize, 
I didn’t thank you when you were here under Committee of the 
Whole; I knew you’d be back again. 
 
And I know that you also know that I’m excited and interested 
in what’s happening over at the Research Council. And this 
Bill, although it sounds really interesting, I think the minister 
scared many of us over here on this side of the House when he 
gave us some explanatory notes about this Bill, because he 
refers to it as having the same level of approval as SOCO and 
talks about SOCO in many instances when he’s talking about 
this Bill. 

Mr. Minister, we are wondering if this will give the SRC the 
power to invest in projects through loans and equity? And we’re 
wondering in what way there will be a difference between SRC 
and SOCO, and if there’s going to be any overlap of the 
mandate between the two of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I think 
— and it’s explained to me by my officials — that yes, the Acts 
are very much similar . . . to SOCO. And I think part of it was 
the fact that it was expedient to draft it quite similar. 
 
Certainly no intention to duplicate what SOCO is doing at all. 
Really what we’re looking for is the ability to turn the work that 
we do into some form of equity. And it’s certainly not that we 
want to set up a parallel lending institution to SOCO, that’s just 
not where it is. 
 
I guess the easiest example and the easy way to describe it . . . 
and for me it would be easy to do right now. I was out at 
shopping with my family just the other day and we were buying 
refills for an E-Zee Wrap 1000, and you will know all about 
that because I think you were on the board when that work was 
done. Well at that time, the Research Council did the work, 
designed the prototype, put it together, but never had the 
legislative authority other than to work on a by-hour basis. 
 
Now sometimes . . . That was a very successful project. It 
turned into sales of millions of dollars and a very good project. 
 
What this component of that Bill would do would be allow, 
rather than working on a hourly basis, the corporation to invest 
their time in the form of equity. 
 
And many times we have clients that will come to the Research 
Council, have difficulties, and they’ve got an idea, good 
thoughts, and really want to move on a project — don’t have 
the capital. This would allow the Research Council to invest 
their knowledge and their people in terms of . . . rather than . . . 
a charge on the hour basis would take an equity portion of an 
initiative. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then the projects that you would 
perhaps supply equity for or invest money in will be projects 
that the Research Council has done some background work on, 
perhaps some R&D or some . . . or they may have been a client 
of the SRC at the time the project was developed. Am I 
understanding that correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — All right, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
other example that I might want to use is: as the Research 
Council people were monitoring deep-water wells, they had an 
idea and thought about perhaps how do we monitor these, and 
how do we monitor the quality? They developed a prototype, 
patented it, and it’s now actually an entity that can be . . . and 
can have some commercial applications. 
 
Now in this case it may be partnered . . . you know, possible to 
partner with this monitoring technology, partner with someone 
else to commercialize, and to bring it into an entity that will 
create some positive cash flow for the corporation. It’s 
knowledge that’s there, why not commercialize it? 
 
It came as a result of work that they had been doing, so it would 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2000 

make sense to look at the possibility of commercializing 
perhaps with a private sector partner. In terms of the equity for 
work done, that I guess is another possibility as opposed to say 
a fee charge. But certainly the work would be done or has been 
done within the Research Council itself. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, we’ve had many 
concerns expressed that perhaps that this was just another 
SOCO; that we have another opportunity for the government to 
decide who’s going to get taxpayers’ dollars invested in their 
project. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give me some assurances that this is . . . 
the money that’s going to be invested is not the $8 million that 
is put into the Research Council through the taxpayers’ dollars 
to the General Revenue Fund. And indeed it is money that is 
from the private sector clients and the people that are doing 
work and hiring the Research Council to do work. So I guess 
maybe that’s the assurance that we need, that it’s not going to 
be the taxpayers’ dollars at risk but more the money that is 
brought into the Research Council itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are, I think, 
written into this Bill a number of areas that will assure that 
funds, knowledge, would be used appropriately. Investments 
require board approval, and the board in turn would be looking 
for a ministerial approval. So the approval process is one that 
really is quite open. 
 
As you will know, the board is appointed of a cross-section of 
people from Saskatchewan — urban, rural, north, south — 
some with a bit of expertise in different areas of work that the 
Research Council does. So from that perspective there is an 
approval process that will ensure the public funds, if any, are 
invested wisely. 
 
I would just say that of the $8 million, there are times right now 
where say, with the oil sector as an example; work would be 
done that would impact, hopefully positively, the whole 
industry where industry will put up some funds, some private 
capital, where Research Council would put up some public 
funds, and then work together on a project to enhance the 
technology in that particular area. 
 
Without this portion within the Act if there’s some technologies 
that present themselves during that, there is no ability to 
recapture any royalties from the knowledge that’s gained. It’s 
just gone. So this will help us then to capture that. 
 
And if there are royalties gained as a result of some of these 
initiatives, it would allow that money to be reinvested within 
the corporation and hopefully we could move to a situation, if 
we were lucky, where the amount that the province is putting 
towards the Research Council’s annual allocation might in fact 
even decrease. 
 
So it’s just an attempt to try and capture on opportunities that 
may present themselves in the course of operations of the 
corporation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I felt good when I 
heard you say that it was going to require board approval, and 
then your added assurance that it was going to require 

minister’s approval didn’t give me that much more feeling of 
satisfaction. I’m sure it’s the board and the people that are 
working at the Research Council that the people of 
Saskatchewan can have some faith in. 
 
And so I’m . . . I know after our discussions today that we will 
be wondering, will there be limits placed on the SRC as far as 
what it can invest money in or will it be a decision left entirely 
up to the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . like the 
duties of the council are laid out in legislation, and these 
investments would have to be consistent with those duties, so 
it’s tied, you know, within legislation. 
 
I think, you know, there are some areas where boards will 
make, I think, some policy decisions within the framework of 
the Act. And that may vary from board to board. And it may 
vary from year to year. But with respect to this . . . these 
changes, this is very much tied to the duties of the council. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I know that at times 
in the past there’s been individuals that wanted to invest in 
Saskatchewan, showing that they had faith in the province, and 
they tried to do so through the Research Council. 
 
Is that . . . will this allow more people to invest in the province? 
Is it going to open the doors for people to be able to see 
Saskatchewan as a viable place for growth without any 
interference from the government, meaning that they can do it 
directly through the Research Council and not have any 
hands-on from the government directly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say that the Research Council has operated relatively 
independent from government and from the day to day 
operations. There has been a role for a minister who is 
responsible for the Research Council as a member of the board, 
but certainly not chairing the board, in my experience. 
 
As well, the Research Council still has the requirement to report 
through a minister to this legislature, which very much makes it 
accountable for the public dollars that are allocated to it and that 
it spends. 
 
In terms of policy, this government’s policy has been to 
understand and know the Research Council as a vehicle to 
expand economic development opportunities. And that’s 
certainly where we’re headed. 
 
(1700) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I just have one other question. 
And first of all, I must comment that I know that the SRC is an 
independent, free-standing item and that’s probably why we do 
have a lot of faith in it in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re just . . . I want confirmation that the 
Provincial Auditor will have the same right of access to the 
books of this part of the SRC, meaning that it can audit all the 
work that’s going on and the money that’s invested in it, much 
as it does with the SRC at this time. 
 



June 19, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The amendments to this legislation 
just allows for some, I guess some extra advice. The Provincial 
Auditor still performs a review of the Research Council. We 
still report to the legislature. And it’s very similar to other 
Crown corporations in that regard. 
 
What it will do though is allow the Research Council the 
opportunity to expand services that will be available to it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I don’t have any further 
questions but I do hope that in a year or so from now we can see 
that this Bill has made some positive changes to the SRC, and 
that we’ll be able to see that investment and research in this 
province will grow because of it. 
 
So I will be looking forward to seeing what’s happening and 
we’re monitoring. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
member for her thoughtful questions and my staff for their 
assistance. And I would like to move the committee report the 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — It now being past 5 o’clock the committee will 
recess until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


