





























































Hansard: March 30, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 327 
 March 30, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition. And I read the prayer which goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation to 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

This comes from people in Grenfell, Melfort, Lake Lenore, St. 
Brieux, basically all over Saskatchewan because that’s the 
attitude. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today for cellular coverage in the Watson area. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular service to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Quill Lake, 
Leroy, Englefeld, and Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition from people opposed to the enforced municipal 
amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Broadview, Kipling, Hanley, Saskatoon, Allan, 
Dundurn, and communities thereabouts. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions to the Assembly in regards to forced municipal 
amalgamations. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present are signed by individuals 
from the communities of Windthorst, Peebles, Glenavon, 
Chamberlain, Dalmeny, and many other communities 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — I also bring a petition in regards to 
amalgamation and I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

Signed by petitioners from Duck Lake, Glenavon, and Grenfell. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand today to 
present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned 
about forced rural amalgamation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the petitioners that have signed this are from Grenfell, 
Glenavon, Storthoaks, Carnduff, etc. 
 
I so present. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you; that’s music 
to my ears, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a petition on 
behalf of people in Swift Current who are concerned about 
hospital funding in my hometown. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current regional hospital by providing approximately 7.54 
million, thereby allowing the Swift Current District Health 
Board the opportunity to provide improved regional health 
care services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition has been signed by people in the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition to present today to do with the forcing of 
municipalities to amalgamate against their will. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Glenavon, Richmound, Storthoaks, Gainsborough, Bellegarde, 
and a number of other communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to read a petition 
opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

From people from Windthorst, Vanscoy, Saskatoon, Regina. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition against forced 
amalgamation: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures here are from Regina, Waldheim, Cadillac, and 
surrounding areas. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition concerning the lack of cellular service in the Watson 
area. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to ensure reliable cellular services to Watson 
and area by installing a cellular tower at Watson. 
 

The petitioners are from Watson and Naicam area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I too have a petition signed by citizens 
concerned with the forced amalgamation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans that it has to proceed with enforced 
amalgamation of municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

Signatures are from towns of Kipling, Maidstone, and Waseca. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition that 
I’d like to present on behalf of citizens concerned with 
municipal amalgamation. And I read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans to proceed with enforced amalgamations of 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by citizens of Windthorst, Vanscoy, 
Montmartre, and Delisle. 
 
I do so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today too to present petitions on behalf of forced 
amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And I have petitioners from Duck Lake, Maidstone, Prince 
Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise as well to present a petition on the issue 
of forced amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

This petition is signed by the good citizens of Kipling, 
Broadview, Grenfell, and Windthorst. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions were 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly 
cause the government not to implement the Personal 
Income Tax Review Committee’s recommendation to 
expand the provincial sales tax. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, the former member from Carrot River Valley, Mr. 
Andy Renaud. It’s good to see Andy back here today, and I had 
a chance to visit with him a little bit last night. 
 
And as I indicated in my maiden speech, I certainly appreciated 
the campaign that we had in Carrot River Valley. I still believe 
it was probably one of the classiest in the entire province. 
 
As most of you members will know, Andy is an avid curler and 
golfer and I am just very glad to have played my part in 
allowing him to further pursue his recreational interests. 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to join in welcoming Andy to the Assembly today. 
Andy has always been and continues to be a constituent of 
mine, and I’ve always been happy to have him. And I’m also 
more pleased now that when he is in the constituency he’s not 
undermining my incredibly good work. 
 
In addition I’d like to welcome Ken Magnus here from Tisdale. 
Ken is a small business individual and runs a business in 
Tisdale. He’s been very active in the community, and he’s very 
proud of his accomplishments. 
 
The one shortfall — an error of judgment — was to run for the 
Liberals in the last provincial election. 
 
However, we do welcome him here. Ken, take care. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — . . . my wife, Shirley, over there. Our friends, 
Isabelle McLellan, Werner and Eileen Peters from Winnipeg, 
Manitoba. Eileen is also Ben’s cousin. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like other members in 
this august Assembly, I would like to join in welcoming former 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Andy Renaud. 
 
As many of you know, Andy was my seat mate for many years, 
so we shared a lot of laughs and quips about the opposition and 
a lot of . . . We share the same social democratic ideals. 
 
I would also note, as has one hon. member, the presence of Ken 
Magnus. 
 
Now what members in this Assembly may not be aware of is 
that Ken Magnus, the former Liberal candidate for Carrot River 
Valley, and Andy Renaud, the former New Democratic MLA 
and candidate for Carrot River Valley, have actually formed a 
partnership in a consulting business. So they . . . There is 
another coalition happening in business as well as in 
government — proof once more of the wisdom of the liberal 
and democratic political philosophies. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, though the . . . I have one 
other guest I would like to introduce. And this is a very 
important introduction for me because this is the introduction of 
a young man who has already demonstrated a very complete 
commitment to politics and to education. I’m not sure what his 
political ideology is or will be, but I do know that whatever 
political party he eventually decides to join will benefit 
considerably from him. 
 
I am referring to Michael Burgess in the Speaker’s gallery. 
Michael is a student at Walter Murray Collegiate. He took 
yesterday off from school to come down to watch the 
presentation of the budget — he came down on the bus — and 
decided that this theatre was so interesting that he would stay 
here today to observe the proceedings today. 
 
Members of the legislature might note that one of the things that 
Michael has already accomplished is a web page and it is at 

www.server.4mg.com. And I would encourage all members to 
go and access this web site and see what the youth of today are 
thinking. The web site is actually an acronym for students 
against the violation of expression and rights. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming Michael 
Burgess to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to recognize Gord Gunoff and other members and staff 
from IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) 
who are in the gallery. And I hope that we could both agree that 
we’re enjoying a quiet period in our relationship, and it’s nice 
to see you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with my colleagues in welcoming Ken Magnus and 
Andy Renaud, to your gallery today. As has been stated, Ken is 
a small business person in Tisdale — owner and operator of 
Taylor’s Mens Wear, and he was our candidate in the last 
election. 
 
And we do have the coalition arrangement in the gallery that 
we’re seeing now, but it’s just representative of the large 
business support for this coalition government. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tributes to Sandra Schmirler 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and notwithstanding the rules and procedures for 
members’ statements, I would ask that members’ statements be 
used today to pay tribute to the memory of Sandra Schmirler; 
and if necessary that the period of ten minutes usually allocated 
to members’ statements be extended beyond that time if 
necessary; and in doing so, the Assembly observe the following 
order of speakers: Deputy Premier, the Leader of the 
Opposition, Leader of the Third Party; and, at the conclusion of 
our remarks, that the Assembly observe a moment of silence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know I speak for all 
of us represented here, and indeed for everyone in 
Saskatchewan, when I say how greatly saddened we all were to 
hear of the passing of Sandra Schmirler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the writer Bernard Mallamud said once, and I 
quote: “No life can be recaptured wholly as it was.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is especially true of the life of Sandra. For 
although it was a life tragically cut short at just 36 years, it 
would be impossible to wholly recapture a life so full of 
accomplishment, a life so full of achievement, and a life so full 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

of joy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for most people in Saskatchewan Sandra 
Schmirler, the impact she had included the sport of curling, it 
had impact across the province, our nation, around the globe, 
and at the very pinnacle of this sport in the Olympic Games. 
 
Her record in curling speaks for itself — a three-time Canadian 
champion, three times world champion, and a winner of the 
gold medal representing this nation at the Winter Olympics. 
And I know for most of us, we will always remember the sight 
of her rink on the medal podium at Nagano singing our national 
anthem. But even more importantly in some ways, waving a 
tiny Saskatchewan flag for the admiring world to see. 
 
And we’ll remember the achievement and we will remember 
the pride each of us felt. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy for us 
to appreciate what we can see. And it’s easy to appreciate the 
gold medals and the amazing performance, the championships, 
the amazing pressure shots, like that little wick into the house to 
count for three. Every curling fan knows exactly what I mean 
and we can all see in our mind’s eye that litany of events. 
 
But it’s just as important and maybe more so, Mr. Speaker, that 
we remember to appreciate those things we don’t see or can’t 
see. The years of practice, the commitment, the training, the 
personal sacrifice that goes into this kind of a championship 
career. 
 
And we must also appreciate the things we can’t see, those 
things like the qualities of determination, the commitment and 
the discipline. And somebody mentioned to me today that when 
Sandra lined up to deliver that final rock, that she had the look. 
 
Those were the qualities Sandra brought to the ice and allowed 
her to become a champion. Those were also the qualities she 
brought to her courageous battle against her last challenge; a 
challenge she faced with her characteristic focus, determination, 
and hugely competitive spirit. 
 
And perhaps that’s why we were so sad here in Saskatchewan 
when we heard the sad news of Sandra’s passing. We knew she 
was up against her toughest opponent, but somehow we were all 
confident that she would win because Sandra always won. She 
always found a way to overcome whatever challenges she 
faced; and we prayed that her strength and that fierce will to 
win would carry the day again. And sadly, it was not to be. 
 
But I hope we can look beyond Sandra’s passing to the fight she 
put in fighting cancer. And I hope we can focus on the bright 
and glorious stories and story that was Sandra Schmirler’s life 
— a life of commitment to her sport and ideals, a life of 
achievement and accomplishment, a life that was too full to be 
wholly recaptured in these few brief moments and few words. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the Premier, of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and indeed all people of 
Saskatchewan, I hope we join together with all colleagues here 
in the House and add to the record my most profound sadness, 
and let me extend my deepest condolences to Sandra’s family, 
especially her husband and two small children. Our prayers are 
with them and I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to rise in the Assembly today and on behalf of the official 
opposition to pay special tribute to Sandra Schmirler. 
 
It was with heavy hearts that we said goodbye to Sandra who 
passed away after her courageous battle with cancer. She will 
always be remembered as not only one of the world’s greatest 
curlers, but also an international ambassador for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to also take this opportunity to send best wishes to 
Sandra’s husband, Shannon, her mom, Shirley, and her two 
daughters, Jenna and Sara. Sandra’s sickness, passing, and 
funeral were so much in the public eye, and I’m sure that it was 
a difficult time for the family but they acted with courage and 
dignity and let the rest of us share our concern and sorrow with 
them. And we thank the family as well. 
 
Sandra was an inspiration to the people around the world, 
particularly to us at home as we watched her lead her team to a 
gold medal at the Nagano Olympics. She was involved in six 
provincial championships and skipped a foursome that captured 
three national titles and three world titles. Although this is a 
very sad time, we should reflect on all of Sandra’s proud 
accomplishments as her legacy will live on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Sandra’s hometown of Biggar, Saskatchewan 
— in the constituency that I have the privilege of representing 
— residents are endeavouring to keep Sandra’s spirit and legacy 
alive. The people of Biggar, in Sandra’s honour, are building 
the Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park, which will be 
officially opened this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Biggar is rallying together to 
show their appreciation for all that Sandra has contributed to 
Saskatchewan. All those involved in this effort are more 
determined than ever to see the park come to completion. 
 
True to Sandra’s form, she was dedicated to this project from 
the beginning. She offered knowledge and insight for its 
development and wanted to help in any way that she could. 
Sandra wanted to make sure that the park would be accessible 
to everyone and that it would fit in with the new school being 
built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this personifies her selfless character as she was 
more concerned about what she could give to her community 
rather than receiving — a lesson that we can all learn from. 
 
Sandra gave her best to her family, her sport of curling, her 
home communities of Biggar and Regina, her province, and her 
country. Whether one knew her well or just saw her on 
television, you could not help but like her. Her winning smile, 
self-deprecating sense of humour, and sense of optimism were 
contagious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition and all of the 
people we serve, and in particular as the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar, I am honoured to join with the Deputy 
Premier and the Leader of the Liberal Party in paying special 
tribute to Sandra Schmirler. We will remember you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, guests and 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

fellow members of this Assembly. As Leader of the Liberal 
Party of Saskatchewan, it is an honour to stand before you 
today to pay tribute to one of Saskatchewan’s brightest stars. 
Earlier this year, Sandra Schmirler was taken away from us 
following a lengthy battle with cancer. 
 
As all of you know, prior to entering politics I was a practising 
medical doctor. In my experience I have witnessed first-hand 
how the ravages of cancer can strike without warning and 
without notice. Sandra’s diagnosis and her struggle exemplified 
the indiscriminating nature of this disease. For cancer to take 
someone as young and as full of life as Sandra is truly a 
tragedy. 
 
Sandra had a never-give-up attitude and a spirit that can be 
recognized in her many accomplishments. She took a love for 
her sport beyond what many of us only dream of. Yes, Sandra 
was an Olympian and a world champion. 
 
Yet the dedication she had for her sport was second only to the 
dedication she had for her family. When we remember Sandra 
let us not only remember her for her achievements on the ice, 
but let us also remember her for who she was. Sandra 
recognized the importance of her family. 
 
It’s true that she realized the value of practice, hard work, and 
determination. But even while she remained focused on her 
pursuit of excellence, she never lost sight of what was truly 
important. We have much to learn from Sandra and she will 
remain a role model for many, many years to come. 
 
When things looked tough, she inspired a sense of optimism 
and hope. She had something that seemed to make miracles 
happen and an attitude that made even the impossible seem 
possible. Her attitude and leadership carried her and her 
teammates through many tough times, and more often than not, 
it pushed them onward to yet another victory. 
 
And, of course, let us not forget that we will also remember 
Sandra for her love to curl and her good sportsmanship. 
 
When Sandra was first diagnosed with cancer, it was a shock to 
all of us. And when she passed away, her family’s loss was felt 
throughout Saskatchewan, across Canada, and throughout the 
international curling community. 
 
To her husband, Shannon, and their two daughters, Sara and 
Jenna, I wish to say on behalf of all of us here today that our 
hearts and prayers are with you. Sandra will always be 
remembered in the minds of all of us and in our hearts she will 
always remain. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask all hon. members to join in rising 
for a moment of silence. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank you, hon. members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of the Assembly: 

That the transcripts of the statements made with respect to 
the memory of Sandra Schmirler be communicated to the 
bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Implications of Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you might 
guess, my question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, for months Saskatchewan people have been 
looking forward to an immediate tax cut in the provincial 
budget. And what happened? At midnight last night you hit 
Saskatchewan taxpayers with a $160 million tax hike. Not a tax 
cut, Mr. Minister. A tax hike. An increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, you just don’t get it. Saskatchewan people are 
demanding tax relief. Not three years from now. Not three 
months from now. But right now. And what did they get? A tax 
hike. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan taxpayers are demanding tax relief. 
How can you possibly justify raising the taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between the 
Leader of the Opposition and this government is that the Leader 
of the Opposition is thinking about the next three months. What 
we’re thinking about on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is 
the future of this province. That’s what we’re thinking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This budget, Mr. Speaker, is about the 
future. It’s not about the next 24 hours, it’s not about buying 
people’s votes with their own money — it’s about the future. 
And when you’re building a province, Mr. Speaker, as we on 
this side of the House are doing, you need a vision, Mr. 
Speaker. You need a vision for the future and you need a plan 
to develop the economy. And that is what is in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, a plan which will save the average Saskatchewan 
family $1,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the opposition leader had any vision he would 
know that on July 1 of this year the flat tax is going to be cut in 
half, and nine months from now we’re going to a new tax 
system, Mr. Speaker. And what we need here is vision, and the 
Leader of the Opposition has no vision, and that’s why he has 
no future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately three years from now many people won’t still be 
in Saskatchewan because they’re not prepared to wait that long. 
I want to quote one of the columnists from today’s StarPhoenix 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

because I think he summed up what every taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan is thinking this morning. I quote: 
 

I was hoping for tax cuts now. I was looking to the 
government for reassurance now that I’m not a fool for 
staying in Saskatchewan. 
 
And all we get now, however, is a sales tax on used cars 
and used sofas. We’re bleeding to death here and the 
government gives us another puncture wound and the 
promise of first aid next year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people are not fools for staying in Saskatchewan 
— Saskatchewan is a great province. But this government is 
wrecking it. 
 
Mr. Minister, where is the tax relief you promised? Why didn’t 
you cut our taxes now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, instead of listening to the 
gospel of gloom and doom from the Leader of the Opposition, 
let’s listen to what the people of the province are saying. 
 
We have Stan Schmidt, the president of the chamber of 
commerce saying, this budget puts us in a much more 
competitive position. 
 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business: These changes 
are going to be significant. 
 
Executive director of the North Saskatoon Business 
Association. “There is no question it will benefit all people in 
this province. ” 
 
Mr. Speaker, while he is spreading his gospel of gloom and 
doom, we’re offering a bright future for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you something. The Leader of the Opposition is 
unhappy. And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. He hates this tax 
cut. He hates this tax cut because he’s been asking for tax 
reform for years. Now he’s got it and he’s afraid he’s not going 
to have anything to complain about any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But we’re not going to be guided by the 
doom and gloom of the Leader of the Opposition. We’re 
looking to the future, and our future is bright in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I sure live 
in Saskatchewan and I’m not getting a tax cut. And neither are 
the people of Saskatchewan. That’s why they’re upset. 
 
You can try and spin this however you want. The bottom line is 
taxpayers are getting taken to the cleaners — which, by the 
way, is now taxable. Tax hikes now, tax cuts later. The problem 
is nobody believes you, Mr. Minister, because they know how 

you operate. They know you will find a way to claw back every 
dime of whatever tax cut they can get in the future. 
 
Higher utility bills, higher property taxes, more PST (provincial 
sales tax). One way or other, you will reach into their pockets 
and take back every dime of this so-called tax cut. They’ve seen 
you do it before; they know you’ll do it again. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s really simple. Why don’t you just cut taxes 
instead of raising them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
talks about picking people’s pockets. I’ll tell you one thing 
we’re not going to do. We’re not going to pick the pockets of 
our children like they would do if they were in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because when we’re talking about slashing 
taxes by hundreds of millions of dollars irresponsibly, freezing 
health care and education, and going back into deficit and debt 
like they would, Mr. Speaker, then you’re picking the pockets 
of the next generation. But we’re not going to do that. 
 
We’re going to build a bright future for the next generation, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m not concerned about the doom and gloom 
from the Leader of the Opposition over what’s happening in the 
next three months. I’m looking to the new tax system that is 
representing the largest tax cut in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t 
seem know it but our kids are leaving Saskatchewan because of 
his high taxes. The NDP (New Democratic Party) keeps telling 
us you just have to wait. Tax hikes now; tax cuts later. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan people are sick and tired of 
waiting. They’re tired of waiting for a tax cut, they’re tired of 
waiting for the health system to work, they’re tired of waiting 
for highways that are safe to drive on, they’re sick of waiting 
for you to create a long-term farm safety net program. They’re 
just sick of waiting, Mr. Minister. 
 
And now guess what they are waiting for? They’re waiting for 
the next election so they can finish the job, finish the job they 
started on September 16 and get rid of the rest of you people . . . 
all your Liberal flunkies. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do we have to wait? Why don’t you just cut 
taxes now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as I said to the Leader of the 
Opposition — although he may have trouble hearing me 
because the members opposite are yelling quite loudly — but as 
I said to him, on July 1 of this year, three months from now, the 
Saskatchewan flat tax is being cut in half. And on January 1 — 
nine months from now — we’re going to a new taxation 
system, Mr. Speaker, that is going eliminate the flat tax, the 
high income surtax, and the debt reduction surtax. 
 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

And it’s going to be the largest tax reduction in the history of 
the province. Something that commerce professor Glenn 
Feltham at the University of Saskatchewan calls enormously 
important, Mr. Speaker. To the people of Saskatchewan, a 
bright future is enormously important. 
 
To the Leader of the Opposition, short-term political nitpicking 
is important, but that’s not what’s important to the people of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Implications for Municipalities and School Boards 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my question too is to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the biggest winner in 
yesterday’s budget may have been the company that makes 
Alka-Seltzer because, judging from the initial response, your 
budget left most of the people in Saskatchewan feeling sick to 
their stomach. 
 
After all, just 10 hours ago you promised big tax cuts. You 
increased the provincial sales tax by $160 million. I guess that’s 
the NDP’s idea of tax relief — just like Alka-Seltzer. More 
money for the NDP means less money in the pockets of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Unfortunately the tax increases won’t be stopped with your 
budget, Mr. Minister. The mayor of Saskatoon is saying this 
morning that property taxes will be going up to pay for the NDP 
government’s massive increase in the PST. 
 
Is that the NDP’s master plan, Mr. Minister? Raise the PST by 
$160 million, then sit back while municipalities are forced to 
raise property taxes to pay for it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, listening to these 
questions, I think I’m going to need some Alka-Seltzer myself. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, if they would look at 
the budget and what it says, instead of listening to the doom and 
gloom of his leader, Mr. Speaker; he would know that in the 
budget there is $5 million more for municipal infrastructure. 
And the city of Saskatoon is going to receive more money 
under the grants in lieu of property tax, Mr. Speaker. Funding to 
the city of Saskatoon under this budget is going up, Mr. 
Speaker, not down. And I would invite the members opposite to 
actually read the budget and have a look at what it says. 
 
But I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that what we’re really 
seeing here is a group of people that are very unhappy that 
we’re repairing and fixing the income tax system. They’ve been 
calling for it for years, Mr. Speaker. They want to keep 
complaining about it. They’re going to manufacture something. 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know 
that we’re going to do the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, another question for the 
Finance minister. See if he can get this one right. 

It gets worse, Mr. Minister. First you jack up the PST by $160 
million. Then you force municipalities to increase property 
taxes to finance your dog-and-pony show. And thanks to the 
leadership of the Leader of the Liberal Party, that is what is left 
of the Liberal Party, school divisions are on the ropes as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, the school boards are saying your budget forgets 
children. They say that the budget will force many boards to cut 
programs, to cut staff, and to close schools. And just like the 
municipal counterparts, school boards are being forced to 
increase education tax to keep roofs patched and the lights on. 
 
Isn’t that what really happened yesterday, Mr. Minister? A 
massive $160 million sales tax grab by the NDP government 
that will force school divisions and municipalities to increase 
property tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, some of these questions are 
strange coming from the members opposite when you consider 
that at least two of them, the member from Kindersley and the 
member from Moosomin, campaigned in 1991 to harmonize the 
PST with the GST. 
 
Talk about . . . talk about people that want to raise taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like to hear the 
response from the minister. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — When we came in, Mr. Speaker, we had to 
fix that. Because they had passed a Bill under the former 
government, which the member from Moosomin was part of, to 
harmonize the GST (goods and services tax) and the PST. 
 
But I want to say in answer to the question, that funding to 
school boards for the third year in a row is going up at least 5 
per cent, which is twice or three times the rate of inflation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re making substantial new investments in education. 
Because unlike the members opposite who in the last election 
campaigned to freeze education funding to the rate of inflation. 
So in the election they want the schools frozen, but now they 
say that they would do something else. This is not credible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, another question for our dazed 
and confused Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, after listening to the things coming out of your 
mouth today, most people in Saskatchewan must be wondering 
whether you slept through yesterday’s provincial budget 
disaster. Do you know that there is more trouble, that you keep 
pitching this bogus story about the NDP is cutting taxes in this 
budget, or that you actually believe in your own tall tale. 
 
Mr. Minister, school divisions and municipal councils are 
saying your budget stinks. They are saying property taxes are 
going up because NDP government jacked up the PST by $160 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

million. 
 
What are you going to tell the mayor of Saskatoon and the 
president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association? 
How do you explain that your government is sitting on a $170 
million slush fund while you force municipalities and school 
divisions to increase property taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to very 
proudly tell the president of the school trustees association that 
funding for education is going up at least 5 per cent as a result 
of this budget, which is three times as much as that party over 
there advocated in the provincial election. 
 
And I’m going to tell the mayor of Saskatoon the truth. That 
there’s $5 million more for municipal infrastructure and there’s 
more money for Saskatoon under the grants in lieu of taxes 
program, Mr. Speaker. So there’s things for education and 
municipal government in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is look to the future, look 
to a plan to create jobs and a better economy in Saskatchewan. 
That’s what this budget does. It’s a budget of optimism and 
hope, contrasted with the doom and gloom that we’re hearing 
from the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try another 
question to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday Saskatchewan taxpayers saw the real 
dollars contained in the old liquor and gaming fund, all 700 
million of them. Mr. Minister, when the Saskatchewan Party 
proposed using $300 million from the liquor and gaming fund 
to help cash strapped farm families, you said it would bankrupt 
the province. You said that money was for rainy days. You said 
you’d have to raise taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday you did raise taxes for the people of 
Saskatchewan and you still have $700 million in the old liquor 
and gaming fund. Now, Mr. Minister, you are moving some of 
that money into another fund, the fancy slush fund that we 
might call the fudge-the-books slush fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you explain to Saskatchewan people that 
you can’t afford to lower taxes when you sit on a $700 million 
slush fund of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with the greatest of respect to 
the Leader of the Opposition, I don’t think that members on this 
side of the House have to take any lectures from the Leader of 
the Opposition about fudging the books. I realize that the 
members opposite are very knowledgeable about that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I really don’t think they’re the paragons of virtue 
when it comes to talking about financial accountability. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, this is the same old 
voodoo economics we’ve heard from these members before, 

which is spend every cent of money that comes in and more, 
and go into deficit and go into debt. 
 
And we’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to set 
aside a reserve to protect the people of Saskatchewan from 
deficits, from debt, from higher taxes, and from cuts to services. 
That is the sensible, responsible thing to do. That is our record, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is what we plan to continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well our Finance minister has so much in 
reserve, if you put it in wheelbarrows they couldn’t all haul it 
out of here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister is 
fooling himself if he thinks the people of Saskatchewan haven’t 
caught on to his game. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning Saskatchewan taxpayers woke up to 
$160 million increase. They are paying more at this very 
minute. Mr. Minister, you can boast about cutting personal 
income taxes by about $40 million, but that is absolutely 
irrelevant compared to the $700 million slush fund you have 
right in your own pockets. 
 
You can say you’re increasing health spending, but health 
professionals are already trying to figure out how they’re going 
to get by. Today school boards and teachers are realizing crunch 
time has come. 
 
Mr. Minister, when your $700 million slush fund could be used 
to immediately help ease the pressures on education and health 
sectors, how can you look these people in the eye and tell them 
that’s all you can do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between the 
members opposite and members on this side of the House is that 
the members opposite want to mortgage our future. The 
members on this side of the House want to invest in the future, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I put this challenge to the Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, we have set out a plan for the 
largest income tax cuts in the history of the province. And I say 
to that member, is he in favour of that plan, is he in favour of 
those income tax cuts or is he not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, that Finance minister would 
be proud if he could sit on a billion or two billion dollars and 
have no one left in Saskatchewan. That seems to be his goal. 
 
We’re looking for a break in this budget. They aren’t sitting on 
a personal slush fund to help get them through and they weren’t 
expecting the government to reveal a big pot of money saved 
for a rainy day. 
 
Saskatchewan people have been hearing over and over from the 
NDP government that they will have to make due with less. 
They have tightened their belts, they have paid their dues, and 
now when governments all across the country have been 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

reducing taxes — just lowering them, not raising them — 
Saskatchewan people were hoping to get something back too. 
 
Instead, Mr. Minister, you opened their wallets and took money 
from them while winking and saying, trust me, the rest will 
come later. Then you flaunt $700 million slush fushion, slush 
fush — oh, that’s tough — slush fund in their face. Mr. 
Minister, I’m getting worked up, this is serious stuff. 
 
How can you withhold taxpayers money in this slush fund when 
so much could be done to improve the economic climate in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is the 
opposition must have very little to complain about if all they 
can do is ask the same questions over and over again. The same 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I’ll say this to the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker — we have a plan for the future. We have a plan to 
reform the tax system. We have a plan that is simple, is fair, and 
is competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason we’re hearing so much protest from the other 
side is that the members opposite know that the people of 
Saskatchewan know that this is the right plan for the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it’s making the Leader of the 
Opposition very uncomfortable. But I’ll just make this other 
observation. Now we have the Leader of the Opposition 
complaining because we’re operating at a surplus. Can you 
imagine what he’d be saying if we were operating at a deficit, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Tax Reduction 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also for 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, all rhetoric aside, you 
know that yesterday people were expecting some immediate tax 
relief. You know it and we know it; they said as much on 
September 16 and they’ve sent that same message consistently 
since then. 
 
But you blew it, Mr. Minister. You blew it by raising taxes at 
midnight last night. But the good news, Mr. Minister, is that it’s 
not too late. The federal Minister of Finance, in fact, has given 
you a second chance. In today’s National Post, Paul Martin 
says he will cut the gas tax at the pump if the provinces are 
willing to do the same. 
 
Mr. Minister, soaring gas prices are hurting everyone in the 
province. Here is your chance to cut taxes now, to provide some 
immediate tax relief now. Will you take Paul Martin’s offer? 
Will you cut gas taxes in Saskatchewan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the member 
opposite, who seems a bit confused, that on July 1, we will be 
cutting the Saskatchewan flat tax in half. And nine months from 
now we will going to a new tax system which will abolish the 
flat tax, the high income surtax, and the debt-reduction surtax, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to have the biggest tax reduction 
in Saskatchewan history. 
 
But I’ll tell you what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker. We 
are not going to return to the voodoo economics of the 1980s 
which says that we’re going to slash taxes, spend more than we 
have, go into deficits, and go into debt. We’re not going to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what the members opposite would 
do if they were given the chance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not difficult to 
understand why the minister’s really avoiding answering the 
question, because here we’re proposing an idea from this side of 
the House as we have done as well since before and since the 
election to provide some meaningful tax relief to Saskatchewan 
people right now. And he doesn’t want to answer the question, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, analysts are saying that gas prices will remain 
high at least through the summer, but they may start to come 
down in the fall. Here’s your chance to make up for the mistake 
that you made yesterday. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party is proposing that the province of 
Saskatchewan immediately cut fuel taxes by 5 cents a litre 
which would then be matched by Ottawa, based on what the 
minister said this morning, providing motorists with a 10 cent a 
litre break at the gas pump. 
 
We are proposing that this measure remain in effect for six 
months and then it would be reviewed based on the gas price at 
that pump at that time. Later today the Leader of the Opposition 
will move this proposal as an amendment to your budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support this proposal? Will you give 
Saskatchewan taxpayers a tax break right now? Will you cut the 
gas tax by 5 cents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that the member opposite should be familiar with the 
Grant Devine administration we had in the 1980s, because I 
think he worked in that administration, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to say this, Mr. Speaker, that this is the same kind of thinking 
that we had in the 1980s when the then premier abolished the 
road tax for short-term political gain; went into deficits, went 
into debt, racked up $140 million a year debt because of that 
kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we are going to do on this side of the House is to invest in 
our highways and transportation system, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to make the largest investment ever in highways and 
roads, and we’re not going to return to the voodoo economics of 
the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the minister 
doubts that Saskatchewan people want some immediate tax 
relief, and if he does, I’d invite him to my constituency; I’d 
gladly tour him around. The tax burden that Saskatchewan 
people face is an emergent problem, it’s an immediate problem, 
and something needs to be done. 
 
We are proposing today a step that could be taken to lighten the 
tax burden that Saskatchewan people face. The Minister of 
Finance in Ottawa has proposed an option, an alternative for the 
government to consider which we would like to also present to 
this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you support the proposal? Will you cut gas tax in 
Saskatchewan by 5 cents initiating a possible 10 per cent cut per 
litre at the pumps? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think we should take note of 
the fact that this is the 1982 election campaign all over again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is an attempt to buy short-term political 
goodwill with the people’s money, Mr. Speaker, but it is an 
attempt that amounts to mortgaging the future of our children, 
Mr. Speaker. It is the voodoo economics of Grant Devine, an 
administration that the member worked in and he’s familiar 
with that administration. 
 
We need, Mr. Speaker, political courage and vision and a 
long-term plan, not this kind of short-term thinking that will 
lead us into deficit and debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have some 
documents to table before the House. The first is a letter of 
resignation from Mr. Strelioff, the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I also have the document submitted by the caucuses, the 
financial . . . audited financial statements, and also the Special 
Report by the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan regarding Changes to The Provincial Auditor 
Act. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I move, seconded by the member Cannington: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding rule 
3(4) of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan that when the Assembly 
adjourns on Thursday, April 20, 2000, it stands adjourned 
until Wednesday, April 26, at 1:30 p.m. 
 

I move this, Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that that is the 
Easter weekend so that families can prepare for a longer 
weekend than might otherwise be available to them. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
responding to the budget yesterday, somewhat in a state of 
shock, not believing what I was hearing from the Minister of 
Finance — that he was actually going to increase taxes rather 
than cut taxes — I thought have I got something wrong here? 
Did I miss something? 
 
But then I checked the papers and I checked with colleagues 
and people throughout Saskatchewan, and guess what? The 
entire province is sharing that same shock, that same dismay. 
 
We heard reports from the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association. They feel that this budget is an attack on children. 
 
We heard condemnation from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) who see the expansion of the PST 
as a tax on municipalities. 
 
We heard from the Canadian Taxpayers Federation who were 
astounded that this government would raise taxes when other 
governments were lowering taxes. 
 
We heard from the roadbuilders’ association who are astounded 
that this government does not recognize the deterioration of our 
roads and highways in Saskatchewan and are putting so little 
from this budget into highways. 
 
We heard from SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), from health care unions — all these people 
were disappointed with the Finance minister’s budget. 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

The first thing that everybody noticed — and there is no way 
they could hide this, Mr. Speaker — the first thing everyone 
noticed is that taxes went up at midnight last night. The taxes 
were up. What a dastardly deed by our Minister of Finance to 
read a budget and promise tax cuts and then immediately raise 
our taxes — immediately raise our taxes. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party was founded on a principle of lower 
taxes for Saskatchewan and that remains our principle today, 
Mr. Speaker. And when we form the next Government of 
Saskatchewan, we will not play a shell game like this Minister 
of Finance. When we promise tax relief, we will deliver tax 
relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we would not 
deprive the taxpayers of the benefits they deserve if we were 
sitting on a $700 million slush fund. 
 
I agree, Mr. Speaker, that the province does need to keep a 
contingency fund. It’s quite normal to keep 100 million, 150 
million, 175 — maybe with inflation someday it might have to 
be $200 million. But this Minister of Finance admits that he’s 
sitting on $700 million of cash that he will not give back to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a family earning a very modest $25,000 a year 
will see an enormous tax break — an enormous tax break of 
$10 a month. I’m sure that’s got them rejoicing in the streets of 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once the hikes in utility rates are factored in, that 
family has $2 more a month at their disposable. The massive 
increase in PST that the government will take will kick in 
immediately, but taxpayers will have to wait, cross their fingers, 
and hope that tax relief comes someday. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the expansion, part of the expansion 
of the PST is on used goods. Now I can imagine . . . they put a 
deductible in there — a $300 deductible. Isn’t that great. I can 
just see the auctioneer now — how much do I have bid on this 
stove? How much do I have bid — 200, 250, 275, 299, 299.50, 
299.75, 299.99 — sold. Now we’ll sell the oven racks, Mr. 
Speaker. Who’ll give me $100 for the oven racks? What a mess 
this Minister of Finance has created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re expanding the PST to real estate fees — 
real estate fees, engineering fees, architecture fees. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re taxing the future. They’re taxing those who want to 
build Saskatchewan. What a mess the NDP are making. 
 
Now we do approve of the cuts in income tax. I don’t know if 
the Minister of Finance didn’t understand that. He didn’t seem 
to understand it. But we’ve been calling for significant 
reductions in income tax for quite some time. 
 
However, there is a little question. This government should 
have taken action to make sure that tax cuts actually got to 
families in this province, and that’s not happening in his budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could talk for an hour about the PST but 
I’m going to move on to some other areas. 

This year’s estimate of provincial health funding represents an 
increase of $16 million over what was spent in the fiscal year 
just ending. Far less than the rate of inflation which is what we 
had committed to. We said we would at least keep up with 
inflation. This government’s not keeping up with inflation so 
they’re actually cutting funding for health care. They said to us: 
zap you’re frozen, because we wanted to keep up with inflation. 
Well, zap they’re frozen and they’re chipping off chunks off the 
block, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister says we can’t throw money at the . . . the minister 
says we can’t continue to throw money at the problems in 
health care. But we agree. We’ve been saying that for months 
— for years — which is surprising that the minister did not 
announce the audit of our health care system. 
 
The federal minister is now talking about doing an audit of 
health care. This minister is talking about reducing health care 
services. This minister is talking about a health transition fund 
— most of which by the way, most of which by the way comes 
from the federal government. The people of Saskatchewan are 
quite worried about this transition fund. They’ve been dubbing 
it the close the hospitals fund, health reform being the code 
word for closing hospitals. 
 
You know, I remember not very long ago there was a sign here 
on the Ring Road on the south side of Regina. Do you 
remember that sign? It said Plains hospital closed. Remember 
that sign? It wasn’t there too long. I expect that that’s what the 
$150 million is going to be used for. They’re going to buy a 
bunch of more closed hospital signs and put them up along our 
highways. 
 
Now perhaps the Leader of the Liberal Party will chain himself 
to a few of those closed hospital signs. Let’s see if he keeps his 
promise this time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ah, it’s just political rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Just political rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see in this budget no guarantee to stop hospital 
closures. We see no plan for shortened waiting lists. All we hear 
from the Minister of Health is more talk about private health 
care. There’s no vision for health care. 
 
This government has already passed legislation that Ralph 
Klein is considering passing in Alberta, and the country is upset 
about it. We’ve already passed the legislation here in this 
province. 
 
Let’s move on. If there’s no vision in health care, let’s move on 
to education. Other than taxpayers being slammed in this 
budget, perhaps the most critical failure in the budget was its 
support for education. While the government tried to use some 
accounting tricks to make the increase to education look larger 
than it was at the end of the day, it’s a fifth — $18.5 million 
increase. 
 
Now it’s quite interesting to hear the Minister of Education. 
I’ve heard him on the radio; I’ve heard him on the news. He’s 
saying it’s . . . I don’t know, was it 35 million the number he’s 
using? And he says, the school boards can’t count. He says 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

they’re so used to bad news that they don’t know good news 
when they see it. 
 
He’s insulting the school boards of Saskatchewan. They can’t 
count. The doctor is telling the school boards of Saskatchewan, 
the people in charge of education, that they can’t count. What 
an insult, Mr. Speaker. What an insult to the leaders who 
provide education for the people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised. We 
shouldn’t be surprised. That was the minister who said, before 
the election, before the election, if I were the Premier, I’d cut 
out the entire Executive Council Communication Department. 
Do you remember him saying that? 
 
He said no more . . . (inaudible) . . . Well I looked at the budget 
numbers and they’re still there and his share of them are still 
there as well. Mr. Speaker, who is it that can’t count? Who is it 
that can’t count? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I noticed something else in the budget and 
this was really in a . . . you know what they go from a nice 
number to zero. The Leader of the Liberal Party’s office went to 
zero. The Liberal leader’s office went to zero. That shows you 
the direction the Liberal Party is going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader has been a deserter of his own 
party and it’s reflected in the budget. He had absolutely 
nothing. How fitting. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the education portfolio 
was so neglected this year since the Minister of Education is 
supposedly, supposedly a full partner in this coalition 
agreement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the SSTA is so angry that they say the 
government has forgotten children in this budget. The 
government — that means this minister — has forgotten 
children in this budget. Once again the government is passing 
along the cost of education onto the backs of school boards and 
onto the backs of property taxpayers. 
 
So while we certainly approve, Mr. Speaker, of a rebate to 
revenues for property tax and agriculture land, even though it is 
not a long-term solution, it will not do a thing, Mr. Speaker, if 
mill rates continue going up. For all other property taxpayers 
it’s even worse. This is one more example of the NDP putting 
into one pocket and taking from the other. The downloading 
continues. 
 
So much for the NDP’s promise to ensure our children have the 
best education. If education is to improve or even stay at the 
same level in Saskatchewan, it appears it’s going to have to be 
local taxpayers, property taxpayers, who foot the bill. 
 
This government has shown no vision in the budget. Capital 
funding for schools remains frozen. It’s those fellows over 
there, those fellows and gals who are doing the freezing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, municipalities. And we raised this issue in 
question period today. The PST has far-reaching effects. Today 
the city of Saskatoon has said that the PST increase will almost 

certainly mean a hike in the mill rate in that city. I’m sure that 
they will thank their NDP MLAs in the city of Saskatoon for 
that tax hike in addition to the PST tax hike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government makes it even more insulting for 
local governments when the province . . . when this provincial 
government stands in its place and points to the municipalities 
as a source of great waste in this government. Mr. Speaker, that 
response is truly, truly disgusting. 
 
We see very little of municipal infrastructure money coming in 
this budget. The province-directed funding, that little program 
where they give $5 million here and $5 million there, that looks 
an awful lot like the HRDC (Human Resources Development 
Canada) scandal in Ottawa. Perhaps it was some of the Liberal 
influence in the budget that got that idea. 
 
Now another question, Mr. Speaker. We looked in that budget, 
we looked hard and wide to find our where the funding was 
coming from for 200 more police officers. The election promise 
prior to the election was that there would be funding for 200 
more police officers in Saskatchewan to help municipalities and 
to ensure the enforcement of law in this province. 
 
But we’ve looked and we’ve looked, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
know, has anybody found that funding for the 200 police 
officers? I can’t find it. Just disappeared into thin air like so 
many other NDP promises. 
 
And then we look at the . . . we see what they’ve done as far as 
agriculture is concerned. And we applaud the fact that they’re 
lowering property taxes. We applaud the fact that they are 
removing the cap on the farm fuel rebate. But of course the 
problem is that there is no long-term safety net proposals in this 
budget. There is no reason to believe that they have a vision for 
agriculture. All they’re looking at is the immediate and not 
looking forward into the future. 
 
The error that the government made when they cancelled GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) and didn’t replace it, haunts 
them day after day, year after year. And there was nothing in 
this budget that indicated that the nightmare will come to an 
end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could talk about highways. They finally reached 
the $250 million level that they had promised several years ago. 
The problem is that the . . . (inaudible) . . . are worse now than 
they were when they made that promise. And in fact they are 
$200 million behind schedule and the hope of better highways 
in Saskatchewan certainly fades with this budget. 
 
I was driving on the highways just the other day, Mr. Speaker, 
and the potholes they filled just prior to the last election have 
reappeared. They’re there as deep and as plentiful as they 
always were. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want my colleagues to have opportunity to 
respond to this budget so I will not speak too much longer. But 
I will close in saying that people need to see help now, not four 
years from now, especially after learning about the $700 million 
slush fund that the government is sitting on. We are the little . . . 
With the little the people got this time around, I can hear the 
engines starting, Mr. Speaker. 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, can you hear the engines starting? 
The convoy beginning to form up? Where are they heading, Mr. 
Speaker? And how old are they, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, 
they’re Alberta bound and they’re young people. They’re 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to a province where, 
when they promise a tax cut, they deliver a tax cut, and they 
don’t raise taxes with the other hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from the riding of Swift Current 
mentioned in question period, we are willing to give this 
government a second chance . . . (inaudible) . . . the new 
government. They’ve only been around for a few months. They 
have this problem of a coalition. Maybe they’re having trouble 
working together. Maybe they’re having trouble getting their 
act together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we’re pretty generous over on this side of the House. 
We’re pretty considerate. We’ve decided to give them a second 
chance. You know, they’re losing the spin war on this budget. 
And I’ve heard them on the radio. They’re trying to spin this 
really positive. Of course they fired all their spin doctors after 
they lost the election and they got some new spin doctors, and 
these people are having just as much trouble as the former spin 
doctors were having. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, drawing from the member from Swift 
Current’s suggestion in question period, for relief for 
Saskatchewan drivers on the price of fuel until the price comes 
down, I’m going to make an amendment to the budget speech 
. . . to the budget motion, Mr. Speaker. This will give the 
government the opportunity to actually provide immediate tax 
relief. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be substituted: 
 
urges the provincial government to immediately reduce the 
provincial fuel tax by 5 cents a litre to be reviewed after six 
months in light of the federal Finance minister’s offer to 
match any provincial fuel tax reductions with a federal fuel 
tax reduction. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to rise and second the motion proposed by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Once again in this province the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, is providing leadership and direction for 
an aimless NDP and now NDP-Liberal coalition. 
 

Mr. Speaker, through the last two years, repeatedly, time after 
time after time, we have offered suggestions that were not only 
practical but doable to improve the situation for our citizens in 
this province. Through the campaign and through the election, 
we clearly identified some significant priorities that this 
province needed to face up to — tax relief being the first and 
most predominant responsibility that had to happen. 
 
And the members opposite can argue that this is some 
philosophical direction that we were taking. It really wasn’t. It 
was pragmatic. It was a recognition of the fact that if we’re 
going to move our province forward for our children and 
grandchildren, we simply have to become more competitive. 
 
It simply was not good enough to be the highest taxed province 
in this country. It simply was no longer good enough to have 
the longest waiting times. It simply wasn’t good enough to have 
the worst roads. It simply wasn’t good enough to have all of our 
students leaving this province to find careers and opportunities. 
It simply wasn’t good enough to have our farmers left on the 
winds of international trade wars. 
 
It simply wasn’t good enough any longer for the province to sit 
there with a do-nothing NDP government and let this province 
drift aimlessly. Mr. Speaker, this simply wasn’t good enough, 
and more people voted for our dream than for any other dream 
in this province in the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province clearly understand that we’ve been drifting further 
behind every day that this government is in office and they were 
crying out desperately for a change. 
 
And unfortunately, unfortunately the third party didn’t 
understand that. And what they did is, rather than accept the 
challenges of making this province move forward, they decided 
to opt in with the status quo and sell out in a shotgun marriage 
that is going to be the death of this province if we don’t change 
the direction. It certainly is euthanasia for the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan, and that has accomplished at least that little bit 
of progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need to accept are the realities that are 
facing us. And I am pleased to say that this NDP-Liberal 
coalition at least accepted to some measure the philosophical or 
the pragmatic admission that the level of taxation that they were 
imposing on this province was no longer acceptable. And at 
least somewhere in the future, if you can believe these people, 
the kind of people that said all campaign promises are just 
rhetoric, and political rhetoric, if you can believe that kind of 
government if you like, then at least we’ll give them the benefit 
of the doubt that the long-term personal income tax relief that is 
proposed in this budget is needed. 
 
But it is needed now, Mr. Speaker, not in three years; it’s 
needed now. It’s needed desperately now because our people 
need a signal that they have to have a reason for staying in this 
province. And quite frankly, the signal they got yesterday is that 
their pockets are being picked again by this NDP government 
before they’re going to ever get around to doing tax relief. 
 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, when I phoned into my community yesterday it 
was very interesting that the amount of cynicism there is as a 
result of this government’s mismanagement. People understood 
very quickly that taxes were going up and they quite frankly are 
very cynical and very suspicious about any promised tax relief 
into the future. 
 
And in the meantime, in the meantime, the same old concerns 
go on. The farm community is worried about their cash flows 
going into the spring seeding season. The people that are on 
fixed incomes are wondering how they’re going to pay this 
extra tax. The teaching and educational community is 
wondering what’s going to happen by the meagre amount of 
increase that has been applied to education; how in the world is 
it going to be possible for school boards to balance their 
budgets and not increase the mill rate. 
 
We met, I met with the school divisions in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’ve told me that their budgets are tighter 
than they have ever been in the last decade. And you know 
what’s happening? The government now promises them about 
half of what their cost increases are going to be. 
 
So what’s that likely to mean? For the school boards who have 
already cut to the bone on pupil-teacher ratios, have cut to the 
bone and deferred capital improvements to their facilities, who 
have cut to the bone and eliminated any discretionary spending 
that they’ve had, they either are going to now cut essential 
programs or be forced to raise property tax. 
 
So what have you done in this budget? You have forced a 
situation where again in education things are going to get 
worse. And any relief that there was going to be for the farm 
community who are protesting by their meetings, of a tax 
revolt, the high level of education tax on farm property, are 
going to be left with any benefit that was promised to them in 
this budget being eroded by the decisions school boards are 
going to have to make. 
 
So where are we at? We are at ground zero, if you like — 
nothing has improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area in my constituency and in many 
others that people are concerned about is the economic future. 
Everybody in my community and in the communities around 
are concerned about the business climate. They’re concerned 
about the fact that businesses are struggling. 
 
If anyone thinks in this province that the business community in 
this province is somehow removed from what happens in 
agriculture, they’re not. And anyone that has a small business or 
even a medium business understands that as soon as the farm 
community is short of cash, that immediately translates into a 
downturn in business spending in our communities. 
 
And everywhere I go people are saying this first quarter of the 
year has been the most difficult that they’ve had in some time; 
that consumer confidence isn’t there. The people were waiting 
for meaningful tax relief as a signal that this province was 
finally accepting the realities of competition and the realities of 
the marketplace. And quite frankly, it just didn’t happen 
yesterday, and so we’re certainly very disappointed. 
 

Over the last days and weeks as well, increasingly, people have 
expressed their concern about what’s happening to fuel prices. 
Every day you go on the roads and pass filling stations in this 
province and across the country, you see the price of fuel going 
up — you see it going up dramatically. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, where indeed it is a step in the right 
direction to remove the cap on farm fuel, for many people that I 
heard this morning are saying that our operation generally 
operates on diesel fuel where the tax is not applied anyway. 
And that at the 900 cap that was there, that was about all we 
were using. So removing the cap, while it sounds very good, is 
not going to result in very much saving for most farm people in 
this province. 
 
But you know what is happening, is the price of fuel is going up 
across the piece for everyone. And now there needs to be an 
opportunity for the rest of the province to be able to have a 
methodology of having some meaningful tax relief right now, at 
a time that they need the cash in their pockets. 
 
This government is very proud of the fact that they’re sitting on 
a great big fat $700 million slush fund. And they take great 
pride in saying, oh that’s wonderful; isn’t this good economics? 
Well I’m sorry, members opposite, good economics means 
there’s a people in this province . . . the citizens in this province 
need to keep the money and make their own decisions about 
how they’re spending it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The people of this province will make better 
decisions about how to spend the money that their own sweat 
and toil earns than the government opposite, coalition or not, 
will make. A hundred times out of a hundred, people will make 
better decisions on what to do with their own money. 
 
So, members opposite, we’ve given you a wonderful 
opportunity to get something right out of this budget. We’re 
giving you the opportunity to have a six-month time to take the 
federal Minister of Finance up on an offer that he’s made, and 
reduce the provincial tax on fuel by 5 cents a litre and hold the 
federal minister answerable for his offer of matching that 
amount. Ten cents a litre would be a significant saving for 
Saskatchewan families over the next six-month period of time. 
 
And hopefully at the end of that, when that promise is reviewed, 
that the results of the OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) countries’ decisions to increase the 
amount of barrels of oil that they’re going to pump out of their 
reserves will then have an effect that will reduce the natural 
price of oil, and that measure could then be terminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, again, the Saskatchewan Party has come up 
with a practical, pragmatic, doable solution for this government 
who will throw up their hands and instead of doing something 
practical, will simply sit on the big, fat slush fund and let 
Saskatchewan people out there to struggle for themselves with 
gas prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more things in the general context 
that I could engage in in terms of the budget debate, but I would 
feel it would be negligent on my part not to touch on the area 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

that I’m responsible for as a critic — the general area of health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is in a very difficult situation in 
Saskatchewan. It is also having difficulties right across this 
country as provinces are struggling in different ways to cope 
with the fact that the federal Chrétien government has 
dramatically decreased the federal contribution to health care. 
 
Mr. Klein, the Premier of Alberta, was quoted some weeks ago, 
something to the effect that said, if you’re contributing so little 
to the parade, you’re not going to be able to dictate the 
destination of where it’s heading. And I think that’s true. 
 
And I know that the minister is engaged in negotiations with the 
federal government as we speak, and with her colleagues across 
the country, asking Mr. Rock and the federal Liberal 
government to restore the kind of funding that is appropriate if a 
federal government is going to have a meaningful role in health 
care policy delivery. And we from this side of the House wish 
all of the provincial ministers well in those efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that though, there is a challenge that 
has been laid down by the federal Health minister. And that is 
there may be, there may be funds available if the provinces will 
come up with a plan. 
 
He has said that he is no longer willing to just throw money 
blindly into the same situation. And he believes, I believe quite 
correctly, that the system needs to be analyzed much more 
honestly and that fundamental change has to happen if we’re 
going to continue to sustain the universal health care system 
that this country is rightly proud of. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I again go back to the fundamental tenets 
of what we said needed to be done. You know in 1992, the 
government, ’92-93, launched the so-called wellness model. 
And it was launched on some pretty decent rhetoric. 
 
And I’m quoting from a new document that was prepared by 
SAHO for the provincial ministers of Health. And they said that 
there were five goals that were part of that whole direction that 
was taken. 
 
And the goals are these. The first goal is that public policy 
should promote good health. Pretty difficult to object to the 
philosophical statement that was made. 
 
Secondly, that health promotion and disease prevention should 
be one of the fundamental goals. Pretty hard to argue with that. 
 
A goal should be that services are community based. A goal 
was that there should be better integration and coordination of 
health services. And a further goal is that we should have better 
use of health resources. 
 
(1500) 
 
Five goals that I think are very, very admirable and very 
reasonable. 
 
But what has happened, you know? Where are the public 
policies that promote good health. Where are they? Individual 

health districts are struggling to come up with ideas that will 
meet that challenge. And some are succeeding in decent 
measure. But by and large, there’s no vision as to how that goal 
may be met. 
 
Health promotion and disease prevention — again another 
admirable goal. But what is happening in a practical sense out 
in the health districts and in our communities? 
 
The goal of community-based services. Well that goal has 
really gone off the rails, because what’s happened since this 
wellness model was introduced? We’ve seen hospitals close. 
We’ve seen transitions or conversions. And I’m really worried 
when they come up with a new transition fund. Does that mean 
we have a transition from an acute care hospital to some 
wellness tent and first-aid station? We’re really concerned about 
what that might mean. 
 
But where are the community-based services any longer in rural 
Saskatchewan? Where are those community-based services? 
This goal has been completely abandoned, and not only in rural 
Saskatchewan. What happened to the Plains hospital, the 
hospital that the Leader of the Liberal Party was going to chain 
himself to the doors to prevent closing. Now he says nothing. I 
mean if he ever did have the courage to chain himself to the 
door, someone should have thrown away the key because he 
should still be there. 
 
So what’s happened, what happened is now he’s sitting across 
with the government, cozying up and pretending that he’s 
taking credit for everything. So let him take credit for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So where is the realization or any progress that’s been made to 
the goal of community-based services? Where has that been? It 
really isn’t there. 
 
Integration and coordination of health services was another 
goal. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that districts have tried to work 
together, and there is a great deal of co-operation that’s going 
on in districts. 
 
In my corner of the world, I point with a great deal of pride to 
the fact that the North-East Health District, the Pasqua Health 
District, and the North Central District co-operated between the 
three of them to lobby the government effectively to have a 
renal dialysis unit put into Tisdale, Saskatchewan. A perfect 
example of a common sense proposal made by three districts in 
order to get a service for the people in the area that they all 
served. So there is some co-operation and integration going on. 
 
But if you can explain to me, Mr. Speaker, how we can possibly 
make sense out of the fact that we’ll send a gentlemen from 
Codette to the Mayo Clinic for 20 months at a cost of $20,000 a 
month when we could have had that service offered in 
Saskatoon for $50,000, if you can tell me how that makes sense, 
and how that is an example of better coordination and 
co-operation among districts, then I think you can easily see 
that there is much more work that needs to be done. 
 
And so we’re falling desperately short of the goal of integration 
and coordination of health services. 
 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

And finally, it talks about better use of health resources. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, everyone will say that that makes some sense, but 
no one has the courage, particularly across the way, and the 
willingness to really have an independent look at the question: 
are we using our health resources as we best can? 
 
Our commitment to the funding of health care in this province 
is approaching $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. That is becoming an 
increasingly significant proportion of the provincial economy 
and the provincial government’s budget. And I don’t think 
there’s anyone in this House or in this province that would not 
be forced to admit that that cannot continue to go up 
exponentially year after year after year. 
 
And at the same time we can admit to that fact of life, we have 
to also admit that there are challenges of providing quality 
health care to all of our citizens. Citizens who are endeavouring 
to find health care services in reasonable proximity to where 
they want to live. Citizens who are, by and large, aging and are 
forced to cope with situations where they may not be as close as 
they feel is responsible to health care facilities. 
 
And citizens who recognize that the day will come where they 
will have to likely be cared for in a long-term care institution. 
As much as we want to talk about home care and the fact that as 
many services as possible should be delivered in people’s own 
homes, that’s true. I don’t know of a single soul who looks 
forward to the day that they may have to go to a long-term care 
institution. They much rather would be looked after as long as 
they possibly can in a safe and responsible way in their own 
homes. That’s true. 
 
But the reality is there’s a responsibility of this government and 
of this province to provide for senior citizens, the pioneers of 
this province, in a way that’s appropriately thoughtful and 
comfortable for their needs. 
 
And so when we talked about using these resources that we 
have, that we have just admitted are limited in terms of the 
ability to grow and expand, we also have to accept the 
responsibility that people in this province are entitled to basic 
services and they’re entitled to look forward to the time when 
they need these services, not with fear and trepidation, but with 
confidence that they’ll be there for them. 
 
And that’s our responsibility and our obligation, Mr. Speaker. 
And in order to do that we simply have to have the courage to 
look at the health care system in a very thorough way. And as 
part of the Saskatchewan Party’s platform, we said what needs 
to be done is we need to have a health care value-for-money 
audit. 
 
Now that isn’t simply an exercise by a bunch of bean-counters 
to make sure all the columns in the ledger are balanced. It 
means what we have to do is to say things like the Enns 
situation from Codette that was going to the Mayo Clinic. 
Those kinds of situations are happening in this province. They 
are an obvious and blatant complete waste of money. 
 
And the health services for this family and this individual were 
not improved one bit. In fact he’d have been much happier if he 
could have gone to the University of Saskatchewan Royal 
University Hospital for his treatment instead of the Mayo 

Clinic. It takes considerable personal time and travel and hotel 
bills and meals, and all the rest of it — that’s just in addition to 
the cost that the province, the Department of Health paid for the 
service on his part. So he is looking for this pragmatic solution 
to his situation. 
 
And you know what the answer was from the Department of 
Health when we talked about this in the fall sitting? Well now 
the university . . . or Calgary is going to buy one of these 
machines and it’s going to be offered in Calgary instead of the 
Mayo Clinic. So that’s the solution. And then the minister sort 
of chuckles with glee and says you know what — the Alberta 
government doesn’t even insure this service in Alberta as if that 
somehow makes the point. 
 
Well it doesn’t make the point at all. It’s irrelevant. In fact it 
makes the point even worse because the Alberta government 
and the Alberta Department of Health, even if they are so 
excited not to provide the service, they’re at least smart enough 
to have the machine there. And we can send our cheque and our 
patients to Alberta. 
 
Same old story, same old vision of this NDP government of 
being unwilling to look at simple, practical solutions that might 
force people to look beyond the obvious. 
 
Another perfect example, Mr. Speaker, that I will use by way of 
example to show that we have to look at using our resources 
better is the whole discussion surrounding the use of the new 
drug, or relatively new drug Aracept for people with 
Alzheimer’s disease. And right now in Saskatchewan there is a 
great effort being made by the Alzheimer’s society and 
Alzheimer sufferers in this province to have the provincial 
government include this drug in the formulary. Our neighbour 
provinces have already done that. And I know that the 
Alzheimer’s society is presenting more material and more 
material and more material because initially the decision was 
not to permit this drug to be included. 
 
But the problem is, as I see it, Mr. Speaker, is what they do is 
they just look at the fact that this drug is going to cost a hundred 
dollars a month for the formulary budget and for the pharmacy 
budget in the Department of Health. So the people there are 
looking at this silo of their own budget and they’re saying we 
can’t afford to add this new drug to the formulary. And if that’s 
all you look at then maybe that is a valid argument. 
 
But what about looking at the bigger picture and saying what’s 
the impact of the fact, if you had this drug on the formulary, if 
people who can’t afford the hundred or hundred and fifty 
dollars a month to pay for it themselves now and could have an 
effective use of this drug, if now you do not need the home care 
people to come and visit them two or three times a week, if now 
you don’t need to have these people committed to an institution 
much sooner than they would otherwise — how much is that 
saving the province of Saskatchewan in straight economics? 
 
But the system is not responsive to that kind of thinking. 
Everything is siloed, everything is binned, and we’re not 
looking at the bigger picture. And so when I talk about a 
value-for-money health care audit, it’s not to see if all the silos 
balance. It’s to look at the broader picture to say, are there ways 
we could do things that are better? And that’s what’s 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

desperately needed. 
 
Every now and again, and certainly we’ve heard it from the 
federal minister, where he has said that no more money is going 
to be injected from the federal government into health care until 
provinces are willing to undertake this kind of comprehensive 
study. We’ve been calling for it for two years. 
 
So maybe he’s hearing it and I hope that our provincial Health 
minister hears it, and that if she engages in such a study that it is 
done in a comprehensive way so that it’s not another 
dog-and-pony show like the investigation about the 
privatization of the Crowns, or any of these other things that 
this government opposite seems to do. We just have a no-fault 
thing that is being investigated, and everybody that’s 
participating in it is saying this is a joke because it doesn’t deal 
with things in a meaningful way. 
 
Well we will not sit idly by and let the government pretend that 
they’re doing something important and valuable and all the 
while nothing fundamental is happening and changing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to also set a new climate in the health 
care delivery field. We have to set a climate of co-operation and 
working together among the various professionals. It hurts me 
deeply when I see licensed practical nurses launching lawsuits 
against registered nurses because they feel that’s the only way 
to deal with issues of scope or practice. 
 
That is so hurtful not only philosophically but in a practical way 
in the workplace. Can you imagine what that does in the 
workplace where people of both of these classifications of the 
nursing profession have to work together? It does nothing 
positive. And it sets a very bad climate. 
 
And while this is going on, what does the government do? They 
sit down and they say that we’re now going to dictate to the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association the new 
standards that should be imposed for entry into . . . education 
standards for entering into the nursing practice. 
 
Instead of being respectful of the registered nurses’ 
association’s ability to make these decisions together 
appropriately, they come up with this idea to impose it. And 
you know what happened — the government finally had to back 
down, and we’re glad that they did. We’re also glad, but quite 
surprised that it takes so long, that they increased seats at the 
University of Saskatchewan for training of people entering the 
nursing profession. That’s very appropriate. 
 
But what was in their heads five or six years ago when they laid 
off 600 nurses? What was in their heads? Did they think people, 
because they said there was going to be the new wellness model 
— like it was sort of get well, be well, or farewell maybe — 
that we wouldn’t need nurses any more? Like why is this 
government so short sighted? 
 
You know, surely you can ask the district health boards to do a 
demographic study of the people in the nursing profession in 
their district that would say, there’s so many people 
approaching retirement age, there’s so many people of an age 
that they’re going to be in here, or certain amount of people that 
are going to take leaves to raise families or whatever, and match 

an anticipated need to a practical reality. Surely they could do 
that instead of waiting until it’s almost too late. And now 
they’ve come up with a plan. 
 
Well we think it’s important that there are more nursing seats at 
the university, and we certainly support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’ll be easy to take the whole time of the 
afternoon to talk about what’s going on in the health care, but I 
want to say this. Mr. Speaker, this government, this Assembly 
needs to set a new climate in health care, a new climate that 
brings together the various professional suppliers of health care 
services in a new vision for what is needed, and instead of 
putting one entity against the other, is to bring them together in 
co-operation in order to make sure that health care delivery is 
done appropriately. 
 
We need to do that. And I am waiting for this government to 
take some initiative. But I suspect, as in most other things, 
you’re going to wait till the Saskatchewan Party comes up with 
a good idea and the format for doing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And we’re prepared to do that in your 
absence. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the government can’t fix health care, the 
Saskatchewan Party is up to the challenge, and we’ll work 
forward to that day and we’ll give them the good ideas of doing 
it. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it is therefore with great 
pleasure that I second the motion moved by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar and I will be pleased to support this motion. 
 
And I am sorry, I think that the general motion in terms of the 
budget debate, this province has been let down badly by the 
lack of vision of this government. I will not be able to support 
that. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much. You know, I’ve been 
away from this legislature so long I’m not really entirely sure if 
I refer to you as Mr. Deputy Speaker or Mr. Chair of 
Committees. For convenience I will say Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I do thank you very much and I thank all the members in the 
Assembly, and most especially my colleagues in the Liberal and 
New Democratic coalition for encouraging me as I stand up to 
speak to what I consider to be one of the best if not the best 
budget that has ever been presented in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Ms. Lorje: — I’m extremely proud of this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My very good friend, the Minister of Finance, has 
worked hard to consult with people all across this province. 
He’s consulted with the whole range of this society and he has 
delivered to us a budget that does not speak only to one small 
narrow group of society. Rather this is a budget that speaks to 
all members of society and for all time. 
 
It is a future-oriented budget. And I can tell you in my speech 
supporting his budget there will be no crepe hanging here, 
rather I would like to quote from the CTV (Canadian Television 
Network Limited) news report yesterday. I was astonished and 
delighted when they led off their news broadcast on CKCK TV 
yesterday by saying: this is an historic budget. There are 
sweeping, sweeping tax cuts is what CTV said. And I thank 
them for that. 
 
Now I want . . . I would like to start out my remarks this 
afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by quoting . . . As I’ve said, 
this is a budget for the future. It’s happening in the present, but 
I think we can also look back to the past for some inspiration on 
the budget. And I would like to look back into the very, very 
dim past. 
 
I would like to quote a 17th century poet to explain to you why 
I support this budget wholeheartedly without reservation. I 
would like to quote from the poet John Donne from his 
meditation 17. And with apologies to all women because you 
will recognize this was written in the 17th century, so the 
language is perhaps a bit dated and perhaps we can just in our 
own minds substitute humankind for mankind. But with 
apologies to the sexist references, I think it explains why this 
budget is important and why we have to adopt it as speedily as 
possible. 
 
John Donne wrote: 
 

No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of 
the continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away 
by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory 
were, as well as if a manor of thy friends or of thine own 
were; any man’s death diminishes me, because I am 
involved in mankind; 

 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, captures why I am supporting 
this budget. 
 
We have to recognize we aren’t an island; we don’t live as an 
isolated entity here in Saskatchewan. We have to constantly 
look . . . we are part of the global sphere, part of the global 
marketplace. Unfortunately our agricultural producers have 
recognized that because of the lack of support by the federal 
government in terms of what is happening with global trade for 
their products. 
 
We’ve had to recognize it. We look at what happens in Alberta; 
we look at what happens in the States. We have recognized that 
we have to alter our tax regime. We have to continue, as is our 
responsibility as elected members in this legislature, we have to 
continue in providing the strong support of social programs that 
the people of Saskatchewan ask for — the education programs, 
social services and health care, transportation services, and so 
forth. 

At the same time we cannot keep our tax regime static and 
pretend that there isn’t an effect when people do their income 
tax calculations in March and April and they use a computer 
program, and then they go and check to see what they would be 
paying if they lived in Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario. We are 
not an island. We have to look to what is happening in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
At the same time we have to ensure that we are caring for all 
citizens — the richest and the poorest. Every one of us have to 
be given due regard in any budget. And that, I believe, is what 
the Minister of Finance has done in his budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — While I’m on this topic I just would like to say 
parenthetically that I would like to thank those people who were 
so gracious to respond to us after the budget and to indicate the 
positive things about the budget that they supported and that 
they appreciated. 
 
I was particularly impressed, I must say, with representatives 
from the restaurant industry. I know that they lobbied long and 
hard and were very concerned that we might follow all the 
recommendations in the Vicq report, and specifically that we 
might implement — as Mr. Vicq had recommended — that we 
might implement a 5 per cent sales tax on restaurant meals. 
 
Now I appreciate their participation in the democratic process; 
and I will say that I even more so appreciate the fact that within 
12 hours of the budget being brought down, they had sent a 
thank you note to the Premier expressing their appreciation for 
the fact that we did not extend the tax to restaurant meals. 
 
Now one of the things that’s always puzzled me in this 
legislature, I have to say, is the consistent contradictory stance 
of the opposition members towards our province of 
Saskatchewan. They say on the one hand that they would like to 
govern the affairs of Saskatchewan people. And they say that 
they can represent the people very well. 
 
But on the other hand, they walk around and they tell us that 
Saskatchewan is probably the most forsaken place on the earth 
and that its people are woeful in their ignorance because some 
of them dare to vote for Liberals and New Democrats and dare 
to cast their votes so that we can have a coalition government. 
 
I always wonder what kind of advancement they’re trying to 
make when they say Saskatchewan is a terrible place — it’s 
really terrible — elect me. And at the same time they seem to be 
fouling the very place that they’re talking about — constantly 
focusing on negatives, constantly trying to find the worm in the 
apple as it were. I find this quite amazing. 
 
And I have to say that when I listened to the Leader of the 
Opposition, one of the things that most struck me about his 
speech — as well as the wrong-headed interpretation of what 
the tax changes will be, and I will state that as far as I’m 
concerned he has got it totally wrong — I was very concerned 
about a statement that he made that he said that the government 
is, quote, “losing the spin war.” 
 
The Leader of the Opposition in his budget speech seems to 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

indicate that this is nothing more than a, quote, “spin war.” 
 
Now this is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this is an important matter. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’d like to urge all 
members to give the member for Saskatoon Southeast the 
opportunity to make her remarks without undue interruption. 
And I’d invite the member for Saskatoon Southeast to continue. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now I’m just 
amazed and dumbfounded that he would reduce the budget 
debate, and the proposed tax changes, to a question of a spin 
war. And I would have to say, quite frankly, that if ever they 
should win the spin war, the people of Saskatchewan will lose 
because they will have been hung out to dry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now Saskatchewan is a wonderful place to live 
— we all know that, and we’re all very proud of it. But when 
you listen to the members opposite, you would think that we are 
living in a place something akin to what John Milton wrote 
about in Paradise Lost. And I want to quote again. 

 
He describes a dungeon horrible with no light, but rather 
darkness visible, a region of sorrow, doleful shades where 
peace and rest can never dwell and hope never comes. 

 
Now that, it seems to me, is what the members opposite think of 
Saskatchewan. But we can be thankful that their perception of 
this place is as skewed as it because they will never rule over 
this place with that kind of negativity towards the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — The fact of the matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that Saskatchewan is probably the greatest place in the world to 
live. We know this. We’ve got two irrefutable sources of proof. 
 
First of all, the United Nations says it is; and secondly, Conrad 
Black says it isn’t. So I rest my case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now members on this side of the legislature, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, know the value of our province, and we 
recognize the worth of its people, and we are working hard to 
give them the kind of government that they demand — honest, 
dedicated, active, and accountable. 
 
We have done well during the decade just past. And yesterday’s 
address by the Finance minister shows that we’re still driving 
on the right side of the road as we begin this one. 
 
What does the record show, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well it shows 
that the provincial debt to GDP (gross domestic product) ratio 
has been reduced from 71 per cent when we took office — 71 
per cent; the worst in all of Canada — down to 38 per cent now. 
We can be very, very proud of that. 
 
We have gone from being the worst debt to GDP ratio, to about 

in the middle of the pack for all provinces of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we adopt this 
budget and the four-year plan together with it, we will be 
dropping our debt to GDP ratio down to 31 per cent. We will be 
almost the lowest, if not the lowest, in all of Canada. That is a 
tremendous record of achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Our total debt, we have taken our total debt 
down from 16 billion down to 11.6 billion. I am extremely 
proud of that. We are paying off the debt of the ’80s. We are not 
leaving a debt for our children and our grandchildren as some 
would who advocate immediate tax measures. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, I just want to urge everyone to give the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast the opportunity to make her remarks. I’m 
having difficulty hearing her. And I think she’s probably having 
difficulty being heard by other members. So please give her the 
opportunity to finish her remarks. Thank you. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker for your very 
kind intervention. I would like to point out, as an esteemed 
former colleague of mine used to say, the former member for 
Watrous. He used to say, if you throw a stone in the dark and a 
dog barks, you know you probably hit the dog. 
 
Now, I want to carry on and just remind all members again 
about what our record is and has been. 
 
The interest on the public debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is now 
down to $670 million. Now some people will say, well that’s 
because interest rates have dropped and so forth; but really it is 
because we have been paying off the debt. We have had a 
balanced approach. 
 
We have been paying off the debt that we inherited when we 
took office in October of 1991. That debt was created by fiscal 
irresponsibility, by spending today and squandering the future 
for our children. We have reversed that, and we have taken the 
debt down almost $5 billion, and the interest on the public debt 
is now reduced to $670 million. I have to point out 
unfortunately that that interest that we pay, each and every year 
that goes out of this province, for which the taxpayers of this 
province see absolutely no benefit, is still 11 per cent of the 
total provincial budget. But we are bringing it down because we 
are continuing along a balanced, fiscally sound approach. 
 
Now a couple of other things that I would like to point out. We 
have a government that probably is the smallest per capita in 
Canada, and yet clearly is one of the most effective. We are the 
only province in Canada to have made substantial inroads into 
the problem, the blight, called child poverty. We are the only 
province that has reduced child poverty. For that we can be 
justly proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Ms. Lorje: — And just in the last year, Mr. Speaker, our social 
assistance rolls are down by 6,000 people — 6,000 men, 
women, and children are no longer relying on the public purse 
for their support. Those people have managed to find jobs and 
they are contributing in a dignified, respectful way to their own 
future and to this province. 
 
The budget as I said, is very far reaching. And now it is true as 
members opposite charge, the people are not going to see an 
immediate benefit today. That’s unfortunate, given the structure 
of the tax system. We all know and we have to admit it, the 
consumption taxes are applied immediately. Some of the 
expanded PST was applied at midnight last night, the balance 
will click in on July 1. But consumption taxes are applied 
immediately. 
 
We have to wait to see the impact of the lowering of the income 
tax measures. Now I would have wished, given that we are 
de-linking or uncoupling our tax system from the federal 
government, I would have hoped that we could have brought in 
the income tax measures immediately. Unfortunately, given the 
nature of our federal-provincial arrangements with respect to 
income tax collection, that was not possible. 
 
Perhaps in the future when our Finance minister makes further 
announcements about income tax cuts, we will have secured the 
necessary agreements from the federal government so that we 
will be able to make those immediately stimulative income tax 
drops. But for right now people will have to wait until July 1 
when they see their first solid income tax decrease. But it’s an 
income tax decrease of which I’m very proud because the first 
thing that we will be doing is moving to chop in half and then to 
eventually, by January 1 of next year, to completely eliminate 
the odious flat tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Now I wish that we could have achieved all of 
our income tax measures without having to rely, for the interim, 
on some consumption tax measures, an expansion of the PST. 
That was not possible. But as social democrats what we have 
tried to do is mitigate the effect of the expansion of the PST. 
 
And I do wish that the PST rebate cheques could go out right 
away. However we have again, as a responsible government, 
opted for the most effective, efficient administration of the PST 
rebates. 
 
And that means that rather than create our own bureaucracy and 
setting up our own collection agents and so forth, that what 
we’re going to do instead is rely on the federal government to 
send out the PST rebate cheques, using the same method that 
they calculate for the GST rebate cheques, so that everyone who 
filled out an income tax form last year will know that come 
October — which is the earliest point at which we could secure 
agreement from the federal government — come October they 
will have a PST rebate cheque. If they qualify because their 
income is below 26,000 they will get a PST rebate cheque. 
 
That will be from the period from April to October and then 
thereafter on every quarter they will know that they can expect 
to see a rebate cheque to compensate them for the additional 
amount of money that they may pay in PST. So yes, people 

have to pay PST on their car washes today, but those eligible 
will receive their rebate in October: $77 per person; $55 per 
child; to a total of $264 per family. 
 
Now I want to just point out, too, and this is extremely 
important from my point of view, that there will be no 
clawback. There will be no clawback on those PST rebate 
cheques for social assistance recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — This budget is about helping people in all levels 
of society, but most particularly it is a budget about helping 
poor people. Over 55,000 people will be removed from the tax 
rolls. The largest percentage tax reduction goes to low income 
families. As a social democrat, this is very important to me. 
 
But as an MLA representing probably one of the most affluent 
and certainly most entrepreneurial ridings in the province, it is 
also important to me that the budget reflect the needs, priorities, 
and concerns of the middle class and high income earners. And 
it does. 
 
The three-tier flatter tax system that the Minister of Finance is 
proposing is based on four principles — that it be simple, fair, 
competitive, and supportive of families. Now these new 
measures I believe do follow consistently those four principles. 
 
The new measures simplify the tax system. They do more than 
merely simplify the tax system, though this is important. We 
will now have three levels of taxation: 11 per cent, 13 per cent, 
and 15 per cent. 
 
And it is important for members opposite to note that there will 
15 per . . . or 11 per cent, I’m sorry, 11 per cent on capital gains 
on farms and small businesses. This is going to dramatically 
reduce the incentive, whether real or imagined, the incentive for 
people to create a virtual residence outside Saskatchewan. It 
means that wealth created in this province will stay in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — This budget is about competitiveness. It is 
important to note that it will improve our competitive position 
with respect to Alberta. It’s important to note that now, once 
this budget is adopted and the measures are implemented, that 
70 per cent of Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay taxes equivalent 
to what they would pay if they lived in Alberta. We have 
removed the incentive for people to leave this province to try to 
gain some small tax compensation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no man, 
no woman is an island. Saskatchewan is not immune to the 
influences from outside jurisdictions. And we have responded 
in a very aggressive, progressive, and far-reaching way to that. 
 
We will eliminate the flat tax. For my constituents this is 
extremely important. The debt reduction surtax and the high 
income surtax will go. And at the same time we are keeping a 
system that is fair and it’s progressive and, most importantly, it 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

encourages initiative and encourages people to remain here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget . . . The final principle that the Minister of Finance 
said was important for him as he prepared this budget, as well 
as being simple and competitive and fair, is that it also had to be 
supportive of families. And this budget does provide support for 
families. 
 
The basic personal exemptions rise; the spousal equivalent is 
transferable. This will significantly — significantly — help 
single parent families. There’s a PST rebate to offset the 
expanded sales tax; and our sales tax — even though it’s 
expanded and even though the Leader of the Opposition has to 
pay 6 per cent on his car wash — it’s still, it’s the narrowest in 
all of Canada, save for Alberta, which is fortunate enough not to 
have to have a consumption tax like other provinces do. 
 
Unfortunately though, Alberta has medicare premiums and 
quite frankly, given my druthers, I would rather pay a PST at 6 
per cent — expanded or not — than have to pay in excess of 
$700 a year for medicare services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — There’s another important thing that this budget 
does that is very important to me and to the constituents I 
represent. It provides support and encouragement for new 
workers, newly trained workers, to settle here. 
 
No longer will we see the unfortunate situation where people 
get their post-secondary education — whether it’s SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
a university or through a community college or an 
apprenticeship — they get their post-secondary training here 
and then say, sayonara city, I’m off to Alberta. 
 
We will be introducing a tax credit measure to encourage 
students to put down roots here, to settle here, to remain in this 
province. And I think that’s a very strong measure, and it is 
something that says we are building for the future. And we are 
building the conditions for a strong and an educated work force 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, I talked yesterday with a man who tells me that his 
two children who had left Saskatchewan are actually moving 
back from Alberta. Now I said to him, what do you mean 
they’re moving back? He said, you know, they can get the same 
jobs — and they’re well-trained people — they can get the 
same jobs at the same salary here in Saskatchewan. But he said 
— and this is very important — they’re going to save, on 
average, at least a thousand dollars by moving back. 
 
No longer will the one son, who is married, have to have two 
cars in his household so that his wife and himself can both 
engage in the long daily commute that they do in Calgary. They 
won’t have to have two cars, so they’re going to save money by 
not having to have two cars. They’re going to save money on 
the insurance. And most importantly, as he said, they will save 
$71 a month by moving back to Saskatchewan because they 
will no longer have to pay the medicare premium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Lorje: — For them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 6 per cent 
sales tax is a very, very lucrative bargain. A small price to pay 
for the privilege of living in this beautiful province. 
 
I’ve got to say that overall this budget is fair, far-sighted, and 
fiscally responsible. But to quote from one of my constituents 
. . . and I didn’t ask him if I could quote him so I hope he 
doesn’t mind. His name is Kent Smith-Windsor and he is, as 
many people will know, in charge of the chamber of commerce 
in Saskatoon. 
 
(1545) 
 
I asked him what he felt about the budget, and he said he was 
just delighted about it. He said, and these are his exact words, 
“This budget creates opportunity for Saskatchewan.” 
 
And I think Mr. Smith-Windsor captured it exactly right. This 
budget creates opportunity. This is a budget of hope, of 
prosperity, and of opportunity. And I’m very proud to be part of 
the government that has introduced such a fine budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I take my place, I 
want to just address one issue. It’s an issue that I care very 
passionately about, and it is an issue that I think will be difficult 
for all of us to deal with in the next little while. And I hope that 
we deal with it with fair-mindedness and with compassion. 
 
And I am referring to the fact that in this budget, we have 
listened to many people and we’ve listened to the 
recommendations in the Vicq report and we have done away 
with the 1937 exemption for provincial sales tax for treaty 
status Indians. 
 
It was a very difficult decision for all members of this 
government to make because we have always felt that we 
needed to provide some measure, some economic measure, for 
the most disadvantaged of our society. 
 
Unfortunately though, the PST exemption for treaty status 
Indians had become subject to a lot of misunderstanding, a lot 
of misinterpretation, and a lot of hateful attitudes. Now this as 
we all know, and, as one of the members opposite indicated in 
his private members statement yesterday, this is the month that 
all fair-minded, tolerant people in this world observe the 
International Day to Eliminate Racial Discrimination. 
 
It’s also a time when . . . just last week I went to a memorial 
service for three Aboriginal men who had been found frozen in 
Saskatoon. Rodney Naistus, a gentleman who unfortunately . . . 
who’s body I found when I was out jogging; Lawrence Wegner, 
a social work student; and Neil Stonechild, a 17-year-old man 
who died in similar circumstances, or in a similar way to 
Rodney Naistus and Lawrence Wegner some 10 years ago. 
 
Now going to that memorial service I was reminded most 
keenly of the incredible difficulties that First Nations people 
face in our province. I was also reminded that there are three 
groups of First Nations people in this province. 
 
There are treaty status Indians, there are non-status Indians, and 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

there are Metis people. 
 
Through a lot of misunderstanding and bad-spirited rhetoric, 
some people have come to assume that all Aboriginal people 
received the tax exemption when they showed their status card 
at the cash register. And that has created a lot of division and 
concern and consternation within the Aboriginal communities 
themselves. 
 
I want to say that I take the spirit of the treaties very, very 
seriously. Those are contractual obligations that we, the settlers 
in this country, people who are of non-Aboriginal ancestry, 
those are contractual obligations that we entered into in the 
1870s and 1880s when we came here, or when our ancestors 
came here. My goal as an elected person is to ensure that the 
benefits and the opportunities that are enshrined in those treaties 
are actually bestowed upon the Aboriginal people. 
 
Now I am not certain from the debate whether or not the PST 
. . . not paying the PST is a treaty right for Aboriginal people. 
My reading of the historical documents would say no, it’s not, 
but I could be wrong. I know that the matter will be settled in 
the courts eventually. 
 
I can say though that in 1937 when a consumption tax that is 
now called the PST was introduced in this province, the 
government of the day and successive governments since — 
Conservative and Liberal, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation), and New Democrat — have always said there 
should be exemptions for certain groups of people. 
 
We all know about some of the exemptions, the exemptions for 
agricultural producers, for instance — the fact that there are I 
believe it’s around $275 million in exemptions for farmers with 
respect to their input costs. None of us argue about that, nor 
should we. 
 
But in 1937 there was also an exemption for PST created by an 
Act of this legislature for treaty status Indians. Over time, 
however, that exemption has come to be misunderstood and 
misinterpreted. And I believe it is time that we recognize that it 
is important that we provide benefits and opportunities for all 
our people, but perhaps those benefits and opportunities can be 
provided in a manner different from how it was provided in 
1937. 
 
I’d like to quote right now from Wilfred Pelletier, a native 
educator who wrote a book called No Foreign Land: The 
Biography of a North American Indian, and he said, quote: 
 

When you no longer go around accounting for yourself, 
making yourself understood, justifying your existence, 
when you no longer feel an alien anywhere, you’ve come 
home. You know who you are. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that with the elimination of the 
exemption for treaty status Indians, that people, treaty status 
Indians will no longer be misunderstood. They will finally have 
come home to their home in this land that is rightfully theirs 
and ours. 
 
We have different circumstances now than we had in 1937 
when the PST exemption was first brought in, so we need 

different solutions for sharing benefits and opportunities. 
Therefore in this budget we have dedicated money to northern 
development, we have expanded forestry development, and we 
have an expansion of educational opportunities for First Nations 
people. 
 
I’m very proud of them and I believe that by sharing these 
benefits of growth and opportunities, that it will mitigate the 
loss of the exemption for PST. I also want to point out that 
status Indians now will be eligible for the PST rebate exactly 
the same as anyone else in this society. 
 
This was a difficult choice, but as we all know, budgets are 
about making choices. They are about finding ultimately a 
balance that promotes the opportunities for all people in society. 
And I believe that that’s what this budget does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a budget, like a Throne 
Speech and like all the Bills that we debate and pass in this 
House, is just one marker by which a government leaves its 
imprint. 
 
First it leaves an imprint on the people for whom it speaks by 
their permission at the ballot box. And secondly, it is a marker 
on the record of time, of the time that we spend here in this 
House. And historians in the future will evaluate whether or not 
the time that we’ve spent in this House has been good, bad, or 
indifferent. 
 
But I believe that this particular marker, this budget, brings us 
closer to the society of equality, fairness, and compassion that 
we began to forge just eight years ago. It’s a perfect society we 
want. 
 
Unfortunately, we will never achieve perfection, but we will on 
this side of the House continually move towards that. It’s one 
step on the way to achieving fairness and compassion and, dare 
I say it, perfection in our society. 
 
It is a budget that I will gladly and wholeheartedly, 
unreservedly support. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to begin with, first off, I would like to welcome the new 
member from Saskatoon Southeast. It is an honour that she’s 
here now, and it’s certainly exciting for the people of that 
constituency to finally be represented here. Certainly maybe not 
quite the way we wanted it to go on this side of the House, but 
we certainly want to welcome her here. 
 
But unfortunately we’re still concerned that there’s one member 
not showing up here on a regular basis every day. So hopefully 
Wood River will get the opportunity to be represented in the 
very near future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday we had the opportunity to hear a 
budget speech that spoke about growth and opportunity for the 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

people of Saskatchewan. Now I want to hesitate that it might be 
for Saskatchewan itself, but certainly for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And as they leave this province and move to 
Alberta or Ontario or North Dakota or Montana or wherever 
they go, it will certainly be a great opportunity for them. 
Because what we’re seeing is an increase in the exodus of this 
province because of the short-sightedness and the lack of vision 
of this NDP coalition government. 
 
Now yesterday one of the great sounds that could be heard in 
this province as we stepped outside the legislature was the 
sounds of cars starting as they leave the province. But there was 
a second sound that we could hear also, and that was the wheels 
of industry grinding to a halt. 
 
Now I’m not sure how a government can plan on raising funds 
to operate a province, when by shutting the province down is 
supposed to be the answer and a vision for the future. 
 
But we heard a little something new in this budget yesterday. 
We certainly heard in the past that there was some slush funds 
hidden in the province. We’ve asked this government on many 
times, Mr. Speaker, to reveal to us how much money’s there; 
how well we could use it to help this province out and get it 
back on its feet again. And of course they always said no, no, 
there’s no money there; there’s no money to be found. 
 
And then yesterday they announced that, oh, they found $700 
million, Mr. Speaker. Imagine that. All of a sudden, on budget 
day they found $700 million. But did they use it to provide tax 
relief to the people of Saskatchewan? Did they use it to enhance 
the opportunities for business and for people to get out of bed 
every day, Mr. Speaker, and go to work? No. 
 
What they did was they took money from a slush fund, Mr. 
Speaker, and put it in another slush fund. Now it’s not called 
the Saskatchewan liquor and gaming slush fund, it’s now called 
the fudge-the-books slush fund. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s still a 
slush fund. It’s still money sitting there, contributed to a fund 
by the people of Saskatchewan, and all of a sudden we still 
can’t use it. We got to save it for a rainy day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is step outside today and 
find out it’s raining. But what did we get from this province . . . 
this government for this province yesterday? A $160 million tax 
increase. And for that we’re all supposed to be excited, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a reason then to get up today and get out 
there and contribute to this economy by giving the government 
more money to waste. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now the minister yesterday spoke about the opportunity that 
this is going to provide for us — taking money out of my left 
pocket instead of my right pocket will make life better for me. 
But the minister also said they’re not going to put any taxes on 
young families. We’re not going to tax their clothing, what have 
you, but we’re going to tax their child care. Now this is a vision 
for the future. 
 
We’re going to stop families from trying to get out and 
contribute to this province. We’re going to stop people from 
trying to create job opportunities and child care by taxing them. 

Mr. Speaker, I say this is not a budget that talks about 
opportunities, but a budget that talks about removing the 
opportunities for growth and development in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to talk to some of the 
professionals in some of the fields of endeavours in this 
province that we hold near and dear — health and education. 
They have a great fear out there with the zap, you’re frozen, 
attitude by this government to two of our most highly respected 
institutions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about the need for continuing 
education in this province, the need to have quality education in 
this province for our students. But, Mr. Speaker, is this 
government willing to participate? Mr. Speaker, no they are not, 
I dare say. In fact what they are saying is that if we want quality 
education, school boards in this province are going to have to 
find those monies elsewhere. 
 
Now in the budget yesterday, Mr. Speaker, there was a bit of a 
reprieve offered for the farmers of this province. There’s going 
to be a little bit of a rebate for property taxes. And that’ll be 
great. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the school boards are already 
talking about, we’re going to have to go after that money to 
offset the increases of inflation for education in this province. 
Not even bringing into account, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the 
teachers were going to be getting a raise in the very near future, 
and probably justifiably so. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that attained a majority 
through a backroom deal in the dead of night with the Liberal 
Party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I was enjoying the banter, 
sorry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the reality is that the people in the cities, in the urban areas 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, are not going to enjoy the same 
opportunities as the rural communities who are getting a tax 
rebate for their property taxes to help out with the increases in 
education costs. No, the people that elected this government, 
the urban members of our society are going to face huge tax 
increases in the very near future on their properties to help 
support education and to help support their communities in just 
trying to deliver the day-to-day services that now this 
government has chose to tax. 
 
Now there’s one of the great philosophies that I have never 
quite understood from this government, is taxing taxing 
authorities. But unfortunately with this government, we always 
seem to be able to find a way to create a new tax to keep the 
people in Saskatchewan down and out and in a unproductive 
system that does not allow us to compete with our neighbours, 
whether they be east or west or south. Actually we’re starting to 
fall behind competing with the people that live north of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now one of the great things that this province has always been 
proud of, Mr. Speaker, is our health care system. Imagine we 
were the birthplace of health care in this country, providing an 
opportunity for everyone to be able to attain affordable health 
care at a reasonable cost to everyone in this province so that no 
one is left out ever again. 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Well imagine to our discernment in this day and age, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have now reached a point in our history where 
this government has been able to take us from one of the 
highest quality health care systems in this country to one of the 
lowest. We have the longest waiting list in the province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it has been revealed by an audit by one of 
the health care districts in this province that they could probably 
achieve some financial savings for the operation of their health 
district because they overexpend in administration. And if they 
had those dollars back, the auditor indicated to them, they 
would not be in a deficit position and, Mr. Speaker, they could 
improve the health care opportunities for the citizens of their 
own community. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the health care decisions made by this 
government, by this NDP coalition government, is driven 
towards the fact that health care is not as important as finding 
jobs for their own party hacks. And that’s all we’re getting out 
of the health care system, Mr. Speaker, is job opportunities for 
the party hacks of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was mentioned earlier on a couple of occasions, 
and certainly by the member from Saskatoon Southeast, that 
there was a huge change in this province in who we tax. And it 
sounded like there was a great deal of concern that how are 
these people who are supposedly oppressed in today’s society 
going to be able to afford this. 
 
But certainly, I think one of the things that we have to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, is that we are all members of this 
province. And we all need to participate in its growth and its 
opportunities. 
 
And for decades and decades, and most of those decades in the 
last several decades, Mr. Speaker, this government opposite was 
the government, and for some reason, felt that it was important 
that that segment of our society remain depressed. And now, 
when we spoke about the opportunity . . . by allowing them the 
same enthusiasm and aggressive, progressive attitudes towards 
participating in the economy of this province . . . during the 
election, they said nay, that can never happen; we’ll never do 
that. Well, Mr. Speaker, again they broke another promise, but 
who’s counting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the speech yesterday from the 
Minister of Finance, I was trying to pick out some clues there as 
to how it might help my constituency, the region that I live in. 
What’s there for us? Was there something for rural Prince 
Albert? I didn’t hear anything. Well, tax increases — that’ll 
help us great. We’ll have less money to be able to participate in 
spending. 
 
Did I hear something for the city of Prince Albert? No, no, Mr. 
Speaker, I didn’t hear that either. The citizens are going to be 
taxed higher. The city’s going to, may be forced to increase 
property taxes to offset the PST increases that are going against 
their services. Education taxes will probably have to be 
increased because of the PST that’s being applied to their 
services. 
 
So I’m not sure how this is going to benefit my region. We 
talked about very, very minimal increases in Highways. Is that 

going to help my area, Mr. Speaker? Oh probably not. The fact 
is we didn’t fix the roads there last year, so now we’re going to 
fix one or two potholes this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to create, many of us in our area of 
the province, opportunities for growth and development. One of 
the things that’s been talked about many times in the past is 
continuing the twinning of Highway 11 from Saskatoon right 
through to Prince Albert. Is there going to be enough money in 
the budget for that? No, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t. The fact of the 
matter is, I’m very concerned that this government doesn’t want 
Prince Albert and area to participate in the economy of this 
province and of Western Canada and of the rest of the world. 
 
That’s not to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are many aggressive 
groups out there that are trying to develop the opportunities for 
growth and for new opportunities for people to get out of bed 
everyday and go to work. This government has talked many 
times that we need to reduce the welfare rolls in this province, 
and we need to applaud that. Both sides of the House agree, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a noble cause to participate in. But if we 
continue, Mr. Speaker, to tax and tax and tax, unfortunately 
people aren’t going to be able to afford to go to work. So we 
have two choices then, Mr. Speaker. We either go on welfare or 
we go to Alberta. And I dislike both opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province is full of opportunity; it’s full of challenge. We 
should be working hard to develop our province, develop our 
regions, and instead, Mr. Speaker, what we’re getting is more 
taxes to hold this province down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we keep hearing that there 
are promises of pie-in-the-sky opportunities in the future for 
less taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what do we know about this government? Every time they 
bring a budget forward, they promise next year it’s going to be 
better. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is their eighth next year. Has 
things gotten better, Mr. Speaker? No — they’ve gotten worse. 
We have nothing. It’s reached the point where we . . . people 
are leaving this province in droves. And yet is the situation 
being addressed by this government opposite? No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At one time we had an education system in this province that 
was the envy of many in the world. Mr. Speaker, the people that 
are graduating for our universities are so few right nowadays, 
the enrolments are down so badly that we’re having to import, 
Mr. Speaker, qualified professionals to fill the few jobs that are 
available. 
 
There’s people coming in from South Africa, there’s people 
coming in from the Philippines. Mr. Speaker, those 
opportunities should be filled by the people who live here now 
and not from some far-off places in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard yesterday from the Minister of Finance 
that change is needed in this province — it is needed now. Mr. 
Speaker, the members on this side of the House wholeheartedly 
agree that change is needed, and it is needed now. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what we saw yesterday was an Ali 
shuffle where you dance with the left to the right, and then to 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

the right to the left, but we continued to shuffle. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, doing a shuffle is not a vision for change. In 
fact it is a vision from a rear-view mirror. And how long are we 
going to be able to keep looking back and blaming everyone 
else for our problems here? This government has had ample 
opportunity to bring the budgets that are necessary to get this 
province up and running. But no, Mr. Speaker, every year they 
keep coming and blaming the NDP government from the ’70s 
for all the problems of today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was 25 years ago that that government was 
here. It’s time now that this government take responsibility for 
their own action and for the direction of this province rather 
than blame someone else. 
 
We can’t have progression in this country because of the federal 
government. We can’t have progression in this province 
because of a government from the ’70s. Well who are we going 
to keep blaming? Next week we’re going to have to blame the 
Northwest Territories for our problems in this province. We’re 
starting to run out of people to blame. 
 
But I think what needs to be blamed, Mr. Premier, and certainly 
60 per cent of the people — and all we had to do is check the 
popular vote, Mr. Speaker — 60 per cent of the people of this 
province voted against this government. And certainly what 
we’re hearing in the newspapers now is that that budget that 
was brought yesterday from this government received 
widespread panic. There was not a great deal of enthusiasm for 
this. The only enthusiasm there was for the speech yesterday 
was from the NDP caucus, and even that was muted . . . I’m 
sorry, the NDP coalition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of regret that I have to 
inform you that I will not be able to support this budget. One of 
the great disappointments I have is that massive increase in 
taxes. I cannot support that. But I will be supporting the 
amendment brought forth by our Leader of the Opposition, 
Elwin Hermanson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just a reminder. I know that the hon. 
member misspoke calling the member by his proper name. That 
is not in accordance with the rules of the Assembly. Just a 
reminder. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It is indeed a pleasure to 
stand here in this legislature to address this, which I quite 
unabashedly say, Mr. Speaker, is the finest budget or the best 
budget for the people of Saskatchewan that we have ever been 
able to introduce. 
 
And it’s a budget that has been built, has been built, Mr. 
Speaker, after consecutive building blocks have been put 
together — not just by successive ministers of Finance starting 
with Ed Tchorzewski, not just those successive budgets that we 
put together in government, but by a million people in 
Saskatchewan who, with the good old Saskatchewan 
know-how, made it happen, made it work, Mr. Speaker. 

And I just couldn’t be any more proud of a million people for 
having the fortitude to stick with it to make today — or 
yesterday, I guess, would be more appropriate — happen. But it 
makes yesterday, today, and the future all possible, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m just so, so honoured to be able to speak to 
this budget today. 
 
I want to take a moment and just sort of reflect. As I walking up 
to the Chamber today, I walked through the Saskatchewan 
gallery which is just below the rotunda. Many of us will know 
that. And I know yesterday it was incredibly crowded. This 
room and the galleries were all filled; and the Saskatchewan 
gallery was full of visitors, guests, watching the budget as the 
Minister of Finance delivered it. They were watching the 
budget on a big-screen TV. 
 
And as I walked past that crowd yesterday, I was struck with 
how much anticipation there was for the budget that was 
coming and how they actually expected that we were going to 
be introducing great tax relief and great support for the various 
government departments — if I can describe it that way. 
 
I also . . . Right next door to the Saskatchewan gallery is the 
Assiniboine gallery which has the portraits of a great many First 
Nations leaders — historic First Nations leaders — and I was so 
proud of them, of their part of history, if I can describe it that 
way, Mr. Speaker. The ability that those great leaders had to 
provide the leadership that their people needed at a very, very 
critical juncture in the creation of Saskatchewan and as we 
developed into the Saskatchewan that we can all enjoy today. 
And I know that we deserve . . . We must always honour those 
people that came before us and help make our province what it 
is today. 
 
Speaking of those who came before us, I also want to take a 
moment and reflect that I also went into the basement, into what 
is the Souris gallery just before I came into the legislature . . . 
into the Chamber today. In the Souris gallery is the portraits of 
former MLAs and former governments. And the one of course 
that I took the most interest in, Mr. Speaker, was the 1944 
government of . . . Many people will think it was the 
government of Tommy Douglas but in the Trew family we 
know that it was really the government of Beatrice Trew, who 
was the first CCF woman elected as an MLA in the 
constituency then known as Maple Creek. And I can assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, that we are just intensely proud of my 
grandmother and her contribution to this great province. This is 
one of our . . . people that came before us. 
 
Then of course I couldn’t resist, before I came in, sliding then 
into the Churchill gallery and seeing the portraits of this 
administration, 1991, when we came in having soundly 
defeated the former administration. The Devine government of 
the ’80s was in a different part of that Churchill . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . They were in the rogue’s gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was good to see faces that have come and gone, 
people that participated. And I think of John Penner, I think of 
Ned Shillington, and I’m already regretting having started 
naming former members because there’s just so many that 
deserve to be remembered and named for their great 
contribution in helping get us to where we are today. 
 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

Now I want to come in on the budget and it is a pleasure to have 
followed not only the Minister of Finance, and the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Saskatoon Southeast who did just a 
terrific job of outlining parts of the budget and issues that are 
very near and dear to her. I was very, very pleased with that. 
But it’s also a pleasure for me to follow the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers, but it would be safe to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that I have some dispute with some of the things that the 
member said. 
 
And I just want to say, early in his speech — I think I heard it 
right, tell me if I’m wrong — but early in his speech the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers said people are leaving 
Saskatchewan. He said, I think his words were something like 
right after the budget was delivered you could hear the sound of 
cars starting as people left the province. I think he said that 
early in his speech. 
 
But then late in his speech — and tell me if I’m wrong on this 
— I know that I heard the member for Saskatchewan Rivers 
say, and I wrote it down here, he said people are coming from 
all across the world to what? To fill jobs. He did say that. I did 
hear that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Oh, I see, doesn’t have to be consistent. On the 
one hand people are fleeing the province; on the other hand — 
in the same speech not 10 minutes later — people are coming 
from all around the world to fill what? Jobs. Jobs. Because 
we’ve got job growth in record numbers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
got the highest number of people working in the Saskatchewan 
workforce that we’ve ever had. 
 
We’ve got a very low level of unemployment. Last month and 
the month before — the lowest level of unemployment in all of 
Canada. Is it good enough? Well not quite good enough yet, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s part of what the budget that was introduced 
yesterday was all about. We have to do more, we have to create 
opportunities, we have to help create jobs, we have to grow our 
economy and continue to grow it. And part of how we’re doing 
it is seven consecutive balanced budgets. Seven in a row. Lucky 
seven. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — One of my colleagues wants me to go back to the 
story of people both leaving and coming at the same time. But I 
just . . . The only thing I want to remind the member, the hon. 
member for Rosthern who’s chirping across the way. I was 
asking my colleagues here if I’d heard it right, and one of my 
colleagues very wisely said: you know, I know the difference. 
She said: I can recognize the difference whether people are 
coming or going. 
 
And I think it’s very good that — at least on this side of the 
House — we do recognize whether people are coming or going. 
And we’ve got a record population, record jobs, and people are 
in fact coming to Saskatchewan to fill those jobs. It’s just 
wonderful, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — As a member, Mr. Speaker, who first came in 
here in 1986, in the second term of the former Conservative 
administration, I was reflecting on how it was that we got to this 
budget. Because it’s really important. If we refuse to learn from 
history, then we’re doomed to repeat it, absolutely doomed to 
repeat it. 
 
I should say that the former Devine administration, the former 
Conservative administration, got elected in 1982 by saying 
things like, well we’re going to eliminate the gas tax — 
eliminate the gas tax — and they were going to do some things 
with interest rates. 
 
Well at that time the leader Grant Devine said, the then leader 
said, Saskatchewan’s got so much going for it that we can 
afford to mismanage it and still break even. Remember that? 
Remember that? That’s probably what attracted you to that 
party — that statement. That, and things like never say whoa in 
a mudhole. Remember that? Your leader saying that. That’s the 
thing that attracted each of you to that party. Remember that? 
So much going for it, we can afford to mismanage it and still 
break even. 
 
What was the result? What was the result? It was 10 
consecutive deficit budgets from your group — 10 in a row. 
You ran up a huge, huge deficit. Huge deficit. They changed 
their name . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I know, changed 
the name. But that fools absolutely nobody. I didn’t even 
mention the change in name because it fools nobody. 
 
The thing that attracted you to that party was what that former 
leader Grant Devine said. What that member said: never say 
whoa in a mudhole. He said . . . he got elected on a promise to 
what, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a 
tremendous pleasure for me to introduce staff of Northern 
Affairs coming in from La Ronge. And we have over here Ken 
Dueck and we also have Dean Desjarlais and also we have 
Mandi Sandhu and we also have Ruth Baxter. 
 
Now I might say that, to Dean I will say because he’s Cree, I 
will say, tansi. And also to say thank you to everybody in 
Northern Affairs for the outstanding work in regards to working 
with people in Northern Saskatchewan. And in Cree, of course, 
we say . . . (inaudible) . . . in Ruth’s language we say, migweth, 
and also marsi choo. 
 
And so with that, thank you very much. And I’d like a good 
welcome from all members of the House to the staff. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I welcome the 
guests. I’m glad to have . . . always glad to have people visiting 
us here in the legislature. 
 
As I remind people about what it is that the Devine government 
got elected on in 1982 — eliminate the gas tax. What did we 
hear, what did we hear, what did we hear today? What did we 
hear today? A blast from the past. What we heard is back to the 
future. A party that absolutely refuses to learn from its own 
history. A party that is so mired, so stuck in a mudhole, you will 
never form government in Saskatchewan. And nor do you 
deserve to, because you refuse to learn from the past. 
 
We have a party . . . we have across the way, Mr. Speaker, a 
party that is saying, cut, cut the gas tax. They’re saying cut the 
gas tax. They’re saying we’re really close, we were really close 
in the last election. And you were. And you were. Absolutely 
you were very close to forming government. No question about 
that. 
 
What’s happened since the election in September? Sask Party 
has gone downhill. And there’s a reason, and there’s a reason 
for it. And there’s a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, 
the hon. member for Saltcoats says, call an election. I’m just 
going to urge that he be careful what he asks for, because he 
just might get it. And it would just be great fun. 
 
(1630) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’m . . . I think it’s time to move on from 
the gas tax. At least for now, at least for now. 1982 — we had a 
government elected on the gas tax and interest rates. What they 
did is ran up deficit after deficit after deficit after deficit — and 
I could continue — every single budget. Every . . . I could say it 
11 different times and be accurate. 
 
And they left us a legacy where the government that took office 
in 1991 had absolutely no choice, no choice but to close the 
gap. We had to eliminate the annual deficit, first off, and then 
reduce the total debt. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to say 
that we have. I’m delighted to say that after nine and a half 
long, sorry, Tory years, we formed government. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan pulled together. The people of 
Saskatchewan paid higher taxes post-1991 — after 1991 — 
paid higher taxes. Why? Because they demanded, they valued 
services like medicare; services like a quality education, both K 
to 12 and post-secondary; they value government services and 
want them funded. The only problem of course is there’s . . . 
money is not absolutely unlimited, Mr. Speaker. I wish it were, 

but money is not absolutely unlimited. 
 
So we’ve balanced the budget seven budgets ago. This one is 
now the seventh consecutive balanced budget and we’re 
projecting that to go for four more. 
 
We have reduced taxes in — strategically — in every single 
budget there’s been at least modest, targeted tax relief. We’ve 
reduced the PST from 9 cents to 7, and then to 6. We’ve 
reduced income tax on several consecutive budgets. 
 
All of which though, Mr. Speaker, was setting us up for today 
. . . or yesterday’s budget. I keep saying today because today’s 
the day I’m speaking. But it set us up for yesterday’s budget 
where the Minister of Finance was able to stand up, 
congratulate the people of Saskatchewan for putting the 
building blocks in place for having our economy solid, for 
growing the economy, for making the Saskatchewan treasury 
able to not only sustain — although sustainability is important 
— but for the Minister of Finance to stand up and announce that 
the average Saskatchewan family is going to be paying $1,000 
less taxes four years from now than they are now. And those tax 
breaks start right away, right away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we hear the Saskatchewan Party 
talking about well, we should spend, we should spend, we 
should spend. I want to say . . . I’m going to actually quote from 
the Leader of the Opposition on April 5, 1999 — this is a year 
ago — April 5, where he says and I quote — I guess I should 
tell you this is in the Shellbrook Chronicle and the article is 
titled “Goodbye budget” — April 5, 1999 from the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party, quote: 
 

Thanks to the second highest taxes in Canada, a drain of 
the liquor and gaming fund, and massive welfare payments 
from Ottawa, the NDP has managed to balance another 
budget, Hermanson said. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting. He says a drain of the 
liquor and gaming fund. This is a year ago, this is a year ago, 
this is a year ago. This is April 5, 1999. 
 
And then earlier today I heard the same . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, earlier today I heard the 
same Leader of the Opposition — and I wrote it down — he 
said, and I quote: “The Minister of Finance admits he has $700 
million in the liquor and gaming fund.” 
 
At least we recognize, at least we recognize on this side whether 
someone’s coming or going, I remind the hon. member for 
Rosthern. We recognize whether someone’s coming or going. 
We don’t say one thing before an election and something else 
after. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this reminds me of a hiring situation. I 
can just picture the Saskatchewan Party hiring its questioners, 
you know, its researchers. 
 
And it kind of reminds me of a hiring situation that I heard of 
where there was three people being interviewed. The first 
person being interviewed was asked a question: what’s two plus 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

two? Well the engineer, the engineer pulled out a slide rule, 
says well two plus two is four. So then that was fine. The 
second person being interviewed they said: so what’s two plus 
two? And he says, well you know, in the case of Devine . . . 
people versus Devine, it was proven unequivocally two plus 
two equals four. So the lawyer got the answer right. Then the 
third person that wanted the job as the question writer says, well 
. . . he’s asked what is two plus two. And he says, well, do you 
have any specific number in mind? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think you’re going to have to get a new 
question writer over there. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I need a new question writer, no 
doubt about it. What was it you say? If you throw a rock in the 
dark and it yelps, you probably hit a dog. I think that maybe 
happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget debate we had the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party complaining that taxes aren’t going down. 
Well, I look at Tuesday, March 14, Maple Creek News, and I’m 
going to quote from the Leader of the Opposition. And it says in 
this Maple Creek News of March 14, 2000, it says . . . I’m not 
going to read his name but it’s the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party has written to Finance Minister, and I won’t use his name, 
urging that his NDP government to: 
 

(1) adopt all personal income tax cuts and reforms as 
recommended in the Vicq report; (2) reject the Vicq report 
recommendations to expand the PST; and (3) hold the PST 
at its current six per cent level. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member for Saltcoats says what did we do? The people of 
Saskatchewan are by the hour realizing more and more what it 
is we did. 
 
The tax cuts are so large it takes a while for it to settle in, but 
what did we do? We adopted the personal income tax cuts and 
reforms Vicq recommended, largely, almost all of that accepted. 
Some changes, and those changes, Mr. Speaker, took place. 
Why? Because government and coalition members, government 
members, were out consulting with our constituents and with 
the people all across this great province. 
 
We asked, what is it you like? We put out the Vicq report. 
Invited comment. I know I put out an MLA report in which I 
took . . . Let me describe it this way, Mr. Speaker. My MLA 
report is four pages and the Vicq report was, I forget, 68 or, you 
know, some significantly larger number of pages. 
 
Obviously I couldn’t send the Vicq report out to all 
constituents, but I took an executive summary, put it out to my 
constituents and said, please do tell me what is it you like? 
What is it you don’t like? 
 
I’m telling you that I got a significant number of letters, a 
significant number of letters from people who said, we value 
chiropractic services. Please do keep chiropractic services 
insured. What did we do, Mr. Speaker? Kept them insured. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh did you? I didn’t know that. 
 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this place just gets more 
absurd by the minute. I hear one of the members opposite 
saying, oh did you? I didn’t know that. 
 
Well I’d invite members to try and have a peek at the budget, 
try and understand what it’s all about. 
 
All we hear is people are leaving; oh no, they’re coming. We’re 
for it; no we’re against it. We’re hearing all kinds of things. 
Consistency is not the strength of members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker; consistency is not the strength there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was taking some notes as the budget was being 
delivered yesterday, and I noticed for instance when the 
Minister of Finance announced that the farm fuel tax was being 
completely eliminated for the next two years, we had one, one 
member, one member, one member applauded. One member 
opposite applauded — gas tax — one member opposite 
applauded. Mr. Speaker, it’s really interesting; they don’t like to 
hear good news, don’t like to hear good news. 
 
When the Minister of Finance was announcing that we’re . . . 
spending on Highways is going to $250 million this year — 
which is a 6 per cent increase I think it is from last year — no 
joy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six point six. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Six point six per cent increase. Thank you, hon. 
minister. There was no joy; no two hands met across the way. 
When there was an announcement that 26 . . . there was $26 
million in municipal revenue-sharing, no two hands clapped 
over there. When there was an announcement of 30 million a 
year in an infrastructure program, there was no joy on the 
opposite side. 
 
When there was an announcement of a minimum of 5 million 
per year from the centennial fund going to northern 
Saskatchewan, there was no joy on that side. Mr. Speaker, small 
wonder that both northern seats are represented on the NDP 
government side. Small wonder, small wonder; they know 
what’s good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the exemptions, the $8,000 tax credit 
personal exemption was announced, when the $8,000 spousal 
tax credit was announced, the $2,500 per dependent child, and 
the $1,000 boost tax exemption for seniors, there was no joy on 
the other side. 
 
Well this is a party over there that’s main claim to fame has 
been one of tax reduction. So when the biggest tax reduction in 
Saskatchewan is announced, there’s no joy. I kind of have to 
wonder, well what is it that they really want? And it boils down 
to . . . I can assure you, having been in this legislature for a few 
terms now, I can tell you it boils down to just crass politics, 
crass politics. 
 
If you really thought big . . . that tax cuts were important, then 
at least salute them when they come. At least, at least show 
some joy. Take some . . . stand up, take some credit even. I 
mean that would be not entirely unreasonable. But to not show 
any joy doesn’t make any sense. 
 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

When the Minister of Finance announced that 55,000 
Saskatchewan people would not be paying any Saskatchewan 
income tax as a result of measures introduced in this budget, 
there was no joy at all on the other side. The only joy there was 
. . . and it’s a good thing that you missed it, Mr. Speaker, 
because guests aren’t supposed to participate. But we did have 
one guest, the former member for Lloydminster, Vi Stanger, 
couldn’t restrain herself at that point, and Vi clapped. Other 
than that, she was fairly, fairly restrained for Vi. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance announced that 
there was going to be $32 million that goes out in a PST rebate 
to the lowest income people, people earning up to $35,000 a 
year, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the guests in the galleries — and 
the galleries were full yesterday — there was many people 
nodding. Was there any . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nodding off. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Oh, you wish they were nodding off. They were 
nodding because they were so pleased that, true to form, New 
Democrats were not forgetting people with lower incomes. 
 
We can’t all be fortunate and have the incomes that members of 
the legislature enjoy, and higher. There are people that are 
working — and I’ll describe it as working poor, although I 
don’t want to capture everybody in that — but there’s people, 
Mr. Speaker, for whom paying bills is a struggle and an 
ongoing struggle. 
 
(1645) 
 
There was one part of the speech where actually we got a bit of 
reaction from the opposition and from us, and that was when 
the Minister of Finance announced that some Saskatchewan 
people were going to get I think it was $285 million each. And 
of course he was our version of Regis Philbin on Who Wants To 
Be A Millionaire. What he was saying was $285,000 was going 
to be distributed, and he made that quite clear. 
 
Then we come, Mr. Speaker, to today, today, and the Leader of 
the Opposition was responding to the budget. The Leader of the 
Opposition said that in Saskatchewan we’re losing taxpayers at 
a record rate. He said we’re losing taxpayers at a record rate. 
And you know what? He was more accurate than he ever 
dreamt he was. 
 
In Saskatchewan we lost, yesterday, 55,000 people removed 
from the income tax roll. Fifty-five thousand of the lowest 
income people eliminated from the income tax roll in 
Saskatchewan in one swoop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Member for Rosthern, those 55,000 people will 
be hard-pressed to think Alberta looks any better. Those 55,000 
people, methinks, are going to be very, very pleased; very 
pleased especially not having to pay a health care premium. 
 
I don’t know if it’s the right time to announce that that 
member’s the one that recognizes the front end from the back 
end, whether people are coming or going. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have across the way the Saskatchewan Party 
— a right wing party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, as the 
hon. member for Saltcoats says, certainly do. And good for you. 
You’ve got the courage to say absolutely, I’m a right winger. 
Good for you. Good for you. 
 
And it’s fair that there’ll be a difference of opinion. That’s what 
this great legislature is all about. That’s what the voters have a 
choice of electing: right wingers or New Democrats, social 
democrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a government here that knew we had to, 
we had to provide fiscally responsible government to get us . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I wish that Hansard 
could catch . . . I wish Hansard could catch some of the 
heckling from across the way, Mr. Speaker. Needless to say, the 
logic somehow comes unravelled. It’s just difficult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a government on this side that is 
absolutely determined to be fiscally responsible. And we have 
been fiscally responsible in every single budget that we have 
delivered since 1992, every single one. They’ve all been 
building blocks. The people of Saskatchewan have all 
participated, some more willingly than some others, but have all 
participated in building our economy. 
 
We’ve got a record number of people working. We’ve got 
record jobs. We’ve got low unemployment, lowest in the 
nation. We’ve got job growth projected for each of the next four 
years. We’ve got the longest consecutive growth, we’ve got the 
longest consecutive growth, economic growth in Saskatchewan, 
than there has been since the Blakeney ’70s. Longest 
consecutive growth since the Blakeney ’70s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes. Not all to our credit, but we’ve helped make 
it so. Yes, my colleague points out that the ’80s were Tory 
times and tough times. That’s history. Now is now. We are 
going to be building. 
 
I am very proud, Mr. Speaker, to see this budget, to see what 
it’s doing. To see that it’s offering a thousand dollars tax cut to 
the average Saskatchewan family. And my constituency has 
many average Saskatchewan families. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say when? Well 
when? Let me say again, the members opposite are the 
remnants of a party that in 1982 should have learned a lesson. 
Certainly by 1991 the lesson should have been very clear. You 
can’t indiscriminately just cut taxes, off-loading those taxes 
onto the future, onto our children. We will not do that. 
 
I’ve heard the Minister of Finance, I’ve heard the Premier, I’ve 
heard many of my colleagues say, we will not be the party to 
off-load onto our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I think the applause, I think the applause 
speaks for itself. This is a party that will not off-load the future 
onto our children. We’re building the future for our children. 
 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2000 

We’re building economic growth. We’re building jobs. We’re 
building opportunity. We’ve got, as the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers says, people coming from all around the 
world to fill jobs in Saskatchewan. This is what the future is. 
This is what we’re about. This is what we’re building. This is 
why, Mr. Speaker, I am going to be supporting this budget, and 
it’s why I will not be able to support the amendment the 
opposition put forward. 
 
I am delighted, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve arrived at this point in 
our history. With that I will take my place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great pleasure to stand in the House today to reply to the budget 
speech yesterday on behalf of the people of Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
I have a news release here that says that Cline brings down a 
historic . . . historical tax cuts. Believe me, if they believe that, 
it will be historical. When you raise the PST by $160 million, 
how can you call that a historical tax cut? 
 
Somehow they’re trying to make people believe that we are 
paying less for our taxes now than before he spoke yesterday. 
And if you ask anybody out on the street right now, they’re not 
paying less, they’re paying more. So if it’s a historical tax cut, 
it’s very tough to believe. 
 
When I campaigned over the last . . . over the month in 
September there, leading up to the provincial election, I 
campaigned on a lot of the things that were addressed in that 
budget. And I’m going to talk to a few of those things. I also 
campaigned an awful lot on what I would do as a person if I 
was elected. And although I am in opposition, I don’t feel I can 
oppose everything that the government says. 
 
I want to see the province move ahead, and some of the things 
that were addressed in the budget I do believe in, and weren’t 
bad ideas — ideas that we put forth during the election. And it’s 
funny how that is missed so often, that we were the ones that 
initiated those ideas. We were the ones that had put those forth. 
So of course I will give the Minister of Finance credit for taking 
a few of our ideas. 
 
Some of the ideas that I will talk about that I can support in that 
budget . . . and they’re few and far between. I found a lot more 
ideas and things in the budget that I do disagree with, but a few 
of the things that I agree with are the property tax rebate. 
They’re talking about reducing the property tax by about 25 
million over the next two years. 
 
I don’t know how many people on that side of the House have 
had the opportunity to attend at tax revolt meetings. We have 
talked on this side of the House many, many times about the 
different tax revolt meetings we have been to. And I think I 
have got about 10 notches on my belt of tax revolt meetings that 
have been held not only in my constituency, but around the 
province. 
 
I talked to a member that sits beside me who has surpassed me, 
unfortunately; he’s attended more tax revolt meetings than I 

have. But when there are tax revolt meetings held night after 
night after night, there is a definite reason for it. 
 
There have been 83 tax revolt meetings held in this province to 
this date and another one being conducted tonight. 
 
I think the numbers on those tax revolt meetings are about 98 
per cent approval or in other words, of withholding property 
tax. So I applaud the government yesterday in addressing that 
issue — an issue that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) has passed resolutions for 30 years to try 
and get the government to listen to with no success. 
 
A group of farmers in my constituency started this movement 
and have pushed it throughout the province, and finally this 
provincial government has listened and has addressed that issue. 
I’ll get back to the property tax issue in a little bit because 
unfortunately it was offset by a number of the other things that 
they did in the budget. But at least they listened and addressed 
that issue. 
 
I think in all those 83 meetings there has been representation by 
government at perhaps two of them. One or two of them, that’s 
been about it. 
 
Another area of the budget that I applaud the government on is 
the fuel tax rebate of lifting the cap on the fuel tax. The cap had 
been at $900 of course, and they’re lifting that. On most farms, 
my farm, it won’t make a big difference but there are a lot of 
farms out there that it’ll make a huge difference. So I applaud 
them on that. 
 
Another area that I am glad that they listened to our advice and 
they are addressing is the personal income tax. They are looking 
at reducing the personal income tax over a number of years — 
over the next three or four years. Unfortunately, as I mentioned 
earlier, I farmed and I was also enrolled in a program called 
GRIP. Now this government on the other side is saying, like 
just believe us. We’re going to drop your personal income tax. 
It may not be this year; it’ll start next year and maybe the year 
after, and we’ll get to our goal eventually. 
 
Well I remember a GRIP program that was a signed contract 
that was ripped up. And now I’m supposed to believe this 
government that they’re going to get to their personal income 
tax goals. And I really have second thoughts. Trust is a tough 
word when we’re talking about this government. 
 
The fourth area that I have to address that I do agree with the 
provincial government in the budget is the issue of PST on 
off-reserve purchases. The PST on off-reserve purchases was 
once again an idea that we put forth and campaigned on. It was 
an issue that I found resonated very, very well throughout my 
constituency. And I do have to compliment them on it. 
 
But I think the bigger issue is not just the PST on off-reserves, 
it’s the whole issue of our First Nations people. We need to 
include them in our economy and not exclude them. And this is 
just the very beginning of that, of taking part in our economy in 
the future. 
 
Unfortunately those are about the four areas that I found that I 
could really compliment the government on, on its recent 



March 30, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

budget, because they are moving in the right direction. It just so 
happens they were the ideas that we had in the last provincial 
election and we campaigned on, but I applaud them for taking 
those and putting them into the budget. 
 
There are a number of areas though that I do have a real 
problem with when it comes to this provincial budget. One of 
the areas, and I addressed it just briefly on the property tax side, 
is in education. The burden on property tax owners is incredible 
to support our education system. And hence the tax revolt 
meetings that have been held around the province. 
 
After going through the budget and listening to the Minister of 
Finance speak on what they are doing for education, and then 
leaving after the budget address and talking to members of the 
SSTA, a number of school trustees that I have talked to, they 
felt like they have been cheated in this budget. 
 
I’ve heard the phrase over there, zap you’re frozen, and that’s 
exactly how they feel. Zap they’ve been frozen. 
 
Now what’s going to happen is, there’s a new . . . the teachers 
will be looking to renegotiate their contracts or are presently 
renegotiating their contracts. The school divisions are looking at 
the expanded PST and how much that’s going to cost them. 
Combining the expanded PST and the possible teachers’ 
agreement which is going to, of course, probably see some 
increases in their wages, they’re going to find that the school 
divisions have only one thing to do and that’s to raise their mill 
rate. 
 
In order to keep up with the lack of funding that this provincial 
government is giving, in order to keep up with the new 
collective bargaining agreement that the teachers will be 
receiving, they’re going to be forced to increase the mill rate in 
the next round of tax year. 
 
When they increase the mill rate, most RMs (rural municipality) 
and school divisions feel that the increased mill rate is going to 
offset any tax break that this government has given on property. 
 
And so, yes they can say that they’ve done a real good thing by 
reducing, by funding the property tax, but I find it’s an awful lot 
like a shell game. They move it from here and it pops up over 
here. 
 
Yes, they can wash their hands of it — oh, they’re not 
increasing the taxes. No, not at all. But you’ll see most school 
divisions forced to increase the property tax, the mill rate, and 
hence the property tax on their property. 
 
The expansion of the PST is another area that I’m just amazed 
that this government went for. 
 
And you know when you look at the number of expanded areas 
that the PST has been expanded to: whether it’s repair services 
or a number of things like that, real estate fees, non-prescription 
drugs — you know, there’s a lot of people that wanted to go out 
and get some Anacin and some Aspirin after that budget speech, 
and I’m glad they did it yesterday because it costs them more to 
do it today — maintenance contracts, bedding plants — the list 
goes on and on — pet food, dry cleaning . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, please. It now being 5 p.m., this 
House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 

 


