





























































Hansard: April 05, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 513 
 April 5, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And this afternoon I 
rise to present a petition in opposition to enforced municipal 
amalgamation. It is a . . . The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by constituents of mine from the area 
of Cabri and also from the community of Carlyle. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition dealing with one of the more favourable ideas that 
have come in the province, the reduction in the fuel tax. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And these are signed from people all over the province that 
support this concept. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to rise on behalf of many of my constituents who 
are opposed to forced amalgamation. And their prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reject proposals of any forced 
amalgamation of municipalities. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Guernsey, Pilger, Middle Lake, Lake Lenore. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reject any proposals regarding 
the forced amalgamation of municipalities. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from the area of 
Clavet, which is not one of what is considered an economically 
feasible area. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of the province concerned about the high price of fuel. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Regina, Pleasantdale, and Melfort in my 
constituency. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding the price of fuel in this province. And the 
petition reads . . . prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Melfort and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — I read a petition in regards to the forced . . . the 
suggested forced amalgamation of municipalities. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And that is . . . the signatures here are from Maidstone and area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too stand today to 
present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned 
about the high fuel tax. The prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the people who signed this are from Kinistino, Melfort. 
 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people in Swift Current and area 
concerned about hospital funding. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to assist in the regeneration plan for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital for approximately $7.54 
million, thereby allowing the Swift Current District Health 
Board the opportunity to provide improved health care 
services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, Success, and Webb. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to also present petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Lloydminster, 
Unity, North Battleford, Maidstone, Marshall, Lashburn — all 
in the northwest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
read a petition concerning the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 
permanent physician with consistent hours and days. 
 

I present this from the good folks from Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition opposed to enforced municipal amalgamation. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
There’s petitioners from Bienfait, Estevan, and numerous other 
places from around Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to read a 
petition of people concerned about forced amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reject any proposals regarding 
the forced amalgamation of municipalities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the bedroom community of Clavet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I rise to present a petition. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
I present this on behalf of the signatures from Bienfait, Perdue, 
and Harris. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition on 
behalf of concerned citizens who are concerned about the 
enforced municipal amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Bienfait, 
Estevan, North Portal, and Harris. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forth a 
petition regarding forced amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And I have petitioners from Bienfait, Moose Jaw and Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to present 
a petition regarding municipal amalgamation and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

Signed by individuals from Bienfait, Estevan, North Portal and 
Harris. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility that I rise to present the petition today also 
respecting the issue of forced amalgamation. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with forced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by the good folks of Bienfait, North 
Portal, Frobisher, Estevan, Elfros and Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. They are petitions: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to halt plans to proceed with the 
amalgamation of municipalities in Saskatchewan; to cause 
the government to ensure reliable cellular service to 
Watson and area; to provide funding for the Swift Current 
Regional Hospital; and to reduce fuel taxes. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. This afternoon I give 
notice that on day no. 21 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: please 
provide a schedule of all rate increases, service fee 
increases, and all other increases and charges to the public 
for services rendered implemented by your department for 
the year 2000-2001, fiscal. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in an effort to keep this 
government open and accessible, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan): please provide a schedule of all rate 
increases, service fee increases, and all other increases and 
charges to the public for services rendered implemented by 
your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs: please provide a schedule for all rate increases, 
service fee increases, and all other increases and charges to 
the public for services rendered implemented by your 
department for the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: please provide a schedule of 
all rate increases, service fee increases, and all other 
increases and charges to public for services rendered 
implemented by your department for the fiscal year 
2000-2001. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to public for services rendered implemented 
by your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well give notice 
that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: please provide a 
schedule of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all 
other increases and charges to the public for services 
rendered implemented by your department for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: please provide a 
schedule of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all 
other increases and charges to the public for services 
rendered implemented by your department for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation: please provide a schedule for all rate 
increases, service fee increases, and all other increases and 
charges to the public for services rendered implemented by 
your department in 2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority: please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year. 

 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year. 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: please provide a 
schedule of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all 
other increases and charges to the public for services 
rendered implemented by your department for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much money is your 
department planning to spend on advertising, direct mail, 
or any other type of promotion for the 2000-2001 
provincial budget. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by your department by the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on 
day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Sask Water: please provide a schedule 
of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all other 
increases and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by Sask Water for the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m standing I have another written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day 21 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development: please provide a schedule of all rate 
increases, service fee increases, and all other increases and 
charges to the public for services rendered implemented by 

your department for the year 2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: please provide a 
schedule of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all 
other increases and charges to the public for services 
rendered implemented by your department for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training: please provide a schedule of all rate increases, 
service fee increases, and all other increases and charges to 
the public for services rendered implemented by your 
department for the 2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Energy and Mines: please provide a 
schedule of all rate increases, service fee increases, and all 
other increases and charges to the public for services 
rendered implemented by your department for the 
2000-2001 fiscal year. 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management): please provide a schedule of all 
rate increases, service fee increases, and all other increases 
and charges to the public for services rendered 
implemented by your department for the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a group of 22 public servants that are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re hard-working representatives of 
the Department of Justice, Finance, Labour, and the Legislative 
Library. 
 
It’s my understanding they’ve had a quick tour, and that they’ve 
come to view the proceedings of the Assembly. They will have 
sessions on the use of our library and on our system of 
government and the session on the government in the British 
parliamentary tradition. And I see Ms. Woods will be 
challenged to provide the debriefing from question period as 
well. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome 
to members of the public service in your gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

you to all members in this House I’d like to recognize 
somebody who’s no stranger in this House; a friend to members 
on both sides of the House; somebody who used to be with the 
newspaper and is now with the radio station — Bonny Braden. 
 
And with her is some journalism students who were with our 
caucus this morning and we reminded the students that there 
were members on the other side of the House who would really 
love to be in our caucus in the morning, but they had the 
opportunity. We appreciated seeing them. And congratulations 
on picking a very good professor. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to say I want to 
introduce to you — but I know that is not necessary — a friend 
of yours and mine. But through you to the House, Mr. Don 
Dament in your gallery. And as I say, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dament 
was the sheriff at Battleford in his previous life, and in his 
present life, he is marshal of the golf course at Jackfish Lake. 
I’d ask all members to please welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you, Mr. Barry Spencer from the city of 
Weyburn. Barry owns and operates a very successful car 
dealership in Weyburn and he’s a special friend as well. And he 
worked very hard to help elect the Saskatchewan Party in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature two of 
my constituents who are sitting in the west gallery, Gary and 
Jessie Carlson. Both Gary and Jessie are participants in so many 
parts of our community that it’s hard to describe it all. So I 
think will just pick one for Gary and one for Jessie. 
 
Gary has just recently been re-elected to be on the senate at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Jessie is a very capable leader in 
the Regina Horticultural Society as well as many other things. 
 
I also would like to bring special greetings to them on behalf of 
the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley because he has 
served with them in many, many capacities in the United 
Church. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome the Carlsons. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce two 
constituents of mine that are up in the Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon. Mr. Lenn Dovell, the owner-operator of Golf 
Kenosee at Kenosee park . . . or Moose Mountain Provincial 
Park, I guess it is. Everybody calls it Kenosee. 
 
And Daryl Safinuk, the owner-operator of the restaurant at the 
Kenosee Inn, also from the Moose Mountain Provincial Park, 
and I would ask all members to welcome them here today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I 
would also like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the official 
opposition, to welcome the representatives of the PSC (Public 
Service Commission) to the Assembly today. And I hope that 
you find the proceedings here instructional and interesting. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In many ways it seems 
a bit of a shame to single out one of the fine people with the 
Public Service Commission that are here today, but it is my 
honour to do just that and single out one John Abraham. Part of 
that is I know John through a mutual friend of ours, Pat 
Danforth, and it also is sort of fitting in that Mr. Abraham is one 
of the people that has come to our province from the Sudan via, 
I understand, an education in India. 
 
But I ask all members to join me in welcoming John Abraham. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Arm River Constituency Hockey 
Teams Win Championships 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to rise today to 
congratulate two hockey teams in my constituency. First up, the 
Loreburn Nineteeners Senior Hockey Team who’ve won the 
Provincial C Championship for the second year in a row. They 
also won the league championship. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the Outlook Express who have won 
the Provincial B Midget Championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Light Source Synchrotron 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to 
talk about our government’s commitment to research and 
development. Last week our government approved a $25 
million investment in the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron. 
This funding through the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development represents the largest single 
contribution outside of the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. 
 
The Synchrotron is the single largest scientific project in 
Canadian history. The Synchrotron represents unprecedented 
opportunities for Saskatoon and the province as a whole. 
 
It will provide 2,000 person-years of employment in the 
construction phase alone; create 200 permanent positions; 
generate $35 million per year in new research and development 
spending; and greatly increase Saskatchewan’s ability to make 
value-added products. 
 
As well, the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development announced over $1 million in research funding 
for our two universities. 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

And in last Thursday’s budget, we announced the creation of 
the innovation and science fund. This new $10 million fund will 
help make Saskatchewan researchers access grants from the 
Canadian Foundation for Innovation. Investments in research 
and development today will help us attract more projects like 
the Synchrotron and will provide opportunities for our best and 
brightest minds to build their future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is something we on this side of the House support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lakeland Community Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in our honoured 
Assembly today to bring a congratulatory salute to one of my 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resort communities of Emma Lake and 
Christopher Lake and the village of Christopher Lake annually 
honour a deserving citizen for their many contributions to the 
Lakeland community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year these communities have chosen Annette 
Heisler as their 1999 citizen of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Annette’s contributions to her community are 
many and varied. Annette is a true giver of spirit, believing that 
it is better to give than it is to receive. 
 
Some of her many commitments include her activities at St. 
Mary’s Church where she serves on the church council, helps 
coordinate the World Day of Prayer, instructs religion, and 
helps with baptisms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Annette is also involved with the Emma and 
Christopher Lake association, serving as a beach representative 
and the liaison to the rural municipality of Lakeland. She has 
also been involved in home care ministries, the Lakeland 
Millennium Committee, the Lakeland Recreation Board, Red 
Cross, Meals On Wheels, and many other community programs 
too numerous to mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating Annette Heisler for all of her accomplishment 
and dedication to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mobile Computerized Tomography Scan Introduced 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to share with the members of the House an example of the 
government’s commitment to health. A new mobile CT 
(computerized tomography) service introduced in southwest 
Saskatchewan will cut travel times for residents in and around 
both Moose Jaw and Swift Current. 
 
CT scans provide detailed pictures of internal areas of the body 
conventional x-rays can’t reach. The scans are commonly used 
to diagnose tumours, strokes, and other injuries to the brain and 
spinal cord. 
 
A custom trailer will carry a mobile CT scanner from Moose 
Jaw to Swift Current and back again each week. This means 

that many people will no longer have to travel to Regina or 
Saskatoon to have scans done. 
 
The new mobile scanner — the very first in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker — is a pilot project funded by Sask Health. The 
province has provided $927,000 in one-time start-up costs, such 
as buying and preparing equipment, and training staff. They 
will also provide more than $400,000 annually for operating 
costs. 
 
The two locations will do an estimated 2,000 scans each year, 
primarily for the people in the two host districts and residents of 
South Country, Southwest, and Rolling Hills Health District. 
The five districts have co-operated in planning the shared 
service. 
 
This year the province will spend 3 million to staff and run the 
province’s 8 CT scans. The number of scans done in the 
province has increased rapidly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Restaurant Expansion 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today we’ll be 
voting on the budget. Those who believe in tax fairness, tax 
simplification, tax reduction, debt reduction, and essential 
program enhancement will vote for the budget. 
 
Those who believe a budget is just not a budget unless it has the 
potential for a billion dollar deficit will oppose it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s another more tangible way to 
support the economic message of the budget, and smart 
business people all over the province are doing just that. They 
see the Saskatchewan economy growing and they are expanding 
their operation to take advantage of that and to contribute to our 
solid economy. 
 
A case in point: according to The Melfort Journal of February 
8, the Melfort KFC restaurant has expanded its business by 
adding a Pizza Hut menu. They plan, later on this summer, to 
include a Taco Bell franchise — three menu choices where once 
there was one. And dare I add? No PST (provincial sales tax) on 
chicken, or pizza, and none to come on his enchiladas either. 
 
I congratulate the proprietor of the Melfort KFC-Pizza 
Hut-Taco Bell conglomerate — the member from Melfort. And 
I thank him for his vote of confidence. 
 
To quote from the February 8 Melfort Journal: “I guess you get 
to a stage where you can only feed people in a community so 
much chicken,” So I guess that means he’s going to be voting 
for the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

April Declared Agricultural Sciences Month 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 
has proclaimed April to be Agricultural Sciences Month in 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

Saskatchewan as a means of promoting the importance of 
agriculture research to Saskatchewan. 
 
Research helps to increase the competitiveness of our 
agriculture and food industry. Research and development in all 
sectors are crucial building blocks of the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Yesterday in Swift Current in recognition of these facts, the 
Minister of Agriculture attended a ceremony celebrating the 
accomplishments of the Wheatland Conservation Area group 
and dedicating a facility which will assist Wheatland in its 
agricultural research. A ceremony, Mr. Speaker, which 
recognizes the importance of co-operation between 
governments and individual groups for the betterment of all. 
 
The building was funded through the joint 
Canada-Saskatchewan Agri-Food Innovation Fund, the AFIF. It 
was built on land provided by Canada’s Semi-arid Prairie 
Agricultural Research Centre, the SPARC. 
 
Together, Wheatland and SPARC have shared resources and 
facilities in research dedicated to areas of specific interest to 
farmers in southwest Saskatchewan such as soil salinity and soil 
conservation. This building will assist them in their important 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how the AFIF is 
promoting the Saskatchewan economy and Saskatchewan 
producers, and I invite all hon. members to show their approval. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal Honour for Regina Golf Club 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the 
House that the Regina Golf Club has received Royal Assent and 
is thus officially changing its name to the Royal Regina Golf 
Club. 
 
The road to Royal Assent began last year during the club’s 
100th anniversary. The club pursued this honour through the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. The request was then 
passed on to the Governor General of Canada and in turn to Her 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. 
 
The Royal Regina Golf Club has enjoyed a celebrated history in 
the Queen City. The club originated on May 6, 1899, making it 
the oldest golf club in the province. In 1910 it moved to its 
present location next to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) training academy. And the Regina Golf Club was 
officially incorporated by an Act in the legislature in 1923. As 
mentioned earlier, the club celebrated its 100th anniversary last 
year. 
 
The Royal Regina Golf Club will be one of only five official 
royal golf clubs in Canada which the last one being designated 
in 1931 which was the Royal Colwood in Victoria, BC (British 
Columbia). 
 
The other royal clubs are the Royal Montreal, Royal Quebec, 
and Royal Ottawa. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Royal Regina 
Golf Club on this illustrious honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fees for Long-Term Care Homes 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, another 
day, another tax grab in NDP (New Democratic Party) 
Saskatchewan. Today they have stooped to a new low. This 
time it’s a direct attack on Saskatchewan seniors — seniors in 
long-term care homes. 
 
A single senior, with about $2,300 of monthly income, will see 
their fees jump by nearly $500 — $500 a month, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s in the NDP so-called tax cut budget. 
 
I would ask the Premier to answer for his government. Mr. 
Premier, what on earth are you doing? How could you possibly 
justify this massive attack on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we 
announced two changes to the long-term care fee structure. The 
first one: some nursing home residents in the higher income 
group will see their maximum increase as of the fall of this 
year. But of the 9,000 long-term care residents we have in 
Saskatchewan, 80 per cent of those will see no changes. 
 
The second change we’ll be making will be affecting married 
couples who now will have another option of how to divide 
their income which will be calculated for their long-term care 
fees. 
 
And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of long-term care 
residents will see no change in their fee structure, and the 20 per 
cent who do see a change will see it begin this fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that 
the Premier didn’t answer the question and account for his 
government’s actions. 
 
I want to tell you how out of touch this government is; this 
morning the Associate Minister of Health said that this increase 
will only affect seniors who can afford it. She then proceeded to 
hand out figures showing that a senior with just $28,000 a year 
in income would be hit with a $5,600 increase. Only the NDP 
would think that somebody with a $28,000 could afford a 
$5,600 tax grab. 
 
Mr. Premier, that is absolutely obscene. You’re telling 
low-income seniors to drain every dime they have in their bank 
account while you sit on a $405 million liquor and gaming 
fund. What is wrong with you people? How can you possibly 
justify this obscene attack on low-income seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The long-term 
sector in our health system is quite significantly subsidized by 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

this government. Over 70 per cent of the long-term care costs 
are subsidized by the government. An average cost of a 
long-term care bed is $3,500; at the very maximum, no one will 
be made to pay more than $1,500. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier 
and I say to his government, by his own record they are jacking 
up long-term care fees by as much as $469 a month, and that’s 
over $5,600 a year for seniors with modest incomes. 
 
And you have the nerve to send out a pamphlet bragging about 
a $500 tax cut for seniors. Have you lost all sense of right and 
wrong? Mr. Premier, you had the nerve to call this an historical 
budget, but it’s an historical attack on Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Mr. Premier, take some responsibility, take control of your 
tax-hungry government, and cancel this attack on Saskatchewan 
seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, when I 
phoned some of the seniors’ organizations to alert them to this 
change, many of them said it’s still very cheap, and that’s very 
reasonable. So I think that what we have to remember is that 80 
per cent of our seniors that are in long-term care will not see a 
change — 80 per cent of them will not see any change. The 20 
per cent that will see a change are in the higher income groups, 
and that’s what’s significant about this announcement today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the Premier, if 
he’s listening, Saskatchewan people are reeling from one tax 
grab after another that’s hidden in your government’s budget. 
The PST tax grab; the student loan tax grab; the property tax 
grab; the camping tax grab; and now the seniors tax grab. Every 
day there’s a new ugly surprise for Saskatchewan taxpayers and 
it begs the question, what’s next? 
 
But when we ask the Minister of Finance to come clean and tell 
us what other tax grabs are hidden in his budget, he says that’s 
not my job. He says it’s the opposition’s job to tell the public 
about all the hidden tax grabs in his budget. So much for an 
open, accountable government. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you come clean? What further tax grabs are 
hidden in your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition, in the tradition of the new so-called Saskatchewan 
Party and its predecessor party, the Tory Party, follows a very 
funny, follows a very funny path, follows a very funny path . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to 
hear the answer. They just simply want to shout me down. And 
if that’s the case, then I’m not going to bother trying to give . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I can’t hear myself speak, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just ask members to kindly allow the 

answers to be heard. The questions are allowed to be heard; 
allow the answers to be heard, please, for the benefit of 
everybody in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very brief in the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . There they go again. There they go 
again. Logic doesn’t prevail; reason doesn’t prevail. Bully tactics 
in this legislature they hope will prevail — they will not prevail in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
What will prevail is the truth. And the truth of the matter is that 
that group over there wants to increase spending well in excess of 
a billion dollars and argue all the while that they can have a tax 
cut, that they can have a balanced budget, and that they can pay 
down the debt; and, Mr. Speaker, if you believe that I’ve got one 
of several bridges in Saskatoon I can sell you. 
 
It’s phony math; it’s Tory math. It didn’t work in the 1980s and it 
isn’t working right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker. The Premier thinks 
we’re upset. He’s absolutely right we’re upset. We’re upset 
because he’s taxing seniors and long-term care homes. We have 
every right to be upset as every Saskatchewan resident is. 
 
It turns out there’s 45 separate fee hikes in the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management alone — 45 increases in 
that department ranging from 9 to 150 per cent. And why didn’t 
the Environment minister tell us about them? He says because 
nobody asked. 
 
If the NDP . . . (inaudible) . . . don’t ask, don’t tell policy, if we 
don’t say anything, maybe nobody will notice how we’re taxing 
the life out of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, we are asking. Earlier today the Saskatchewan Party 
tabled written questions asking for a list of hidden tax grabs in 
every one of your departments. But why don’t you just make it 
easy. Why don’t you release those tax grabs today? Give us the 
list. Mr. Premier, will you tell us what else you’re hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition in the Saskatchewan Party, the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party, as its predecessor the Tory Party that 
governed from 1982 to 1991, has the same consistent habit now 
for the last 15, 20 years. And their argument is to say that every 
fee for usage of a park is a tax. Their argument is that every rate 
charged for a public utility is a tax. 
 
If that utility was owned privately they wouldn’t say it was a 
tax, they would say it’s a fee. But the fact that it’s owned 
publicly, it’s a tax. Under these people’s maths, which is the old 
Tory math, everything is a tax. Not a charge. Not a fee. Not 
something to be used and be paid for under normal usages. 
 
Yesterday they raised the question of the parks fees and they 
said the advisory committee hadn’t even been consulted. And 
the Chair of the advisory committee said he had been consulted 
and not only that but the fees were reasonable. Everything that 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

is there is reasonable. We’re not going to go back to the days of 
your math of nearly bankrupting this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fees In Tourism Industry 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: —Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Environment Minister. Mr. Minister, there aren’t many areas of 
Saskatchewan’s economy that haven’t been hammered by NDP 
taxes, but one area that has been able to bob and weave through 
the barrage of taxes is our tourism industry. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget caught the 
tourism industry with a stiff left-hand to the jaw as well. That’s 
what 45 fee increases will do to tourism in Saskatchewan’s 
parks and resorts. 
 
Mr. Minister, here’s what the resort owners, LeRoy and Brenda 
James wrote about the $450,000 baseball bat your government 
took to park and fishing fees: 
 

As a resort owner in the Meadow Lake Provincial Park, I 
am once again embarrassed by our government. With 
summer just around the corner, I have the duty to inform 
our customers that, along with the 40 per cent increase they 
must pay to enter the provincial park, it will also cost them 
155 . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, please, I would ask the member 
to go directly to his question please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — 
 

. . . to purchase a fishing licence when they get there. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain this latest tax grab to LeRoy 
and Brenda and the thousands of other people who have to 
serve our tourism industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
there’s a lot of howling going across the street about tax grabs 
and what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, to the member is that 
parks in this province cost $13.6 million to operate. This 
province grants $5.1 million to cover those costs. The rest are 
coming from park fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed, this government is 
committed to our park system. And I say today that the $2 . . . 
the one . . . the $2 increase on a daily entry into the park is not 
as significant as the . . . as the $15 billion debt that your party 
left us in, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Environment minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
know which is worse — that you pummelled the tourism 
industry with massive tax increases for park fees and licences, 
or the fact that you tried to inflict the tax increase without 
telling anyone. 

Mr. Minister, here’s what the owners of the Big Island Cove 
Resort at the Meadow Lake Provincial Park had to say about the 
45 fee increases you tried to slip through in the dark of the 
night. 
 

This is a lose-lose situation for everyone involved. The 
province will see a decrease in licence revenues, struggling 
resort operators will see a reduction in rentals, and 
ultimately tourism in Saskatchewan will decline. 
 

Mr. Minister, will you admit that your foiled attempt to secretly 
inflict a massive increase in park and licensing fees is going to 
be a disaster? And will you immediately rescind these 
unnecessary tax increases on our tourism industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the 
answer is no I will not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these increases result in approximately 708,000 in 
new revenues from the users and this province is putting 
532,000 additional dollars into the provincial parks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this money is used for our parks system. And once 
again, I go back to our earlier point that we have a beautiful 
province. We have a beautiful park system. And we are 
prepared not only to ask the users to chip in to cover some of 
the 1 and $2 costs, this province is also putting money where 
their mouth is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Police Services 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s secret assault on property taxpayers 
continues. A few days ago we heard from the Education 
minister telling school divisions, if you don’t like it, raise the 
mill rate. 
 
Now villages and RMs (rural municipality) are being told the 
NDP is unloading $4 million worth of policing costs on them. 
For most RMs that translates into a tax increase of between 1 to 
2 mills. For villages it means a massive property tax increase or 
it means forced amalgamation. Are those the options the NDP 
would recommend to municipalities trying to cope with the 
latest NDP downloading — amalgamation or increased property 
taxation? 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you suggest that municipalities pay for a 
massive $4 million NDP download? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
to the member, first I want to say to the member that if he were 
to read the information as to how the $4 million arrived in that 
particular pool, what he would see that in 1995 there was the 
committee that was established of which SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Association of Rural Municipalities) were a part of. 
 
And over that period of time, that committee decided that there 
would need to be an increase in fees for policing across the 
province. That increase in fees across the province showed that 
there would need to be an additional $4 million that would have 
to come from small towns and villages who weren’t 
participating in that contribution. 
 
After the review was completed, this administration said, over a 
period of time we would cover off the $4 million until such 
point as there would be a mitigating period. That mitigating 
period, sir, is now completed and those municipalities that were 
not paying that $4 million are now absorbing that within their 
own budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. Minister, no amount of 
NDP bafflegab changes the fact that your budget downloads $4 
million of policing costs on municipalities. It’s another little 
tidbit the Finance minister forgot to put into the budget speech. 
 
Mr. Minister, when were you planning on telling municipal 
taxpayers their property taxes were going up? When you were 
boasting last week about your so-called tax cuts, why didn’t you 
also announce that you plan on slashing $4 million from the 
budget for municipal policing? 
 
Is the NDP’s idea of beefing up policing services in 
Saskatchewan cutting $4 million from policing budget and then 
telling municipalities to raise taxes to make up the difference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member, if you were 
to review the budget more fully and more clearly, what you 
would see is that a portion of those policing costs have now 
gone to the municipalities and over to Justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s happened, of course, is that what you’re seeing is 
that you are seeing a broadened and expanded service to rural 
Saskatchewan through the Justice department in its additional 
policing. So in the province today we add an additional 25 
police officers, of which rural Saskatchewan’s going to see in 
proportion about 16 of those. 
 
And you say to us that that’s not a sufficient investment in 
policing the province. I say to the member opposite, just review 
the budget, see that those services are going to be provided now 
in a broader way in rural Saskatchewan by additional policing 
officers. Go back to your community and ask them whether or 
not they don’t support additional policing services in their 
areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. Minister, it may come 
to a shock to you to find out that Saskatchewan is currently 
facing more than 100 RCMP vacancies — not additions, 
vacancies. That’s 100 fewer police officers on the street. And 

it’s a long way from the NDP campaign promise to increase the 
number of police officers in Saskatchewan by 200 — not 25 — 
200. 
 
How many municipalities are being told their policing funding 
is being slashed $4 million to zero? Mr. Minister, how does 
your decision to cut police funding by $4 million with your 
campaign . . . square up with your campaign promise of adding 
200 more police offices? And how are municipalities supposed 
to cope with this last, broken NDP campaign promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I think I should clarify 
the member’s understanding of what is happening with regards 
to policing in Saskatchewan. The government is committed to 
200 new police officers over the next four years, 25 are in place 
. . . will be in place this year, Mr. Speaker. And the party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, in the campaign, of course committed 
not one penny to Justice, not one penny to police. There would 
not be one extra police officer on the street if that party opposite 
was in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By the end of this year I should also add, there will be almost 
no vacancies in the RCMP contingent. Mr. Speaker, we have 
filled . . . we have seen 40 RCMP vacancies filled since 
October. We will see the rest of them filled by the end of the 
year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there will be 300 more police 
officers on the street this year than there were last year, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s our commitment to rural Saskatchewan and to 
urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs also. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan residents are very concerned about this 
government’s heavy-handed interest in forced municipal 
amalgamation. Attendance has been very high at the public task 
force meetings being held around the province. Thousands of 
people have turned out to express their concern over Mr. 
Garcea’s interim report and about the NDP forcing 
amalgamation upon them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister is telling the media he will make 
a recommendation to cabinet before the end of this month. He 
will begin preparing legislation before Mr. Garcea’s final report 
is out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the rush? Mr. Minister, will you commit 
right now not to bring in legislation forcing amalgamation on 
municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that he should look at what’s happened in this province 
over the past 10 years. Because over the past 10 years both the 
organizations of SUMA and SARM have been calling for 
changes to the structure of municipalities. 
 
Municipalities have been asking for, both SUMA and SARM, 
Mr. Speaker, have been asking for greater autonomy, they’ve 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

been asking for greater revenue sharing, they’ve been asking for 
greater opportunities for them to provide a broader range of 
services in this province. 
 
And that’s why today, Mr. Speaker, municipalities asked for the 
. . . asked in this province that you have a study. And that’s why 
Mr. Garcea and his committee are travelling the province today 
to respond to the kinds of questions that municipalities have 
been asking for. 
 
And we’re listening and we’re paying attention to what they’re 
saying, and we’ll be providing that kind of information in the 
future as soon as we have some opportunity to wait for the 
completion of those reviews. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today a cartoon in The Leader-Post I think sums up the whole 
story. It’s a depiction of the Premier walking Saskatchewan 
residents into the black hole of municipal amalgamation. And I 
quote from the cartoon. It says: 
 

Trust me, we must walk this road for our own good. I 
mean, have I ever misled you before? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, does the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) program cancellation or hospital 
closures ring a bell? 
 
To the Minister of Municipal Government: who are you 
drafting forced amalgamation legislation for — to improve the 
lives of RM people or town people, or to have more control for 
your NDP government and find a new way of downloading? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
spent many years in the municipal system, as I have, and 
understands the kinds of issues and pressures that exist in the 
municipal system. And he understands that too. 
 
And the members also understands that, having been a member 
of SARM and SUMA that I’ve been, that they’ve been asking 
for a long period of time, Mr. Speaker, for greater authority, for 
greater responsibility, greater share of the revenue. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we have the mechanism in place 
which is examining how in fact that process could take place. 
And we’ve said to that committee, Mr. Speaker, which 
comprises people from SUMA and SARM, to respond to what 
the people of Saskatchewan are saying to them, and they’re 
there. They’re in those town halls listening to them and we’re 
paying attention to that message. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that review is under way. In 
a couple of days they’ll be finished their work, and I’ll provide 
you with the information that I too have gleaned from listening 
to people across the province on the municipal issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Tax Increases 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a few days now 
since the budget’s been tabled. Already a number of tax 
increases, tax grabs, have come to light. 
 
Today we vote on the budget, and I think it would be very 
proper if the Premier, in light of the shocking revelations like 
the tax grab on seniors and long-term care homes being 
revealed today, I think it would be appropriate if the Premier 
would agree to respect this House and to table in this House any 
future or further tax grabs that have been hidden away in his 
budget. 
 
I invite him to do that today to benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan who are wondering exactly what he is up to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is the day that we’re 
going to be voting on the budget. And what the Leader of the 
Opposition and the members of the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party are desperately trying to do during this debate — because 
they have nothing else to attack in substance in major policy on 
this budget — is to try to concoct the argument that, for 
example, a fee for park usage is a tax, or that a fee for coyotes is 
a tax, or power bills is a tax, in order to find some thinly 
disguised basis to vote against this budget, all the while not 
offering any positive, concrete alternative. 
 
In fact, as will be demonstrated later this afternoon by the 
Minister of Finance when he speaks, not only no alternative, 
except the alternative of $1.2 billion extra more expenditures, 
driving this province right back to the brink of bankruptcy. 
 
That’s their choice. Ours is the honest choice for people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 17  The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to join this 
debate on behalf of all my constituents because I’ve been 
hearing from them a great deal the last few days, not only 
strictly on budget, but on a number of other things this 
government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I became a candidate for the Saskatchewan 
Party prior to last year’s election, the people at the door were 
telling me they were supporting the Saskatchewan Party 
because they simply did not trust the NDP any longer to do 
what was necessary in order to get the province, the whole 
province, back on track. 
 
They were telling me that in order to get Saskatchewan moving 
in the right direction, the government has to realize that they 
can simply not continue to pick the pockets of every man, 
woman, in Saskatchewan clean. Mr. Speaker, a strong economy 
cannot be built upon the government with hundreds of millions 
of dollars stuffed away in this slush fund or that slush fund 
waiting for a politically opportune time to spend it. 
 
One thing this government still does not get is the fact that just 
because government considers itself doing financially well, 
doesn’t mean people in the province feel it. And in the 
discovery of $700 million extra cash, this government is doing 
very well financially. If only the people of Saskatchewan could 
share that good news today. If only they weren’t asked by the 
members opposite to simply trust them; relief is on its way. 
 
Not surprising, Mr. Speaker, after being beaten about the wallet 
for years and years and years, this government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. Order. I’m just 
going to ask members to please pay attention to the 
presentations being made. The noise is just a little bit above the 
level that allows people to hear the presentation. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not surprisingly, Mr. 
Speaker, after being beaten about the wallets for years and years 
and years, this government, they simply don’t believe they’ll 
see the relief of any kind over the next year or the next four 
years. 
 
They’ve just seen this play one too many times, Mr. Speaker — 
one of the big reasons I am standing here today with 24 other 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) serving with a party that got the highest percentage 
of popular vote in the election. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP always remind me of a horse 
with . . . an old horse with blinders. They say they have vision, 
but it’s only tunnel vision, and I would suggest this government 
doesn’t look beyond the Saskatchewan boundaries. 
 
I’d like to take the horse thing just one step further. When a 
horse is spooked, you then put a bag over its head, and you can 
lead that horse almost anywhere. And I would suggest the 
members opposite have all put a bag over their heads because of 
their fright at the last poll, the last election, and the blind is now 
leading the blind. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — People of Saskatchewan are tired of having NDP 
obviously feeling entitlement when it comes to people’s cheque 
books. After years and years of NDP take and take and take, 
and then when they promise to take a little less four years from 
now, they act as if they’re doing the people a favour. 
 
They wonder why the public aren’t falling on their knees in 
thanksgiving. That’s how arrogant this government has become. 
In fact I would suggest to you the NDP was the birthplace of the 
word arrogant. 
 
People really did want to believe in the NDP near-death 
experience in September and would have made them really sit 
up and take notice of what the people are really saying. No such 
luck, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As soon as the Liberals signed the bottom line and gave the 
Premier back his majority, against the will of the public, it was 
business as usual for these members. Same old I-know-best 
quality that was seen, that we’ve seen since 1991. 
 
Well, the people said in September and they continue to say it 
today, the NDP doesn’t know best. But if for once they actually 
stopped to listen to the people they would figure it out what was 
best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a strong economy is built upon people having 
financial viability to take care of themselves and their families. 
An economy built upon business sector having confidence in 
what they will be able to do, that they will be able to survive 
through simple hard work and initiative and not have to 
constantly worry about government that seems intent on doing 
everything in its power to stifle business and opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has got to be one of the few places 
in this country or even on this continent where government 
really believes it can get away with telling people yes, they will 
get a tax cut but only if the residents accept a tax increase first; 
that they will be able to keep more of their paycheques in a few 
years, but in the meantime they’re going to fork over more and 
even more. 
 
But that is NDP logic, Mr. Speaker. Just as it’s NDP logic when 
they raise the provincial sales tax to 9 per cent from 7 per cent, 
then they took it back to 7 some years later. They called it a tax 
cut. And that’s what we see here again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve heard promises to reduce income tax some years down 
the line, and if they really actually follow through, Mr. Speaker 
— and that’s a big if — it will be positive. However, offsetting 
this positive impact is the immediate increase in the provincial 
sales tax. Well they don’t call it an increase, it’s an expansion. 
Call it what you will; it means that as of midnight Friday, 
people in Saskatchewan were paying more taxes. 
 
Since the budget, calls into our offices here in Regina and back 
in our constituencies have been unbelievable. People are angry, 
Mr. Speaker, very angry. While we made our position to this 
expansion known for quite some time, I think even many of us 
on this side of the House have been surprised by the level of 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

anger and cynicism we are hearing from the people of 
Saskatchewan over this budget. 
 
They see it for what it is — a last minute tax grab before any 
form of tax relief kicks in; the last chance to raid the public 
wallets. And they don’t believe at the end of the day, even four 
years from now, that they will see any real savings. People 
throughout this province are absolutely convinced that members 
opposite will find a way to get this money back from them 
somehow. 
 
Utility rate increases, increases in licences, increases in 
government fees — people who have called me and have called 
my colleagues just take it as a matter of course that all these 
things will be going up to recoup any potential tax saving for 
people. And I think they’re probably right. 
 
In fact I wouldn’t be surprised that very shortly we will see 
these things start happening. In fact, they already have. In the 
last couple of months alone, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the 
government boost rates for two of our Crown corporations for 
an additional $40 million. And what do you know, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s about the same amount the government projects as tax 
relief this year. Funny how it works, isn’t it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituents are very, very angry and very 
worried about the NDP PST expansion. The Battleford-Cut 
Knife constituency is on the west side of our province and the 
people are already voting on this budget by making the short 
trip into Alberta to escape the PST. This expansion has only 
served to make them even more determined to make their major 
purchases outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I since I don’t expect the member from North Battleford to 
raise these concerns like he used to, I will be speaking on behalf 
of that city as well. It’s not a secret to anyone how much 
business North Battleford and Battleford lose because of the 
PST. 
 
An hour’s trip up the highway takes the people to the tax-free 
zone, Mr. Speaker. The businesses and residents both in 
Battleford-Cut Knife and North Battleford are telling me that 
this move on behalf of the government will ring every last tax 
dollar out of us. It will make business on the west side even less 
competitive than they were before. 
 
I would be very interested in hearing from the member from 
North Battleford on what his constituents are telling him about 
this budget. However, I really don’t expect him to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . really speaks out about any of the issues in his 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government revenue is projected to rise over a half 
a billion dollars this year. And this government can see fit in 
giving back a whopping $40 million, excluding utility rate 
hikes, which basically reduces this year’s tax saving to zero. 
Mr. Speaker, that simply isn’t good enough for the people of 
this province who have been sacrificing for so long. 
 
And what is the government doing with this huge increase in 
government revenue? Since they’re not giving it back to the 
people, one only can guess, because it doesn’t look like it’s 
going into our essential services. 

On a daily basis we continue to hear the members opposite talk 
about the so-called plan of the Saskatchewan Party to freeze 
spending in areas such as health care and education. And of 
course that isn’t what we campaigned on, but those members 
have said it so often, some of them might even start believing it. 
 
Actually we campaigned on stable, predictable funding 
increases tied to the rate of inflation. In fact the government has 
not even come close to matching this. Direct increases to health 
districts have increased less than 1 per cent in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker — less than 1 per cent. Of course there is money that’s 
being put into the health care transitional fund, most of which 
comes from the federal government. Now the government 
hasn’t explained what this money is going to be used for. 
 
But it seems to me that the word “transitional” has replaced the 
word “reform” as the NDP’s code for hospital closures and 
service reductions. In fact some people have already nicknamed 
this account the hospital closure fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we hear the Health minister echoing precisely what we 
said during the campaign — that we’ve simply got to figure out 
to spend the current health care budgets better. And we 
absolutely agree with that, Mr. Speaker. In fact the minister has 
even gone so far as to suggest a review of health care spending 
be conducted. And we agree with that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It just seems a little ironic that the Minister of Health is 
suggesting this now as a good idea. I seem to recall last year 
when we were proposing such a review they said it was one of 
the worst ideas in the world. And now the minister seems to like 
it. 
 
(1445) 
 
Beyond health care, Mr. Speaker, one other major concern of 
the people of my constituency is education. Once again we hear 
the members opposite say that we would have frozen education 
fund. Again this is nonsense. It is interesting to note, had the 
Education budget simply increased at the rate of inflation since 
1991, the system would be better off to the tune of nearly $400 
and then our mill rates wouldn’t have had to shoot through the 
sky. 
 
Any government that speaks about vision for the future, 
education simply cannot be left out of the equation. Yet from 
what we hear from SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) and the teachers’ federation, this government has 
done just that. 
 
Those organizations, which often don’t agree, do agree on this 
point, Mr. Speaker — that this budget has forsaken both 
children and of course local taxpayers, because depending 
where you are, one or the other is going to get a hit. Either 
education will suffer or the taxes will go up because of the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA has given this budget a failing grade. 
Not only will it not cover the general rising costs of education, 
it probably will not cover the entire cost of the new teachers’ 
contract, which the government will work out with STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), and since the end of the 
protocol agreement with SSTA will have only limited say on 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

the final contract. But they will have to foot the entire bill. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the government is off-loading its 
responsibility for education onto the local school divisions and 
onto local taxpayers, which is somewhat surprising given who 
we have for a Minister of Education. 
 
When the member was the Leader of the Liberal Party instead 
of a second-tier cabinet minister in the worn out NDP 
government, he decried the NDP’s off-loading of education 
costs. He said the fact that 60 per cent of the cost of education is 
now being picked up by local taxpayers was wrong and he 
would, in government, strive to bring that percentage down. 
 
And now look what happened, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal leader, 
now the Minister of Education, walks out into the hallway and 
announced not only that 60 per cent is fair, it may not even be 
high enough. Just like how his promise to get rid of patronage 
appointment became a vow to hire more hacks was reversed so 
that his concern for . . . and so has his concern for property tax. 
 
He is now urging school boards to raise their mill rates. Simply 
incredible. In the wake of tax revolt meetings around the 
province, this minister is advocating throwing gasoline onto the 
fire, Mr. Speaker. How inept can a single cabinet minister be, 
Mr. Speaker? How unprincipled can the minister be, Mr. 
Speaker, to simply turn his back on his entire election campaign 
and now advocate higher property taxes? 
 
Well the view from his cabinet office must be pretty good, Mr. 
Speaker, because it certainly has made him forget all about the 
things he said he once stood for. 
 
Well I’ll say it to the rumoured Leader of the Liberal Party. He 
shouldn’t get too used to his big office and growing staff. Either 
the Premier’s going to tire of the Liberal leader’s talent for 
sticking his foot in his mouth or the voters are going to tire of it 
by the next election rolls around. One way or the other, his stay 
in this job is going to be short-lived. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although it probably wasn’t in the NDP’s game 
plan, this admission by the Minister of Education that the 
government is simply planning to download more of the tax 
burden onto the local taxpayer is at least a bit of honesty by one 
of the members opposite. 
 
It shows how they operate. Cut this tax. Raise that tax. Give a 
rebate on property taxes. Force school boards to raise the mill 
rate. Same old story, Mr. Speaker: put it in one hand and take it 
out with the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I want to take the 
opportunity to say a few words about the NDP’s plan for 
imposing its will on municipal government. Mr. Speaker, this 
exercise is one of the most cynical I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a former SARM board director I think I know something 
about local government, and I have a few urban councillors on 
this side as well. I think we even have a current mayor here. 
There’s a great amount of experience over here dealing with 
local government, and the NDP has painted this picture for the 
benefit of those people who are not familiar with local 
governments. 

This picture is false. They have told people, particularly in 
larger centres, that local governments are simply a waste of tax 
money and one of the reasons property taxes are so high. Mr. 
Speaker, they know this is untrue yet they keep saying it. 
 
It is one of their plans to make the perceived rural/urban split 
very real. They can no longer count on us splitting the vote with 
the Liberals since the NDP, along with the leader of the 
Liberals, have pretty well killed the Liberal Party off. So the 
NDP game plan for the next election is to intensify the 
rural/urban split which they have created over the last nine 
years. It’s cheap, cynical politics beneath contempt. 
 
They have given no evidence that this will save money. They 
have not shown how this will improve services, but what they 
have done is tell the people in cities that this will save them 
money, even though the government knows this is likely not 
true. 
 
It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, because they know as well as I that 
there’s a great deal of co-operation right now. There’s 
amalgamation going on, but this government wants these local 
governments wiped out immediately because they want more 
and more power concentrated and centralized where they feel 
comfortable — in the cities. 
 
The NDP no longer has any interest in attracting the support of 
rural areas. They’ve written these seats off, and in doing so, are 
trying to write the future of rural Saskatchewan. I mean if the 
NDP were so interested in promoting co-operation and 
amalgamation, why have they not amended the municipal Acts 
that currently make it all but impossible for amalgamation 
between certain types of municipalities. Why not make the 
legislation friendly toward voluntary amalgamation and then 
trust the local leaders, the people who run the most efficient 
governments in the province, to use their own judgment to 
decide the future course of local governments. 
 
Don’t force amalgamation, whether it makes sense or not, to fit 
your political agenda. Make local governments . . . let local 
governments which have kept their affairs in order for so long 
determine their future. Makes sense? That makes sense to me, 
but only if your goal is to actually come up with a more 
efficient local government. They have plenty of effective . . . 
they’re plenty effective right now. 
 
And I know if there were a way to deliver services cheaper and 
better, local governments’ leaders wouldn’t hesitate for a 
moment to follow this course. But if your goal is simply to strip 
away the voice of rural Saskatchewan, the NDP approach to 
forced amalgamation and heavy-handed government may prove 
most effective. Mr. Speaker, but there’s no doubt in my mind 
what the goal of this government is when it comes to rural 
Saskatchewan. And I would suggest that we name — rename 
the Garcea report, the hon. member from Yorkton report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to close, the people of my riding don’t like this 
budget; they don’t like the so-called NDP vision; they don’t like 
this government and the reason is they don’t trust this 
government. And so far in this term the NDP has not given my 
constituents any reason to trust them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment to this budget. 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

I will not be supporting the budget itself. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I am very pleased to rise today to participate in the debate on 
the first budget, the first of many of our coalition government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When I was first sworn in as a 
member of this Legislative Assembly I stated that 
Saskatchewan had entered a new era — one that was marked by 
co-operation and consensus rather than opposition and conflict. 
This budget, the first of the Liberal-NDP coalition government, 
is a testament to this new era, an era of acknowledging different 
interests in our shared pursuit of providing the people of this 
great province with effective, responsible government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Saskatoon Northwest, there 
are many people representative of all kinds of interests. There 
are professionals and there are entrepreneurs. There are farmers 
and blue-collar workers. There are those of them with young 
children and there are those of them with older children 
attending college or university. 
 
These people understand the importance of balancing a budget. 
They, too, have to make decisions each day that ensure that 
their own financial house remains in order and they deserve the 
same from their government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — They, like all Saskatchewan people, 
understand the importance of taking a balanced approach when 
making decisions regarding the province’s finances. They 
understand the importance of addressing debt, a debt that their 
children and their children’s children will face in the years to 
come because of past governments. 
 
They understand the importance of investing in health, 
highways and education. Investments that will ensure a bright, 
sustainable future for the years to come. And they also 
understand that we must provide support to our hardworking 
farm families while also reducing our tax load. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this 
budget speaks to the people of Saskatchewan. I believe that the 
coalition Government of Saskatchewan has presented a fair, 
responsible budget that will lead Saskatchewan into the new 
millennium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I am particularly proud in how the 
coalition partners worked together to create this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — It is one that reflects the platform and 

priorities of both parties on this side of the House in areas that 
include health, agriculture, education and tax relief. 
 
When asked yesterday evening, the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood indicated that they too have a plan for 
these areas, particularly in the area of post-secondary education. 
In his remarks he stated that he would get to it and then he 
never got to it. Mr. Speaker, perhaps he clings to the old adage 
of silence is golden because we’re still waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is good for my constituents and it is 
good for the people of Saskatchewan. It makes progress on the 
debt. It invests in priorities like health, highways and education. 
And it helps support farm families while providing broad-based 
tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We have also done other things to 
improve the lives of Saskatchewan citizens. We have provided 
an additional $63 million for health care, an additional 50 
million out of the transition fund, and an additional 100 of that 
150 million for health transition — a total of $213 million for 
health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Two hundred and fifty million dollars 
for highways — the largest ever investment ever in Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And we have reformed our province’s 
tax system so that it is fair, simple, and competitive. Mr. 
Speaker, we did this by eliminating the flat tax, the debt 
reduction tax, the high income surtax over the next three years, 
reducing provincial income tax, and introducing the 
significantly higher personal tax credits so all Saskatchewan 
families could benefit from a tax cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — These changes represent the largest 
single reduction in income tax Saskatchewan has ever seen. 
 
The members opposite should be rejoicing, yet unfortunately, 
bat boy Brad and catfish Carl remain stuck on fish, coyotes, ball 
bearings, and drill bits. They can’t get the big picture here. 
These individuals try to develop credibility in light of their 
platform that said nothing — shameful behaviour, shameful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that 
this budget provides $50 million over two years in targeted 
property tax relief for the farm community, and the coalition 
government has eliminated the provincial tax on farm fuel it’s 
buying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This budget also improves access to 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

post-secondary education with the creation of a post-secondary 
education tax credit for graduates, increased operating and 
capital grants to post-secondary institutions, more money for 
technology-enhanced learning, and more support for persons 
with disabilities to access post-secondary education and 
training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of 
Education, I am particularly proud of how this budget invests in 
K to 12 education. Since becoming minister I’ve had the 
opportunity to meet with teachers, school trustees, 
administrators, and parents from across Saskatchewan. They 
have told me the importance of increased funding to K to 12 
education. They have told me about the pressures on rural 
school boards due to demographic shifts and declining 
enrolments. They have told me about the increased demands on 
school divisions to accommodate the diverse needs of students 
in their classrooms — special needs students, Indian and Metis 
students, and students that are at risk due to a variety of societal 
pressures and failures. 
 
They have told me of the need to support core curriculum 
actualization. And they have told me of the need to invest in 
capital infrastructure to ensure that Saskatchewan students have 
safe, healthy, learning environments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget responds to those concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We have provided an increase in the 
foundation operating grant for school divisions. The grant for 
year 2000 is the largest amount the province has ever provided 
to support students and teachers in Saskatchewan schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In addition school divisions will also 
receive $5.3 million in grants in lieu of taxes — an increase of 
1.9 million from last year. 
 
Within the foundation operating grant, we have also provided a 
number of enhancements to support educational priorities. 
 
This budget substantially increases the recognition for special 
needs students — over $14 million. This additional recognition 
will help schools and school divisions provide an enriched 
classroom experience to our special needs students. 
 
We have also enhanced funding to our community school 
pre-kindergarten program. We are expanding our program for, 
in 13 schools, to serve twice the number of children at each of 
these 13 locations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We are also enhancing the 
community schools program in northern Saskatchewan. The 
community schools program helped provide northern students 

with an education that reflects their histories, experiences, and 
learning needs. 
 
We are increasing our investment in learning technology to help 
prepare Saskatchewan students for life beyond school in this 
increasingly electronic and competitive world and addressing, 
addressing the distances in rural Saskatchewan where learning 
technology is vital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this endeavour particularly benefits students in all 
the rural areas. We are investing in capital infrastructure to 
provide our students with safe and well-equipped environments 
in which to learn. And I am proud to say that just today I had 
the pleasure of announcing that we will be building two new 
elementary schools in Saskatoon — announced today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, with a 20 per cent 
increase in our financial support for school capital project, I am 
also pleased to say that 115 communities throughout 
Saskatchewan will also receive capital support this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Would I have liked to do more? Of 
course. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe this budget accurately 
reflects the co-operation between the coalition partners and is 
fiscally responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The commitments my party made 
during the last provincial election are reflected within the 
coalition context. They are reflected in some of the innovations 
on property tax rebates, on fuel tax relief, on income tax breaks, 
assistance for post-secondary students, more money for health, 
and best of all, more money for K to 12 education. 
 
These two parties talked about K to 12 education. The members 
opposite did not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the members 
opposite, we believe that education is a priority, not an 
afterthought. We had the foresight to develop a platform that 
included our children. 
 
What is the opposition’s plan, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
like their plan for post-secondary education so articulately 
detailed yesterday evening by the Post-Secondary Education 
critic from Last Mountain-Touchwood, they’ll get back to us. 
 
I recall looking for the opposition’s plan for K to 12 prior to the 
last provincial election. I waited for it during the election and 
never saw it. And, Mr. Speaker, their silence told me just how 
important children were to them. Their response was to freeze 
spending in education. 
 
Cost of living is a freeze. Nothing for special needs. Nothing for 
the North. Nothing for capital projects. Nothing for education 
property tax relief. Nothing for teachers’ salaries. And nothing 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

for the children in this province. Shameful. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I’m being a little bit too unkind in 
my comments. Now I suspect, now I suspect that they had, and 
continue to have, a plan for our children. When the member 
opposite from Kelvington-Wadena addressed the SSTA at their 
convention in Saskatoon, she suggested that the Education 
budget should be double. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I almost fell over. Perhaps the time spent with my 
party was not entirely wasted — children are important. 
Perhaps they were finally going to think about our children and 
perhaps they had a plan. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t until this House resumed sitting that 
their plan, an insidious plan, became even more apparent. 
During the short time this House has been sitting, the members 
opposite have proposed an additional $1.2 billion in new 
spending — $l.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is now that I realize what the members opposite intend to do 
for our children and our children’s future is this. Mortgage it, 
Mr. Speaker. They want to mortgage our children’s future. 
Unacceptable. Totally unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all too familiar with the role some of the 
members opposite played in creating the monstrous debt that 
almost crippled our province. A beast that they now want to let 
out of the box. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are on to them and we are on to their games. 
One point two billion dollars in fiscally irresponsible spending 
sounds a lot to me like devine inspiration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I commend my coalition partners for 
their hard work in saving our province from the brink of 
bankruptcy. And as a partner in this coalition government, I will 
fight and fight hard to ensure that the province of our children 
remains on sound financial footing. 
 
I find it ironic that the opposition even has an Education critic. 
One day they propose nothing in the area of K to 12 spending 
and the next day the Education critic wants to double it. 
 
Double or nothing, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they propose. 
Well double or nothing is not a game we can afford to play with 
our children’s lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is responsive 
while remaining responsible. The first budget of the coalition 
government, the first budget of the new millennium. I am proud 
to support this budget. And I will not be supporting the 
Sask-a-Tory’s amendment. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened with great 

interest to the member’s comments and I’m sure people all 
across Saskatchewan are watching it with great interest as well. 
 
You have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, whether this was a good 
budget. That’s the question that will be before the House before 
long this afternoon. Was this a good budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I voted . . . You will know, Mr. Speaker, that I voted one time 
before for an NDP budget because there was a real tax cut in 
that budget. That was a number of years ago. 
 
It took me two more years . . . it took two years in my 
constituency to convince everyone that I hadn’t lost control of 
my faculties. We won’t be doing it again, simply won’t be 
doing it again. 
 
In this budget there are all kinds of things that people are 
learning of in the last few days about. Tax increases that were 
hidden. 
 
The Premier stands in his place today in the legislature and 
says, it’s not a tax if it’s a charge. It’s not a tax if it’s a fee. It’s 
not a tax if it’s a utility rate. When it’s coming out of your 
pocket, when it’s coming out of your pocket, does it really 
make any difference what the NDP want to call it? No. 
 
But what it means at the end of the day is you have less money 
in your pocket to use for the things that you want. To use for the 
priorities for your family and to use for the priorities of your 
business and to use for the priorities of your farm. Those are the 
kinds of things that the people of this province are concerned 
about. Those are the kinds of things that miss the mark in this 
budget. Those are the kinds of things that people all across this 
province have given this budget a failing grade about. 
 
And when you look at the various departments across the piece, 
my critic responsibilities are in the area of agriculture. And 
there are a couple of things that will benefit agriculture. And we 
might as well be upfront about them. 
 
First and foremost, there’s the fuel tax . . . gasoline tax rebate 
and farmers will benefit to a modest degree in terms of that. 
There’s no question about that. There’s no question about that 
— very modestly they’ll benefit. 
 
Also there is the tax rebate in terms of property tax and that will 
be a positive thing, that’ll be a positive thing. 
 
And I’ll explain to the member from Regina South as to reasons 
why I won’t vote for the budget. Even though there are those 
two things that will help in terms of agriculture, there’s a whole 
load of things that are going to hurt. 
 
And those are in the areas of fee increases. Those are in the area 
of utility rate increases. Those are in the rate of all kinds of 
charges. Those are taxes. Make no mistake about it, Mr. 
Premier, those are taxes and the people all across Saskatchewan 
know that they’re taxes. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — People all across Saskatchewan know that all of 
the good that there is in the budget has been lost in recent days 
because of all of the things that are just coming forward now. 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Fee increases, taxes, utility rate increases. All of those kinds . . . 
the four hundred bucks that you may have got on your farm for 
property tax rebate are all gone in one fell swoop in terms of 
things like utility rate increases. All of those are gone. 
 
And on top of that, we have an Education minister in this 
province that says to the school boards all across Saskatchewan: 
if you don’t like the budget, if you don’t like what you’re 
getting from the provincial government, just raise the mill rate 
— just raise the mill rate. 
 
So the property tax rebate that I’m getting on my farm, or every 
other farmer is getting, is lost because of the statements from 
that member alone. Lost because of those statements alone. 
 
So the school boards at home just got the licence to do exactly 
that from the Minister of Education; jack up the rate because the 
minister says it’s okay. The minister says it’s okay so that’s 
exactly what’ll happen all across this province. 
 
In agriculture, the one failing grade that you got in this budget, 
the real failing grade that you got in this budget was, where is 
the long-term safety net, Mr. Member from Saskatoon 
Northwest? You were going to have money, you were going to 
. . . If you really had any input into this government, why 
wasn’t there money in the hands of farmers within three weeks 
like you promised there was going to be in your election 
campaign? 
 
Was it just more of that . . . was it just more of what you talked 
about after the campaign? Political rhetoric? That’s what it’s all 
about with you isn’t it? That’s what it’s all about with this 
member. 
 
How do you get elected? Say anything, do anything, and when 
you get there do exactly the opposite. Tell people you can 
expect property tax cuts and then say to them raise the mill rate. 
Tell them you’re going to have a safety net in place, you’re 
going to have money in the hands of farmers all across this 
province in three weeks, and we haven’t seen it yet. Tell the 
people of this province that you’re going to do more for 
education, you’re going to come forward with a scholarship 
program, and then deliver not a thing. Not a thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier and Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province will never forget some of the statements that that 
member has made in this legislature and outside of this 
legislature. Things like he was going to . . . he was not going to 
allow the Plains hospital to close. He in fact . . . What happened 
to it? It closed in a dramatic fashion. In fact he was going to 
chain himself to the front doors of the building. In fact many 
people in Saskatchewan wish he still was chained to the front 
doors. 
 
And I’m sure the Premier, and I’m sure the Premier of this 
province, I’m sure the Premier of this province wishes he 
wasn’t chained to him right now. Because that’s where he is. 
And all of the members of that government on the opposite side 
of the House know that they’ve got a real problem because 
that’s where he is. That’s where he is — chained to the NDP, 
chained to the NDP. 
 
(1515) 

Bring forward patronage appointment after patronage 
appointment. Neil Collins, defeated candidate in Estevan, got 
royally thumped, royally thumped in the election down in 
Estevan and now he’s got . . . somehow or another he’s got the 
credibility and the credentials to be on the SaskPower board. 
All because the member from Saskatoon Northwest says he 
does. 
 
And on top of that, and on top of that we’re hung again the 
two-tier Harvey, the same member that used to sit right back in 
this seat right over here. The NDP used to criticize him every 
single day in the House and you’ll remember that, Mr. Speaker. 
Every single day in the House they used to stand up and call 
him two-tier Harvey and criticize everything he had to say. And 
they were legitimate in their criticism in a lot of ways. 
 
Harvey McLane will talk about her in a moment. Yes, he’ll talk 
about her in a moment. I’ll read you the letters. I’ll read you the 
letters. I’ll be happy to read you the letters that we’re sending to 
the association. 
 
Two-tier Harvey over here, two-tier Harvey over here, saying to 
the people of Saskatchewan, if you have the money to pay extra 
for health care services, maybe you should. And that’s why they 
coined the phrase, two-tier Harvey, and that’s why there’s a 
new member sitting back there . . . back there because two-tier 
Harvey said that. And somehow or another he has the 
credibility, somehow or another two-tier Harvey has the 
credibility to be in this House. 
 
And the member from North Battleford back there wants to 
criticize Terri Harris. Yes, wants to criticize Terri Harris. And I 
want to take the time . . . I want to take the time to read you a 
letter that I’ve written to the elk breeders association about that 
criticism, to the elk breeders association. 
 

As the official opposition critic I want to express my regret 
for not being able to attend your meetings on the weekend 
in Saskatoon. Our family suffered a loss of an uncle and 
the funeral was on that day. 
 
Your industry, the elk breeders association, is providing 
excellent vision of diversification for our province. Your 
efforts have resulted in significant investment jobs and 
opportunity for Saskatchewan. 
 
It is always a pleasure to watch a new industry grow from 
its early beginnings to where the elk industry is today. I 
understand a large part of the growth of your industry has 
been a result of the efforts of the former executive director, 
Terri Harris. 
 
Your association should be commended for awarding Terri 
with an award of merit for her service to your association. 
The official opposition is very proud now to have Terri 
now working in our office. And it is no surprise to your 
association that Terri is doing a terrific job and is a 
pleasure to work with. 
 
It is with great surprise and very regrettable that the 
Premier of Saskatchewan chose to berate Terri for working 
in our office. This is an unacceptable attack on an 
individual that has served your industry well. 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

I fully intend to ask the Premier for an apology to Terri and 
to your association for your regrettable comments. Again, 
congratulations for your contributions to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And the next letter goes to the Premier of this province, and I 
want to read it so the Premier will know what we’re going to be 
asking him for: 
 

On behalf of the official opposition, it was with great 
shock and disappointment that you chose to sully the 
reputation of one of the staff of the official opposition, 
Terri Harris. 
 
The elk breeders association, the elk breeders association, 
sir, have recognized Terri with an Award of Merit for her 
efforts, for her efforts on behalf of that industry. For you to 
cheapen, for you to cheapen her efforts, as you did in 
question period on April 4th, is an unacceptable attack on 
an industry-recognized award winner. 
 
I expect you will apologize and want to do the honourable 
thing. 
 
I’ve written to the elk breeders association to inform them 
of your actions. I sincerely hope that you will take the 
opportunity to apologize to them as well. 

 
And just as can be expected . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And just as can be expected from the Premier of 
this province, the NDP Premier of this province, he shouts from 
his seat: not a chance. Never, never will it happen. Never will 
he do anything like that. Never will he apologize for sullying 
the reputation of an industry-recognized award winner in this 
province. Never, never in this province will the Premier ever, 
ever do those kind of things because somehow or another, it’s 
beneath the Premier to apologize for his actions when he knows 
fully he’s wrong, when knows fully he’s wrong . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Order, please. I would ask all hon. members to please keep the 
level of side conversations and comments back and forth at a 
lower level so we can hear the hon. member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the 
budget, the people of Saskatchewan were expecting a lot more. 
They were expecting, they were expecting a tax decrease, and 
they get tax increases from the NDP. 
 
They get things like increased fees for fishing and coyote taxes 
from the NDP. They get PST expansion. They get everything 
but what they wanted. They get $400 on the backs of every 
senior in this province. 
 
Every month that goes by the seniors of this province are going 
to have less money to spend as a result of this budget; as a 
result of the minister not telling anybody about it in their budget 
— not breathing a word of it. 
 

And the Finance minister — if you can imagine this; if you can 
imagine this, Mr. Speaker — the Finance minister saying, it’s 
not his job in a budget to talk about tax increases; it’s the 
responsibility of the official opposition to bring them out. 
That’s what he said in his response to the media inquiries of 
yesterday. 
 
Well you can be assured, Mr. Speaker, that every day that this 
legislature sits all through the summer, every day that it sits, 
we’re going to be asking minister after minister after minister: 
which increases do you have in your department? How many 
more fees are there going to be levied? How many more 
charges are there going to be levied? How many more taxes are 
the people of Saskatchewan going to pay? And how soon are 
we going to, from this NDP administration, see the tax 
decreases that they promised in the budget? 
 
During the election campaign you promised tax decreases and 
then you do anything but that. And every day that we walk out 
of this legislature, people all across Saskatchewan say to us, 
every single day they say to us, and they promised and they 
promised tax decreases and all we get is tax increases. 
 
And the vague promise from the NDP that they’re going to do 
better, that they’re going to have a historic budget, that they’re 
going to cut taxes, and we wind up with anything but. Anything 
but. 
 
And on top of that, on top of that, Mr. Speaker, all across 
Saskatchewan right now the people of rural Saskatchewan are 
faced with a minister from Yorkton going out to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the form of Joe Garcea and his committee and 
saying to them, on top of that, we’re going to take away your 
local governments as well. 
 
That’s what he said to them. And poor old Joe Garcea, the 
scapegoat for this outfit, the NDP opposite, is the poor guy that 
has to go around and try and sell the message. 
 
And at every single one of the meetings, the people 
unanimously stand and say no, we don’t want this, we don’t 
need this, we don’t want NDP-style of government in rural 
Saskatchewan, we don’t want that kind of thing happening to 
the people of this province. 
 
They are saying to them, where is the minister? That’s the other 
thing that they are saying at those meetings: where is the 
minister? Where is the minister? Is that minister actually going 
to attend even one of those amalgamation meetings? 
 
I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. Not a single one. Hasn’t got the courage 
to go out there. Instead he sends poor old Joe out there to take 
the heat for him — poor old Joe is going to take the heat from 
him. 
 
And that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from 
her chair shouts about the past as she always has. Whenever it’s 
. . . whenever things are a little tight around here, whenever 
there’s a problem, whenever there’s a problem in this 
legislature, what do the members opposite do? Whenever the 
heat’s on you, whenever the heat’s on you, what do you do? 
 
They want to talk about 1982. They want to talk about personal 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

attacks. They want to go on the offensive. They want to talk 
about anything but what the NDP are doing in Saskatchewan — 
anything but. Pull out newspaper clippings from 1982. Pull out 
newspaper clippings from the 80s and say, oh, here’s our 
answer to all the problems, here’s the concerns that all of 
Saskatchewan has. 
 
The member, the Finance minister, you’ll recall, you’ll recall in 
his budget address said, no longer are we going to look at the 
past — we’re going to look to the future. And then he stands in 
his place day after day after day in this legislature with 
newspaper clippings from the 1980s and said somehow or 
another this justifies all of their actions today. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, you know, are tired of that. 
And the reason why, and the reason why they’re tired of it is 
because that’s your answer to everything — hark back to the 
past, no vision for the future, even though Jim . . . even though 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest claims he has vision for 
the future. Even though he claims he has vision for the future, 
his answers all speak to the past. 
 
And that’s why, and that’s why in the election that passed, just 
passed, that’s why the NDP took the licking they did in many 
places all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — There isn’t a vision, there isn’t a vision, there’s 
no optimism, there’s no hope, there’s no opportunity in 
Saskatchewan under your administration. And that’s why the 
people of Saskatchewan are rejecting you at every opportunity. 
And that’s why, and that’s why people more and ever are 
turning to the Saskatchewan Party as an alternative. 
 
That’s why they are saying to us, we need hope, we need 
opportunity, we need jobs, we need vision, we need optimism in 
our province. We don’t need NDP rhetoric, we don’t need NDP 
promises, we don’t need NDP taxes, we don’t need NDP 
charges, we don’t need NDP fees, we don’t need any of that 
stuff in Saskatchewan. What we need is a new administration in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And I’m just reminded, by seeing the member 
from Regina Dewdney back there, about his advice to the young 
people in this province the other day. The other . . . His advice 
to the people, the young people of Saskatchewan — and 
particularly to the parents of Saskatchewan when they’re giving 
their young person, their young family member, their child any 
kind of advice — his advice was don’t look for opportunity. 
 
Don’t tell them about opportunity. Don’t tell them about the 
possibility of greener pastures elsewhere. Don’t tell them about 
optimism. Don’t tell them about any of those things. Shut off 
the television. Shut off their computer. Don’t let them read the 
newspapers. Don’t let them have any opportunity to hear about 
anything else that’s going on in the world. Build a wall around 
Saskatchewan, do everything you can to convince them to stay 
here, even though there isn’t a job, even though there isn’t 
hope, even though there isn’t opportunity, even though there 
isn’t optimism — do that to your young people. And why, Mr. 

Member, would you give that kind of advice to your child? 
 
When I was growing up, when I was growing up, and all of the 
members on this side of the House, the talk around the kitchen 
table was about rewarding success, rewarding opportunity, 
talking about risk, talking about chance, talking about success, 
talking about optimism, talking about opportunity, talking about 
expanding your horizons, talking about all of those kinds of 
things — that’s what we were taught. 
 
We weren’t taught as a family, fortunately, we weren’t taught to 
just look, and build a wall around the province of 
Saskatchewan. Whether you like it or not, Mr. Member, the 
people of Saskatchewan have opportunity to look elsewhere. 
And that’s what they are doing and that’s they are doing in 
overwhelming numbers. That’s what they are doing in 
overwhelming numbers. 
 
They are saying to the people and they are saying to this 
administration, I’m going to vote with my feet, I’m going to 
leave this province. That’s what they are saying. 
 
And the newspapers — and the member from North Battleford 
would know this — the newspapers are full of those kinds of 
comments. We see a geologist firm from Regina here saying in 
the newspaper a couple of days ago that they are pulling the pin 
as of July 1. They’re leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
And I look in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I look in my 
constituency. I look in my constituency alone — I’ll give you a 
few examples. I look at drilling companies like Pirate Drilling 
in Kindersley, $15 million payroll — $15 million payroll — 
and as of July 1, they’ll be operating out of Calgary. 
 
I look at another oil company in my constituency — and the 
Minister of Energy and Mines would know this — Fraser Oil in 
Kindersley, Saskatchewan, not quite as big, their payroll’s only 
about $5 million. I know the NDP don’t mind flushing that 
down either. So only about $5 million, significant investment, 
significant number of jobs in Kindersley, and they’re moving to 
Calgary, Alberta. Another business down the drain. 
 
(1530) 
 
And one that is probably the most disturbing of all, Mr. 
Speaker. The other day I had two dentists in Kindersley tell me 
that they brought in a new, young dentist. He was born and 
raised in the Kindersley area, up around Major. Kelly 
Chotowetz is his name. He went through the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) dental program and he came out of that 
program with honours, came out of that program with honours. 
And they thought, we have finally found the right young guy to 
come back and take over this practice — finally found him. 
 
And the dentist in Kindersley said to me, you know we brought 
him back in at a considerable expense. And you know anyone 
that has any knowledge of the dental industry, it takes a 
considerable amount of money to help bring in a new, young 
practising dentist into their fold — and they did that. And they 
told me it probably cost them, probably cost them $200,000 to 
bring him into their dental practice — probably cost them 
around $200,000. 
 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

And he was with them for one year and then he announced to 
them just a few days ago that after this budget, that after all of 
these kinds of things that are happening in Saskatchewan, that 
he said, I’m sorry, I’m not staying here; picking up, and I’m 
leaving, with his wife. And they’re moving to Calgary, Alberta. 
 
And that’s the most disturbing thing that I think I’ve heard in 
the longest time, that a young fellow that had so much promise 
in Saskatchewan, so much hope, so much opportunity, so much 
optimism here for Saskatchewan, looked at it and realized and it 
took him only one year to do it once he got out into private 
practice, only took him one year to realize that the opportunity 
was not here for him. And he picked up and left. 
 
And along with him will leave a future family. Will leave with 
him, I dare say, future kindergarten students; along with him, 
volunteerism in Saskatchewan. Along with him will go hope; 
along with him will go opportunity; along with him will go the 
optimism that Saskatchewan should have in this province, but it 
doesn’t. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the disturbing reasons why I will be 
voting against this budget, because it doesn’t speak to those 
kinds of people. It doesn’t provide them with any hope and it 
doesn’t provide them with any opportunity. And people all 
across Saskatchewan are saying those kinds of things as they 
wave goodbye to their kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every one of the members of this legislature, every 
single one of us, should be aware of that kind of situation; every 
single one of us should be trying our level best to turn that 
around. 
 
And instead what did we see from this administration? They 
bring forward a budget that promises everything and delivers 
nothing. Total deception. People across this province are 
looking at this budget and every single one of them are saying 
to themselves, I didn’t realize that it was going to have this 
impact. 
 
On budget day I think a lot of them looked at it and they said to 
the Finance minister, congratulations for finally doing 
something in terms of taxes. But the problem is, Mr. Minister, 
they didn’t realize all of the hidden agenda that you have along 
with your budget. They didn’t realise that even their fishing 
licence is going to go up. They didn’t realise that if you want to 
go out and protect your cattle operation you’re going to have to 
buy a licence now to handle the coyote situation. 
 
They didn’t realize, the seniors in this province didn’t realize 
that they were going to be taxed to the tune of about $400 for 
long-term nursing care in this province. They didn’t understand 
or didn’t realize it. And the Finance minister unfortunately 
didn’t want to tell them about that in his budget. 
 
He had all the spin doctors in place to tell everybody about how 
good a budget it was. Had everything lined up — talk show 
after talk show, presentation after presentation, dinner after 
dinner, NDP fundraiser after NDP fundraiser — to go across 
this province one after another of them, cabinet minister after 
cabinet minister after cabinet minister, backbencher after 
backbencher, to spread the good news about how this budget 
was going to be such a great thing for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And all across Saskatchewan it’s receiving that big, fat failing 
grade because they didn’t want to tell them about those kinds of 
things. 
 
You might have actually been able to do it. You might have 
actually been able to convince the people of this province that it 
was good for them if you had told them about the bad parts in 
the budget. You might have been able to convince them. 
 
But you know what has happened in Saskatchewan? People 
have lost absolute confidence and trust in your administration 
because those are the kinds of things they’ve learned to expect 
from you. Those are the kinds of things they’ve grown, they’ve 
grown to understand that you can expect from the NDP in each 
and every time that they bring forward those kinds of budgets. 
 
And the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance, he should 
be ashamed that he didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan about 
all of those kinds of things. And for him to stand before the 
media of this province to say to them that a budget isn’t the 
proper place to talk about tax increases . . . it’s the proper place 
to talk about good things; it isn’t the proper place to talk about 
tax increase; that’s the responsibility of the official opposition. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we accept that challenge. We accept that 
challenge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And we will be doing exactly that. We will be 
doing exactly that. We will be going as well to the talk shows. 
We’ll be going as well to the dinners across Saskatchewan. 
We’ll be going as well to the fundraising events and to the 
community events all across Saskatchewan. And we’ll be 
telling them exactly about what is in it. 
 
We’ll be telling them about the five pages of fee increases alone 
in the Department of Environment. We’ll be telling you about 
that. We will be asking minister after minister. Every single one 
of you will be asked those same questions. What kind of fee 
increases are in your department? What kind of tax increases? 
What kind of cutbacks are in your department? What kind of 
expected increases in terms of taxation can the people of this 
province expect? 
 
And if you have the courage, if you have the courage of your 
convictions, I’m sure you will want to tell the people about 
what you are doing, not only for them, but to them. And that’s 
what the people have learned about Saskatchewan and the NDP 
— what are you going to . . . not only what are you going to do 
for them, but what have you done to them in the last little while. 
And that’s the problem with it. 
 
And I couldn’t help but listen with absolute horror as the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest mockingly talked about 
catfish and . . . (inaudible) . . . fee increases, and coyote taxes 
and ball bearings and drill bits and those kinds of things. 
 
He clearly has no understanding, Mr. Speaker, of how 
important some of those things are to the people of this 
province. How important the oil industry is, how important the 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

$350 million . . . (inaudible) . . . pumped into the economy, or 
into the coffers of the Government of Saskatchewan last year 
alone. And in terms of the investment in this economy, I’ll tell 
you, when it comes to industry activity in Saskatchewan, drill 
bits and ball bearings are pretty darned important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And in my constituency, fully 30 per cent of the 
people in Kindersley alone are employed in that industry. And I 
can’t help but think they’ll be listening with great shock when 
they discover that the Minister of Education for the province of 
Saskatchewan, the supposed guy that wants to talk about the 
future, the guy with all the vision for Saskatchewan, all of the 
vision — he takes credit for all of the vision of this province 
right today — is saying, it doesn’t matter about drill bits and 
ball bearings because who cares anyway? Well, I care. 
 
And the members of the official opposition care and I care 
about the jobs and I care about the Pirate Drilling and those 
companies in my constituency that we just finished losing. And 
I care about the loss of Fraser Oil from my constituency; and I 
care about Kelly Chotowetz, the young dentist that I lost in my 
constituency; and I care about all of the other people all across 
Saskatchewan that are voting with their feet and renting a 
U-Haul and pulling out of this province. 
 
You have to wonder about what is the reasons why. What are 
the fundamental differences between what are happening in 
other places and what are happening in Saskatchewan? All of 
the problems that are associated in Alberta . . . or any problems 
that they have are associated with growth. How do you deliver 
more services? How do you build faster? How do you build 
new suburbs in Calgary at the rate of requirements of 20,000 
people a month? How do you do that in Calgary? How do you 
build in Medicine Hat to keep up with the demand? Those are 
the kinds of problems that they are faced with. 
 
And what are we faced with? How do we carve up this province 
into 10 or 12 little regions that Stabler is talking about at the 
tune of $250,000 of taxes? How do we carve it up into these 
little chieftains so that the NDP can grasp a little bit more 
power — a little bit more power from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That’s what this is all about. It’s always about 
power politics in Saskatchewan. It’s always about those kinds 
of things. How do we grasp a little bit more power from the 
people that we don’t trust with anything? How do we do that? 
 
Well you do it by putting in things like a Stabler commission at 
$250,000 and telling them what their mandate is and telling 
them what kind of a report you’re going to write. You do it by 
bringing forward things like the Garcea commission and telling 
them what their mandate is at the tune of $750,000 — $1 
million blown, alone, for those kinds of things to tell the people 
of rural Saskatchewan what they believe in the NDP is good for 
them. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the people of rural Saskatchewan have had 
enough. They’re looking at this and they’re saying to 

themselves this is the line in the sand; you’re not going to cross 
this line in the sand because we are not going to allow it to 
happen. They are saying to the people all across Saskatchewan 
that’s why there’s 500 people turn up at meetings, every single 
one of them across this province, plus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — There were 500 people plus, Mr. Speaker, at the 
amalgamation meeting in Kindersley. And in my presentation, 
as modest as it was, in my presentation I said to the 
commission, at the end of this presentation . . . and I asked the 
chairman of the meeting: at the end of the presentations this 
evening, I would like there to be a vote to see whether people 
support what the government is doing in this area. 
 
And of course as the evening wore on, I think a lot of people 
kind of . . . at least I think the panel members at least hoped 
they had forgotten about that. And then right at the end of the 
meeting another one of the questioners got up and said, we’re 
just about done the meeting here tonight. I want to know two 
things — did you do any economic analysis of this program, 
and are we going to have the vote tonight? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know what happened? Mr. Garcea said 
no, there’s nothing in terms of an economic analysis, and then 
the Chair called the meeting to an end. And then you’ll never 
believe this, you won’t believe this, Mr. Speaker, but there were 
500 people there that heard this. The Chair called the meeting to 
an end and then there were people yelling from all over the 
floor saying call the vote, call the vote. 
 
And finally the Chair got up and said, you know, I thought I 
was going to be able to slip that one through. Can you imagine? 
The Chair of the meeting, the Chair of the meeting said, I hoped 
I could slip that one through. He hoped that the people at that 
meeting that night wouldn’t remember that there was going to 
be a vote. 
 
So anyway, he was forced to call it and he finally did. And to 
his credit he called it. He asked the people in this meeting here 
this evening, support the report calling for forced 
amalgamation. And there wasn’t a single hand went up. None. 
Not a single one. Not even the task force members put up their 
hand to that. 
 
And then he said, I would want everyone that’s opposed to the 
forced amalgamation to now raise their hands. And 500 people 
plus put up their hands and cheered and roared, and the people 
of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And the people in that constituency knew clearly 
that the NDP was on the wrong track. And I understand that’s 
happened at meeting after meeting after meeting all across this 
province. 
 
And at every single one of those meetings and the ones that 
follow from now on, we’re going to be asking the commission 
members, how do you expect to have any credibility in this 
exercise when the member from Yorkton has already said to the 
people of Saskatchewan, not only are we going to direct what 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

this . . . how this process is going to happen, we’re going to . . . 
the committee’s recommendations and the committee’s report 
will reflect our wishes. That’s what he said. 
 
So for the $750,000 the taxpayers of this province just spent, we 
get the member from Yorkton’s final decree — it’ll be only our 
way or the highway. That’s it, no other way — it’s our way or 
the highway; just as it always is in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my time is drawing to a close here, but I 
want to end by saying, I want to end by saying that the reasons 
why, the reasons why the members on this side of the House 
will not be supporting your budget are many. The reasons why 
we will not be supporting your budget are many. Because it 
doesn’t speak to our families; it doesn’t speak to our friends. It 
doesn’t speak to hope; it doesn’t speak to opportunity. It doesn’t 
speak to optimism; it doesn’t speak to any of those kinds of 
things that the people of Saskatchewan wanted in the budget. 
 
They wanted meaningful tax relief and they got none of it. They 
wanted all of those kinds of things. And that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, I will not be supporting the budget and will be 
supporting the amendment brought forward by the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, the hon. member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, lest there be any expectations of my 
trying to match the performance of the previous speaker, I want 
to try to suppress those. 
 
I went through this before just a week ago at a banquet here in 
the city. The member for Saskatoon Northwest was the first up 
to set the stage. The member for Kindersley followed and 
brought the crowd to their feet; they were cheering and they 
were so excited. And then it fell on me to put them back to 
sleep so that they could have a good night, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might be provided with a bit of 
leeway. I didn’t have an opportunity during the course of the 
Throne Speech to make any remarks. And I wanted at the 
outset, Mr. Speaker, to recognize your elevation to the Chair. 
 
I think that of all the Speakers I’ve seen, you’ve come uniquely 
experienced from a background in law enforcement, dispute 
resolution. I think those experiences and your qualities will 
stand us in good stead. And we look forward to working with 
you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank 
the constituents of Regina Victoria for their support for electing 
me for a term to represent them here in this Assembly. I very 
much appreciate the support that they give me. 
 
I also appreciated the campaign. I enjoyed meeting with them, 
renewing old acquaintances, making new acquaintances. It’s a 
very enervating experience. And I guess it’s like that for all 
members, otherwise we wouldn’t be here. We must enjoy that. 

And I certainly did. 
 
I also would like to thank my family for their support. Being an 
MLA, as all the members know and even for the new ones will 
begin to appreciate, can place a great many demands on a 
person. Not just demands in terms of being gone away from the 
families to attend meetings or banquets or whatever the case 
might be, but also demands in terms of trying to carry on with a 
normal life in the community — whether it’s about grocery 
shopping or whatever it might be, and to have people intrude 
into your space to tell you about something or another. 
 
And although as an MLA I don’t mind that, it’s sometimes 
difficult for families to fully appreciate that. And so I thank my 
family for their support and for allowing me to do this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank 
my constituency assistant who has been with me for many 
years. She continues to do a tremendous amount of hard work 
and does it with a great sensitivity and terrific confidence. And 
without that, I’m not sure I’d be here this time, Mr. Speaker. So 
I want to thank her too for the wonderful work that she does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just for the information of members, especially the 
new members, the constituency I represent is Regina Victoria, 
which is a part of east central Regina. A series of, in my mind, 
very pleasant neighbourhoods, a very nice area to live. 
 
The neighbourhoods are in a way not dissimilar to the distinct 
communities that members represent in their own ridings and 
rural ridings. We may not have distinct boundaries all the time 
between the communities and they may run from one into the 
other, but they are distinct communities. And as 
neighbourhoods, they’re not much different than many of the 
small towns that members are more familiar with. 
 
I go walking. I’m around in my area and people stop to talk and 
greet each other. They’re friendly people. And in that way it’s 
not much different than many small towns that I’ve lived in. 
 
Sometimes members come here and have this notion of this 
large, impersonal city filled with all these cold people, and 
that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. Most of these cities are a series 
of very liveable and very warm neighbourhoods., Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just might point out for the interest of members 
that Regina Victoria is arguably the provincial constituency in 
all of Canada that has seen the highest economic growth and the 
most employment creation in all of Canada as a provincial 
constituency. 
 
Now I could be corrected; there may be the odd constituency in 
Calgary or perhaps in Toronto that might also be able to lay 
claim to that, but I’m not going to be easily moved off of 
making that claim that Regina Victoria, as a provincial 
constituency, as one provincial constituency among many 
provincial constituencies in Canada, has during the course of 
the last number of years seen probably the most rapid economic 
growth, the most rapid increase in jobs anywhere in all of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

And that’s because Regina Victoria contains the east Regina 
Victoria . . . or contains the Victoria East shopping centre area 
including the Victoria Square Mall and many of the big-box 
retailers, and members will know that there’s been a 
tremendous economic development in that area. Now that’s all 
in my constituency, and it’s not something that I take any credit 
for whatsoever. Okay. It’s not something that I take any credit 
for whatsoever. 
 
If there’s credit, then the credit should be due to the people of 
the city of Regina or the people of the province, but it should 
not go to me as an individual. Similarly, Mr. Speaker, when 
other areas of the city have severe economic problems or have 
social problems, we should not give credit to the MLA as 
somehow being responsible for that. 
 
That’s not how our cities work. That’s not how they work. We 
share all of the advances that we make, and we share all of the 
problems that we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the Department of 
Social Services. This is not a department or an area of 
government that has been talked about very much by members 
opposite. I can’t recall anyone saying anything about the 
Department of Social Services. Some of my colleagues have 
mentioned it. 
 
I guess when you’re not talked about in government, that’s 
good news. And I accept that, but there are some comments I 
want to make. 
 
I look forward to discussing the department’s estimates and the 
details of what it is the department does during estimates when 
they come up. But I did want to touch on a few items, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First, a few words about the employees of the Department of 
Social Services. I take great pride in the work of the employees 
in my department. The work that they do is often challenging; 
frequently stressful. Sometimes when you make a positive 
difference in someone’s life, then the job can be very 
rewarding. But more often than not, Mr. Speaker, that is not the 
case. Social workers do thankless work in what is often very 
difficult situations. 
 
They deal with extremely complex and emotionally charged 
issues. Their work is often a very precarious balancing act. 
There are certainly other professions that will lay claim in our 
society to being the most demanding, the most difficult . . . and 
I can think of professional groups who have been here before 
the legislature and in public life, to make that claim. I haven’t 
seen social workers do that, but I in my opinion would state that 
I think that some of . . . social work is arguably the most 
difficult work in our society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having been a social worker for a period of my life, and having 
been an elected representative for a longer period of my life, 
I’m in a position to make some contrasts. And I’d like to point 
to people that I’m now in the decision-making business, and 
have been doing that for many years. 
 
And in the course of making decisions in government, or 
whether it was in city council, you can become involved in 

making extremely difficult decisions, trying to weigh the 
advantages of one thing as opposed to the disadvantages of 
something else; trying to weigh the overall good of society 
versus the difficulties that may be placed on individuals or 
groups in our society. And trying to weigh that out, Mr. 
Speaker, so that as a decision maker you can make some very 
difficult decisions in the work that we do. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that any of the 
decisions that I’ve been faced with in public life begin to 
compare with the difficulty and the complexity of the decisions 
that I had to make as a social worker, Mr. Speaker. And I say 
that from some experience, and I say that honestly, Mr. 
Speaker, that social workers do very demanding work. I salute 
our social workers; I salute all of our staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I also just wanted to make 
mention of a very unique social worker in the province of 
Saskatchewan, not an employee of the Department of Social 
Services, but a social worker who has been in practice in the 
province for many years. I speak of Dr. Geoff Pawson who is 
the executive director of the Ranch Ehrlo Society. And very 
recently Dr. Pawson was recognized and received the Order of 
Canada. This is a unique distinction that is accorded to 
Canadian citizens who have made great contributions to our 
society. 
 
I am very pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that social workers too 
can be recognized for the very difficult work that they do in our 
society. So I congratulate Dr. Pawson, and I congratulate all 
social workers for the difficult work that they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to 
touch on the issue of poverty in our society. One of the most 
unfortunate aspects of the 1980s in Saskatchewan, and there 
were many, was what I saw as a deinvestment in the needs of 
the poor. And I think that’s putting it diplomatically. Others 
might say that the government of the day was downright 
antagonistic when it came to poor people in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we saw in the 1980s was a very rapid transition from . . . 
for many people from full-time, well-paid jobs to part-time, 
poorly paid jobs. I think we can all remember the tremendous 
shifts that took place in our economy as that happened. 
Hopefully, thankfully, that has peaked, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
evidence points that increasingly the jobs that are being created 
in Saskatchewan — I dare say in other parts of the country as 
well — are increasingly full-time jobs as opposed to being 
part-time jobs. So hopefully that phenomenon has peaked. But 
that is something that took place during the 1980s and is only 
ending now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another unfortunate thing that happened during the 1980s is 
that the government of the day starved the daycare system, and 
daycare is a, is a service to many working families in our 
society that subsidizes them so that they can ensure that there is 
top quality child care for their children, even while they go to 
work to try to make ends meet. By de-investing in child care it 
tended to create greater problems for families, made it harder 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

for them to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government of the day, I think relative to the inflation that 
was taking place, also suppressed the minimum wage and that 
too is a major impact on poverty. When you begin to look at the 
difference between the minimum wage in a jurisdiction and the 
kind of wage that someone needs to make in a jurisdiction in 
order to get out of poverty, the greater the gap, the greater the 
chances that one will begin to see the development of poverty. 
So suppressing the minimum wage as they did relative to 
inflation has also had a major impact on the poorest people in 
our society. 
 
The government of the day also did whatever they could to 
discourage workers from organizing to advance their own 
economic interests. There were changes to labour legislation 
that were downright antagonistic to the needs of working 
people. And members can look at that as sort of some 
ideological thing that they believe in. But at the end of the day, 
denying people those rights and denying them that opportunity 
to organize to protect their own interest, has an impact on 
people and has an economic impact on people’s pocketbooks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course the other regrettable thing that happened in the 
1980s was the very punitive taxation measures like the flat tax 
that was introduced by the then Devine government. I think the 
Minister of Finance that first introduced it was Bob Andrew, 
then from the constituency of Kindersley. 
 
I remember the press coverage of the day that the right-wing 
columnists from across Canada were hailing Bob Andrew as 
some economic guru for having introduced a flat tax in 
Saskatchewan. And they thought he was just a wonderful 
person. In fact, I think it was Dian Cohen who said, we look 
forward to the next brain thrust or the next great idea from Bob 
Andrew. 
 
This was in a sense laughable, Mr. Speaker, that the right wing 
who supposedly has all these concerns about economics and has 
all these concerns about trying to keep things on balance, 
people like Dian Cohen would say these things about Bob 
Andrew, the Finance minister, who really introduced deficit 
financing to Saskatchewan. And was the person who, I think, in 
concert with Grant Devine, the two of them, who really set us 
on a road for which we are still paying — and paying mightily 
— today. 
 
But it was ironic to read the coverage of the flat tax that he was 
being hailed . . . and the reason I say this in the contribution of 
poverty, Mr. Speaker, is that the flat tax is a very punitive tax. 
It’s a very regressive tax for people with low income. Even 
though, even though, the well-to-do could find ways to get 
around the flat tax, poor working families couldn’t find any way 
and they’re paying more in terms of income taxes. 
 
So what we saw, Mr. Speaker, was a growing number of poor 
during the course of 1980s. And when the government was 
finally voted out after the ’80s, not only did we have a growing 
number of poor, we also had a huge deficit and debt situation in 
Saskatchewan that we had to deal with. But once we balanced 
our budget, Mr. Speaker, we identified poverty reduction in 
Saskatchewan as a priority for the government. 

In 1998 we introduced our building independence strategy. This 
strategy was intended to reduce dependence on welfare. And 
there are a number of elements in that plan. It included a 
training allowance that was more generous than welfare benefits 
so as to encourage people to upgrade their skills. 
 
It’s working, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen, I think, approximately 
5,000 people in Saskatchewan being assisted by the provincial 
training allowance. And people are still being helped to upgrade 
their skills and to put them in a better position to not only go 
forward in education but also to get meaningful employment in 
the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other benefit that we introduced, Mr. Speaker, was a 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit which, in conjunction with the 
National Child Benefit, provided substantial support to low 
income families. The maximum benefit that a family might 
receive in Saskatchewan is approximately $2,500 per child. 
That’s a substantial help. 
 
I also want to recognize the contribution of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan in making it possible that we could have these 
child benefits and have this tangible support for people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that it’s not fashionable for us in society to talk about 
the poor, to talk about the low income, or to see premiers to go 
to bat for the poor, but the fact of the matter is the Premier of 
Saskatchewan went to bat for poor people in Saskatchewan and 
poor people in all of Canada. And as a result, we’ve seen the 
first major social program in Canada since medicare. And I give 
a lot of credit to the member from Riversdale, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, one of the other 
benefits that we saw in the . . . that we’ve seen in the last three 
years is the Saskatchewan employment supplement. This is a 
subsidy to assist working families with the work-related costs of 
. . . or like transportation and child care. And here the maximum 
benefit can be up to about $2,000 per child. 
 
So those two benefits combined are about $4,500. That’s 
substantial help for some low-income families. Help that means 
that they’re in a better position to go to work and have the 
wherewithal to get the transportation, go to work, to have the 
clothing that they might need for work, and importantly, to 
make sure that they’ve got some support for child care that they 
need in order to be able to go to work. 
 
These two benefits, Mr. Speaker, plus the family health benefits 
plan, which is a plan that provides coverage for low-income 
people. We have coverage in Saskatchewan for people on 
welfare so that if families on welfare experience some . . . have 
some problems with respect to children’s health or there’s some 
catastrophic illness, then we’re in a position to assist them. 
 
And we felt that we should also be extending those kinds of 
benefits to low-income working families so that some health 
problem on the part of their children, or some catastrophic 
illness in the family didn’t set them back and put them back on 
the welfare. And those benefits plus the Saskatchewan . . . or 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

the family health benefits, Mr. Speaker, are having a profound 
impact on low-income families in Saskatchewan. 
 
The members will recall that a few months ago a group called 
campaign 2000, which is a . . . I think is, comes in part because 
of the efforts of the Canadian Council on Social Development, 
but in any event, is a group that tries to monitor child poverty in 
Canada. 
 
After the Parliament of Canada passed a motion saying that 
they wanted to eradicate child poverty, campaign 2000 issued a 
report, like they do every year, on child poverty in Canada. And 
we saw that in their last report card, that Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is the only province in Canada to reduce child poverty 
since 1989, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of 
the government’s actions in tackling poverty in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would be the first to say that more needs to 
be done. But I take great pride in also saying that in this 
particular instance, we’re also on the right track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about welfare. There is 
reason to believe that many people in Saskatchewan will be 
confused about welfare and how many people there are on 
welfare and how many welfare cases there are in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say they have reason to be confused because during the last 
number of months and during the last election campaign we 
saw the Leader of the Opposition, we saw the Leader of the 
Opposition going around in advertisements, in speeches and so 
on, putting out a great deal of misinformation about what is 
taking place in Saskatchewan with respect to welfare. 
 
And what he essentially said was that there’s been a huge 
increase in the number of people on welfare in Saskatchewan on 
account of the NDP government. Well that’s what he said. He 
said that there was a huge increase in the number of people on 
welfare in Saskatchewan on account of the NDP government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. In 
fact, if you really begin to examine the causes of some of the 
increases that have taken place in welfare, I’d suggest that the 
member for Rosetown should look in the mirror because the 
policies that he puts forward probably has a greater impact than 
what the Saskatchewan government has had. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 there were about 28,000 cases of 
welfare in the province of Saskatchewan. By 1994 those cases 
had jumped to a high of 41,284. So there was a very rapid, very 
great increase in welfare from about 1990-1991 to 1994. And 
there’s no denying that. That is the truth. Those are the facts. 
 
The question is what did that have to do with the NDP 
government or, for that matter, with any provincial 
government? And I would suggest that it’s very little, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact this rapid increase started to take place before 
the NDP was ever elected in 1991. This rapid increase started to 
take place even during the Devine administration. 
 
And there are three reasons for that. One, there was a recession 

in 1990-91. You will all recall the recessionary times that I 
think helped convince people that Mr. Devine and his 
administration should be booted out of office. You will 
remember the recessionary times here as contributing to the 
mass exodus of people from Saskatchewan to Alberta and other 
parts of Canada, where employment prospects were much better 
than they are . . . than they were here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know members like to talk about depopulation and people 
moving to Alberta and that somehow that this is some epidemic 
that’s taking place in our society. But I tell the members that if 
you really want to get a sense of an epidemic and people 
leaving Saskatchewan in droves, you only have to look back 
about 10 years to get a full appreciation of what was happening. 
 
And that was people were leaving Saskatchewan not by the 
hundreds, Mr. Speaker, not by the hundreds, not by the 
thousands, Mr. Speaker, but leaving Saskatchewan by the tens 
of thousands because there is was no hope, no opportunity, 
nothing for them here in Saskatchewan. And at least in that 
score, Mr. Speaker, I am encouraged by the progress that we 
have been making. 
 
Is it enough? No it’s not enough, and I think all the members on 
this side would recognize and agree that there’s much more that 
needs to be done. But again you know everything in life is 
relative, and if the members want to talk about out-migrations 
and the policies of governments and the impact that it has, I 
invite them to compare our record. I invite you to compare our 
record with the previous government. 
 
Before you go to the people of Saskatchewan and say well 
we’re going to do it so much better or there’s so much more that 
we can be . . . Oh sorry, that was an old phrase from some years 
ago by Mr. Devine. But before you go around saying that oh, 
we can do it so much better than anyone else, I would just 
encourage members to take a breath, and I would encourage the 
people of Saskatchewan to put things in some context. 
 
But in any event, there was a rapid increase in welfare which 
started under the Devine administration, in part because of the 
economy at the time but also in part because of changes by the 
federal government. And that is something that affected all the 
provinces in Canada. 
 
You will probably remember that starting with the Mulroney 
government, in 1990 thereabouts, the federal government 
started to change the rules for Unemployment Insurance — I 
guess they now call it Employment Insurance — but they 
changed the rules for Unemployment Insurance. It meant that it 
is more difficult for people to qualify; the benefits that were 
being paid out were less than they were before. 
 
In any event, the federal government made those changes which 
meant that people who hitherto would have been able to qualify 
for Unemployment Insurance now couldn’t qualify and had to 
go to provincial welfare offices in order to get support between 
jobs. Now that’s not something that affected only 
Saskatchewan, that’s something that affected all provinces in 
the country and affected Saskatchewan as well. 
 
That resulted in a major part of the increase that we saw starting 
in 1990 as a result of the changes by the Mulroney government, 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

changes that were very strongly supported by the right wing, 
very strongly supported by the Reform Party when they had the 
chance. In fact they said the government should go harder and 
faster on those kinds of things. You can do that but it does have 
an impact on people, and it’s had a very great impact on welfare 
rolls in Saskatchewan. 
 
We also saw in 1993 the federal government make a further 
change. Oh yes, before I get into that, you’ll all know that the 
Employment Insurance fund, so-called now, has a very healthy 
surplus. In fact there’s been a great deal of debate in Canada as 
of late as to how the federal government should deal with the 
question of the surplus that’s there in the Employment 
Insurance fund. 
 
And some people are saying well you should give it back to 
employers and others are saying you should use it to reduce 
your taxes and so on. I don’t want to get into that debate, but 
the fact of the matter is that the federal government has a very 
healthy surplus — thank you very much, thank you very much 
— as a result of the changes that they made. 
 
Well those changes, plus changes to treatment by the federal 
government as to off-reserve Indians, meant that there was a 
huge increase in welfare caseloads. But the good news is that 
since that peak in 1994 welfare caseloads have been going like 
this. And they’ve been going like this — they’ve been going 
down, they’ve been going down as a result of a better economy 
in Saskatchewan and as a result of some of the changes that 
we’ve made to our system. Now the member may smirk but 
that’s the facts of the case. That’s the facts of the case. 
 
(1615) 
 
I mean, welfare caseloads have come down. Welfare caseloads 
went up as a result of the federal government and the changes 
they made. Welfare caseloads have come down 14 per cent 
since 1994 as a result of a good economy. And the member may 
say, well, there’s really no association between the economy 
and welfare caseloads. Well there’s a very strong association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, as one of the Prairie provinces, has 
one of the lowest dependency ratios in all of Canada; that is to 
say the number of people in the population who are dependent 
on welfare. Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba have the lowest 
dependency ratios. They also have the lowest unemployment 
rates in all of Canada. I think there’s an association there. 
 
So I just wanted to set it straight and hopefully your leader . . . 
or their leader, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, 
won’t go around as he has done in the past, now knowing all of 
the facts, won’t go around as he has in the past attempting to 
mislead people in Saskatchewan about the true facts related to 
welfare in Saskatchewan. And he’ll quit trying to score political 
points on the backs of the poorest people in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my time’s 
coming to an end. I just wanted to say that this is a good budget 
for low-income families. Although there has been an expansion 
to the PST base, we have not included necessities like home 
heating and children’s clothing. Poor people, low-income 

people do have access to a sales tax credit which in my opinion 
will more than compensate them for the costs they will have. 
 
This budget sees the beginning of the end of the Devine flat tax, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is a very welcome initiative by 
low-income families in Saskatchewan because it means that, as 
opposed to having the regressive tax system we have, we now 
begin to have a progressive tax system. 
 
Poor families will pay their fair share, but with this new tax 
system they’re not going to be paying more than their fair share, 
Mr. Speaker. We will see 55,000 fewer low-income taxpayers 
in Saskatchewan. Finally, Mr. Speaker, a progressive tax 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this budget has also 
seen a major investment in social housing. This is welcome 
news for some of our low-income families because it might 
increase their options for safe, affordable, decent housing so 
that their children can be raised in better environments than is 
now the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is up. I again want to thank the members 
for their attention and I look forward to their contributions and 
debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a real 
privilege to be able to respond to the budget speech. I have only 
a few minutes and I’m going to try and summarize very quickly 
some of the things that . . . some of the concerns that I’ve 
picked up over the last couple of days listening to the debate 
and some of the things that I think need to be highlighted in 
summary form. 
 
I was very anxious to hear the Throne Speech . . . I mean the 
budget speech because of the promises in the Throne Speech 
and some of the things that we had heard in the election 
campaign. 
 
There was a lot of things promised — to listen to the people; 
they promised some very meaningful tax reductions, a new way 
of doing government, a real advantage in this coalition. Of 
course they were talking about the tax reductions and I know 
that the Liberal promise, for instance, of the civil service 
reduction and how that was going to square with the budget as 
it came out. 
 
So when the budget speech came out and I was listening to it, it 
really appeared that there was some positive innovations there; 
and I have to commend them for some of those things like 
removing some of these simpler taxes, the flat tax, for instance; 
going to a more simple tax form; the reduction and the 
elimination of some of the other taxes — the provincial flat tax 
for instance; and the decoupling — very good moves. 
 
But when I talk to my constituents in the Lloydminster area, it 
was very interesting to get the reaction from them — very much 
the same reaction that we had here, very much what we had 
heard earlier on. 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Some of the reactions that I heard: if it looks too good to be 
true, be careful; the devil is in the details, they said. Actually 
what they said is it’s the bogeyman in the books in this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — What’s in the budget that’s going to keep 
me in Saskatchewan right now, they said, let alone into the 
future. They were very concerned about what was happening. 
They said they felt a lot of discomfort as the minister was 
speaking. 
 
And I take those comments very seriously because in the Lloyd 
region, the Lloydminster region in particular, the constituents 
there are very aware of the kind of conditions that they make 
their personal decisions on. Remember that the Lloydminster 
area is in a very unique situation. Most people live there, they 
work there, and they do business there in a dual environment. 
 
And where I’m from, you just don’t say to the people — as I’ve 
heard from the other side — you just don’t talk about Alberta. 
You don’t let people know what’s going on there. You can’t 
compare Alberta with ourselves. I’ve heard that over and over 
again. We don’t want to be Albertans. We just want to be 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let me say to you and everyone here: don’t be afraid of our 
neighbours. We should be learning from our neighbours. We 
don’t want to disavow their very presence. And I think by . . . it 
would be a disservice to everyone here and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What I’ve heard, I’ve heard them say Alberta is not our way. 
There is no difference between the province . . . And again I 
ask: who are these people trying to convince? Are they trying to 
convince our young people? Are they trying to convince our 
trained and educated people who actually have moved away 
already? Are they trying to convince our nurses? 
 
We have to pay attention to what’s happening in that Lloyd area 
because really that’s, that’s where the reality really hits the 
road. It’s not an anomaly up in that north corner. Lloydminster, 
I think, should be viewed as really a model for what might be in 
store for the rest of the province. I think you have to look at that 
big picture. 
 
Presently Lloydminster is in a boom cycle, and one of the few 
places in the province that is in a boom cycle. It’s a growing 
and a young population. It has an expanded economy, and it has 
a vigour, and it has a momentum. But that does not come from 
the vision that I saw in the budget. I don’t see any policies or 
initiatives from this government in this budget. 
 
The engine for that vigour is really coming and spilling over 
from Alberta. And what’s happening in Alberta is really there in 
spite of what’s happening here in Saskatchewan. 
 
When we talk about . . . In the budget speech I heard growth 
and opportunity. Well that’s certainly happening in 
Lloydminster but the growth is not on the Saskatchewan side, 
and the opportunity is not there either. No matter what this 
government says, stagnation seems to have happened on the 
Saskatchewan side and not on the Alberta side. 

From the short term, there is a real urgency to the situation. 
People are relocating. In my area they’re relocating daily; 
decisions are being made to move. And in the short term, this 
budget only adds to the continuation in this direction. It doesn’t 
help it. In fact it increases the urgency to make these changes. 
 
So why must we keep talking about our competition and why 
do I bring up Alberta? Well one of the first rules of business, 
Mr. Speaker, is to know your competition, understand the 
advantages of our competition, and why. Understand what has 
been done and make sure that we can copy those and take 
advantage of those advantages. You must understand the vision 
that make these changes happen, and understand the mission 
and the methods that are making it happen. 
 
If we want to compete, we have to take advantage of those 
things. But remember: it’s a moving target, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
moving target because just at the time as our personal income 
taxes will eventually equate to Alberta’s, you have to remember 
that their projection is to actually eliminate the personal income 
tax altogether. 
 
And you must remember that the economic forecast in Alberta 
coming up in the next three or four years is projecting 295,000 
new jobs. Well where do you suppose those jobs will come 
from? Two hundred and ninety-five thousand jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, is about three-quarters of our total workforce. 
 
Really what should have been expected in this budget, and I 
didn’t see, was a couple of things that are very important, and 
that budget statement should have had something about a 
statement of vision. And I saw no long-term vision; I saw no 
long-term direction in that budget. I don’t see anything in that 
budget that says where this government plans to be and where 
it’s going, not only in the near future but in the long term as 
well. 
 
But instead of that, instead of a vision or a clear statement — 
and that’s what people so desperately need in this province — 
all we got is some tinkering, some self-congratulations. We saw 
a lot of hidden taxes, a lot of fee increases that we’re only 
finally discovering at this point. 
 
We didn’t see the vision, we saw trends. We didn’t hear any 
immediate action, we heard some promises and we heard a lot 
of trust me. And I’m wondering why the people don’t believe 
what’s going on when this governments put forward their 
budget. 
 
Well you have to remember what actually the people see. You 
have to remember what they make decisions on. They wanted to 
see a tax reduction — not a promise into the future — and all 
they got was a tax expansion right away. 
 
And I think what was particularly arrogant at this stage was this 
government saying that they could have taxed even more. They 
could have taxed restaurant foods, they could have taxed 
children’s food, they could have taxed utility rates. But they 
didn’t do so and therefore in some convoluted way they must 
have felt they’re really the good guys here. 
 
What they see as balancing the budget on downloading onto the 
people — particularly the municipalities. The net taxes paid by 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

the municipalities on fuel and services, equipment, is actually 
more than the operating grants paid by this government. It’s a 
complete download. 
 
What this budget really should be described as, Mr. Speaker, is 
a token budget. And that’s really the word that the minister used 
when he was describing what the student tax credit was in an 
interview with a student who said $350 would not keep him in 
Saskatchewan. This person would go elsewhere for 
opportunities. 
 
And I think this budget should be more adequately described, at 
least in my area, as a emigration or an out-migration budget. 
 
If we look in the Health department, we see that same trend, the 
downloading, putting the cost to the regions. Many of the health 
regions are now running at a considerable budget . . . deficit 
rather. And the administration costs are up. And it’s only 
actually a $16 million expenditure. That’s just a token. 
 
We see the same trend in agriculture. We see the same 
deficiency of vision. We see the deficiency of direction there. 
And that’s exactly what was needed in this budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we listen to the people, we say that 
they’ve missed the point in this budget. They’ve neglected the 
urgency. 
 
I cannot support this budget speech for those reasons. And I 
will be supporting the amendment that will create a temporary 
tax relief that is so lacking in this budget. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1630) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I noticed 
in your gallery that a couple of couples have joined us from the 
Moosomin area, and I think we’re looking forward to joining 
them for dinner just a little later on. 
 
But John and June Schulte and Harvey and Blanche Steffenson 
have joined us this afternoon for a few minutes. And I’d like to 
invite you and the members of this Assembly to extend a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Cline, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Romanow that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, in accordance with rule 15(3), 
I’d now invite the mover of the main motion to close debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise in my place to close debate. 
 
And I want to say what this budget is really about, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget is about a vision for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what this budget is about, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not about the next week. It’s not about the next 
month. It’s not about the next three months, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
about the next generation and it’s about the future of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when 
we look at the future, we have a future in Saskatchewan — 
notwithstanding the gloom and doom preached by the Leader of 
the Opposition and his colleagues — that is bright and secure 
because of this budget, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud of this 
budget, and I’m proud of my colleagues and the people of 
Saskatchewan that have helped us prepare this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what is it about? It is about the future. It’s about growth 
and prosperity, Mr. Speaker. And that starts with a fairer tax 
system. And that’s what this budget delivers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We need a simple competitive tax system 
for growth and opportunity in our new economy, and 
Saskatchewan people deserve a tax break. And maybe, Mr. 
Speaker, the members of the opposition aren’t going to vote for 
that tax break, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that every member 
that sits on this side of the House will be voting for a tax break 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They say that you don’t have to do 
anything with your tax system except hack and slash income 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. That’s the extent of their vision. They say 
that you don’t have to reform our entire taxation system. And 
what they’re really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that they want to go 
back into deficit and debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have been, on this side of the House, 
we’ve delivered seven consecutive balanced budgets. And as 
long as we sit on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to continue delivering balanced budgets in Saskatchewan. 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we hear day after day members of the 
opposition getting up in this House and saying there’s no tax 
cuts in this budget, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll tell you and I’ll tell 
this House, the people of this province know that on July 1 of 
this year, less than three months from now, the Saskatchewan 
flat tax, introduced by those people over there in 1985, is going 
to be cut in half, Mr. Speaker — cut in half. 
 
And on January 1 of this year, Mr. Speaker, the flat tax is going 
to be eliminated. It will be gone. The debt reduction surtax will 
be gone and the high income surtax, Mr. Speaker, will be gone. 
And we will be going to a simple three-way tax structure, Mr. 
Speaker, that will lower income taxes for every person in this 
province who pays income tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And not only that, not only that, we are 
going to remove the 55,000 low-income taxpayers in this 
province from the provincial income tax rolls, altogether, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And what I want to know, and what the 
people of Saskatchewan want to know, Mr. Speaker, is why do 
the members opposite oppose the elimination of the 
Saskatchewan flat tax, Mr. Speaker? Why? And why do the 
members opposite oppose taking 55,000 low-income people off 
of the Saskatchewan income tax rolls, Mr. Speaker? Why do 
they . . . why are they opposed to that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, I’ll tell you why. Because this perplexed me. They’ve 
been getting up for years in this province screaming about taxes 
and the need to lower taxes, Mr. Speaker. Now there’s a plan to 
lower taxes and they don’t support it. And I asked myself, why? 
Why would they not support it? 
 
And then you know what I did, Mr. Speaker, I looked at their 
election platform. And do you know what they proposed in their 
election platform, Mr. Speaker? They proposed that we reduce 
the basic rate of income tax collection from 48 per cent to 38 
per cent. And what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? 
 
No they did not propose that we eliminate the flat tax. Did they 
propose that? No. They did not propose that we eliminate the 
debt reduction surtax. They didn’t propose that, they wanted to 
keep it on. They did not propose that we eliminate the 
high-income surtax, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t propose that. 
And they did not propose that we would eliminate and take off 
the tax rolls 55,000 low-income people. They didn’t propose 
that, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you why. Because what they say 
to the people of Saskatchewan is, cut the income taxes of the 
millionaire by 20 per cent and cut the income taxes of the senior 
citizen by 20 per cent. And that’s not what we say, Mr. Speaker. 
We say, take the senior citizen off of the tax roll if they’re 
low-income, Mr. Speaker, not a big tax cut for the rich. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what we say, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s what we’re going to do. And I’ll tell you something. No 
mention of the flat tax from them, Mr. Speaker. No mention of 
the other surtaxes; no mention of higher personal credits that 
will take low-income people off of the tax rolls; no mention of 
enhanced credits for senior citizens; no mention of new credits 
for children; no mention of fairer treatment for families, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you something. The opposition hates this tax 
package. And I’ll tell you why they hate it, Mr. Speaker, 
because it doesn’t contain a big tax cut for their rich friends — 
that’s why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s what they really want. It’s not 
what they’re going to tell people but that’s what they really 
want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because you know who wrote their tax cut plan for the rich, Mr. 
Speaker? Their advisors on Bay Street in Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s where it came from. 
 
Well, I’ve got news for them, and I’ve got news for the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. Our tax cuts for ordinary 
people and low-income people in Saskatchewan wasn’t 
designed by Bay Street in Toronto; it was designed on main 
street right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And if you think, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
unhappy now because they didn’t get their tax cut for the rich, 
which is their secret and not-so-secret agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you think they’re unhappy now, you just wait until July 1 of 
this year when the flat tax that they brought in is cut in half, Mr. 
Speaker. And then we’ll see how unhappy they are. 
 
And if you think that they’re going to be unhappy about that, 
Mr. Speaker, you just wait until January 1 — less than nine 
months from now — when that flat tax is eliminated, when the 
high-income surtax is eliminated, when the debt-reduction 
surtax is eliminated, and we’re going to a new, fair, simple, 
competitive income tax system for this province over your 
opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And they don’t like it because they want 
their tax cuts for their rich friends. And I’ll tell you something, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to let them do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And they’re never going to get away with 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the people of Saskatchewan know it. 



April 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

And I want to say something about the hyperbole and just the 
ridiculous rhetoric we hear from the opposition about what’s 
going on in Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria already pointed out that we 
were losing tens of thousands of people from this province, Mr. 
Speaker, when the members opposite had the chance to govern. 
Tens of thousands a year. 
 
And we’ve turned that around, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan 
people are filled with hope and optimism about our province’s 
future. Because I’ll tell you something . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people do not want to hear the message of doom 
and gloom and despair from the opposition. They want to hear a 
message of hope and optimism about the future of this province 
— that’s what this budget delivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, I thought I 
had heard it all. I thought I had heard it all until the other day 
when I heard in this House the member from Carrot River, the 
member from Carrot River, stand up in this House and do you 
know what he said? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — He said he was talking to somebody who 
had moved here from Bosnia-Herzegovina, Mr. Speaker. He 
had asked, he had asked the person well, how do you like it in 
Saskatchewan? And the answer the member from Carrot River 
got was, well he complained about the taxes, he said. 
 
And I’d like to say to the member from Carrot River that I find 
that comparison highly offensive, and I think people in 
Saskatchewan do and I think Canadians do, and I’ll tell you 
why. Because it trivializes, Mr. Speaker, what is really going on 
in other parts of the world including places like 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
 
What we see in places like that in the world, Mr. Speaker, is 
rape, murder, genocide, ethnic cleansing, people destroying 
schools, destroying hospitals, destroying houses in pursuit of 
hate, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we see in those parts of the 
world. 
 
And I think what we have to remember, and what I would ask 
the members opposite to remember, is that we in Saskatchewan 
are blessed, Mr. Speaker. We are blessed to live in one of the 
finest places in the world with a wonderful quality of life, Mr. 
Speaker. And we should not, we should not, Mr. Speaker, be 
suggesting in any way, shape, or form that things are not a lot 
better here than in other parts of the world that unfortunately, 
tragically, and sadly are suffering from war and human misery, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I don’t care how much crepe that the 

Leader of the Opposition wants to hang all over the Legislative 
Building, and how much doom and gloom they want to spread, 
and how much they want to say that Saskatchewan is a bad 
place to live. Until my dying day, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
stand up here or wherever I am — and everywhere in this 
province, in this country, in this world — and say this is the 
finest place in all the world in which to live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So much for references to other parts of the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we have the Leader of the Opposition who wants to be all 
things to all people, standing up in this House and saying he 
doesn’t like the tax package which eliminates the flat tax and 
has the largest income tax in the history of the province. He 
doesn’t like that. The largest income tax cut in the history of the 
province, Mr. Speaker; he doesn’t like that. 
 
He doesn’t like the elimination of the flat tax, and he can’t stand 
the fact that lower income people are going to get a break 
because he wants to award his friends — that’s what he wants 
to do. Then he goes out into the rotunda and talks to the media. 
And they say to him, well Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you 
say you don’t like this tax package, so we can count on you to 
make a commitment to reverse it if you’re ever elected — very 
unlikely to happen — but will you make that commitment, Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition? 
 
You know what his answer is, Mr. Speaker? His answer is no, I 
won’t commit to that. Because he knows, Mr. Speaker, that 
when the people of the province examine this tax package they 
know it’s fair, Mr. Speaker. And unlike the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, they’re not interested in a tax cut for the rich, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re interested in a tax cut for ordinary people 
in Saskatchewan. And that’s what this budget delivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Then we have the usual Tory inspired, all 
things to all people approach, where they come into this House, 
Mr. Speaker, and they start talking about what they would do. 
 
And of course they would cut this tax and cut that tax, and 
spend here and spend there. The member from Kelvington goes 
to the school trustees and says, we’ll double what you get. 
There’s a $380 million expenditure there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1645) 
 
Then we have the member from Rosetown saying, we’ll cut the 
PST by $190 million, Mr. Speaker. We’ll do that. Then we have 
the member from Swift Current saying that we’re going to 
spend another $40 million or some such amount in Swift 
Current. And it goes on and on. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, in five days, five days, 
they’ve spent $1.2 billion — $1.2 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — One point two billion dollars, and this is 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2000 

supposed to be a credible opposition that presumes to say that 
some day they want to govern this province. 
 
Well, I say, Mr. Speaker, with this kind of Tory math, that is 
never going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But you know what they want to do, Mr. 
Speaker? And it is the easiest thing in the world to do. The 
easiest thing in the world to do, Mr. Speaker, is to spend money 
on the backs of the next generation. And that’s what they want 
to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the Leader of the Opposition gets up and says that 
this government wants to pick somebody’s pocket, I say again, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing that we’re never going to do like 
they do — we’re not going to pick the pockets of our children, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We saw that, we saw that with the 
members before, Mr. Speaker, and we’re seeing it again. We’re 
seeing a plan, a so-called plan from them that would say they’re 
going to put us into deficit and debt. That’s what they’re going 
to do because they don’t have the courage and the vision, Mr. 
Speaker, to look to the future; not to short-term political gain; 
not to vote . . . not to buying people’s votes with their own 
money, Mr. Speaker, but having a vision for the future. And 
that’s what we need in this province. That’s what this budget 
delivers. 
 
And I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. The people over there 
have no vision, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why, 
unlike the province of Saskatchewan, they also have no future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:50 p.m. until 4:51 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 31 
 
Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 

Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 
The division bells rang from 4:54 p.m. until 4:55 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 

Romanow Trew Hagel 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Melenchuk Cline Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Serby Belanger 
Nilson Crofford Hillson 
Kowalsky Sonntag Hamilton 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Yates Harper Axworthy 
Junor Kasperski Wartman 
Addley   
 

Nays — 24 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Boyd 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


