





























































Hansard: June 02, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1529 
 June 2, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise this 
morning and present a petition dealing with the high cost of 
gasoline. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And this is signed by the good people from Weldon, Melfort, 
and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition from the good people of Saskatchewan who would 
like to see their fuel tax lowered by 10 cents a litre. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Brockington, Saskatchewan; Kinistino; Melfort; Weldon; and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition asking the Assembly to retain the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Watrous and Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high price of gasoline. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Fairy Glen, Radisson, Beatty, Ituna, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition in regards to the gas tax. And read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
communities of Star City, Melfort, Saskatoon, Tobin Lake, and 
Archerwill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition in 
regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the members . . . or by 
people from Kinistino and Weldon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens deeply concerned about the high cost of fuel. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Kinistino and Yellow Creek. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the high price of fuel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to do with the health care situation in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, with this petition are 
from Govan, Drake, Jansen, Lanigan, and Lockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding hospital closures. There’s a 
number of people in this province that are concerned about 
hospital closures. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Lanigan, Guernsey area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about hospital 
closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Lanigan, Jansen, Drake, and 
Guernsey. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from Balgonie, Kenaston, Davidson, Strongfield. 

There’s even a couple from out of province who think we pay 
way too high tax here — Nova Scotia and Edmonton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned about hospital closures. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners are from the communities of Guernsey, Jansen, 
Saskatoon, Viscount, Lockwood, Drake, and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as 
well from citizens concerned with the high cost of fuel. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Weldon, Kinistino, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this morning to bring a petition to stop municipal reserve 
account confiscation. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from the 
rural municipality of Paddockwood no. 520. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Cupar who are 
concerned about the continuation of medical services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure that the 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

Cupar Health Centre remains open and physician services 
are retained in the community of Cupar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to bring forth a petition regarding the fuel costs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel tax by 
10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Melfort and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the threat of possible 
forced municipal amalgamation, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from Drinkwater, 
Moose Jaw, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on 
behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the high cost of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Melfort, 
Kinistino, and Birch Hills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of the citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; and 

To ensure the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
present to the Assembly this morning, through you, a former 
member of this Assembly who served his constituents, this 
Assembly, and the province with great distinction. Mr. Speaker, 
behind the bar we have the former member for Weyburn, Mr. 
Lorne Hepworth. 
 
While Mr. Hepworth was a member of this Assembly, he 
served as minister responsible for Agriculture, Education, and 
Finance. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that everyone will realize 
that Mr. Hepworth certainly did put his mind to the job and 
served his constituents well, served this province well, and I’d 
like to ask the members to join me in welcoming back Mr. 
Hepworth to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
side, I too would like to join my colleague from Moosomin in 
welcoming Mr. Lorne Hepworth. Mr. Hepworth was the 
minister of Education when I came in as a rookie critic, and I 
recall how kind he was to me with the questions that I asked. 
 
I also recall, Mr. Speaker, a by-election that was in the riding of 
Assiniboia — I think it was called at the time — that I thought 
I’d go down and help our candidate, Allen Engel. I was 
knocking on a rural door and a lady came to the door and 
welcomed me in. She said, won’t you come and have coffee. I 
came and sat down at the table. Guess who was there? Mr. 
Lorne Hepworth, who’d arrived an hour earlier. 
 
Welcome, Lorne. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 19 students from L.P. Miller School in Nipawin. 
And they are accompanied today by their teacher, Ms. Beth 
McDonald, and a chaperone, Ms. MaryLou Hamilton. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to meet briefly with 
these students a little earlier and I was very, very impressed 
with the fact that the vast majority of them could actually 
pronounce my last name correctly, unlike the vast majority of 
my colleagues in the Assembly. 
 
So I would ask everyone to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Nipawin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to introduce to 
you this morning two friends and through you to the House. 
These two friends I’ve known for a while and as a member of 
the ag committee we’ve met and talked over a number of issues. 
 
They’re in the west gallery; one who is known to many 
throughout this province, and one who probably will be through 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

the years ahead. I’d like to introduce Roy Atkinson and Roy is 
from the Biggar area, and Bill Rosher who is from the 
Kindersley area. 
 
These two gentlemen are working very hard with the Prairie 
Alliance For the Future to try and revitalize the rural farm 
economy. And we’re glad to have you here today meeting with 
us and observing actions in the House. We hope that you feel 
welcomed by all of us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to this 
morning introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the House 30 grade 12 students from Valley Christian 
Academy, just outside the community of Osler, sitting in the 
east gallery. 
 
They’re accompanied this morning by their teachers Trace 
Block and Pete Reimer. I’ll be meeting with them afterwards 
and I hope they enjoy question period as much as I intend to 
enjoy it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
also want to join my colleague from P.A. in welcoming Lorne 
Hepworth to the legislature. I was the critic for Education prior 
to the 1991 campaign and Lorne and I used to have some 
wonderful debates, particularly during estimates for Education. 
 
I think one debate we had a discussion about the philosophy of 
education. I have great regard for Lorne. I’m glad that he’s in 
our province visiting with I understand the Minister of the 
Environment. I know that he is now in Etobicoke, I think, 
Ontario, just outside of Toronto. I’m sure that someday when he 
wants to retire, he might consider coming back to the province 
of Saskatchewan, which is his birthplace. 
 
So welcome, Lorne, to the legislature and I’m sure you’re going 
to enjoy question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with 
my colleague in welcoming our friend, Lorne, here to the 
legislature; and also a friend of many Saskatchewan people, 
Gunnar Passmore with the Trade Council, who is with us today, 
and a friend. I want all members to join with me in welcoming 
Gunnar here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Health Care System 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to rise today to talk about something that is always 
first and foremost in the minds of Saskatchewan people — our 
health care system. 
 
As Liberals we share the principles of single-tier, sustainable, 

responsive, and affordable public health care with our New 
Democratic coalition partners. 
 
All members on this side believe that it is the responsibility of 
both senior levels of government to support financially and with 
legislation a publicly administered, publicly funded health care 
system. 
 
Unlike the members opposite who speak only of audits and 
frozen health care spending and a user-pay, two-tier system, this 
coalition government will ensure the Saskatchewan health care 
system is responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan citizens for 
many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
It is time to review our system from primary community care to 
tertiary care based on an integrated province-wide approach. 
We must be mindful that the system of the future, to be 
effective and sustainable, must be built from the many 
substantive and positive system delivery initiatives that are in 
place today. These must be supported through our renewed 
health care system. 
 
We all look forward to our future system with hope and vigour, 
knowing that the creators of medicare always envisioned a 
system strongly supported by the public, by caregivers, and by 
both levels of government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Area Students Win Nationwide Contest 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate two 
Weyburn students for winning a nationwide contest which is 
sponsored in part through local Kinsmen and Kinette clubs. 
 
Queen Elizabeth School student, Lee Bauer will be going to 
Fredericton, New Brunswick and Haig school student, Melody 
Penny has won a trip to Edmonton. Both are grade five 
students. 
 
The trips are part of a Celebrate Canada in the Capitals, 2000 
Program and focus on teaching children about Canada’s capital 
cities. Only 13 children in Saskatchewan were awarded the trips 
and so I’d like to again congratulate Lee and Melody, and to 
wish them a most enjoyable and educational trip. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Commemoration of National Cancer Survivors Day 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, June 2 
celebrations will take place to commemorate National Cancer 
Survivors Day in Saskatchewan. The Canadian Cancer Society 
Saskatchewan Division and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
are planning two events in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
The Regina program will take place outdoors at the main 
entrance to the Pasqua Hospital, beginning at 1:30 p.m. The 
Saskatoon program will take place at the Cancer Centre, 20 
Campus Drive in Saskatoon at 2:00 p.m. 
 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

National Cancer Survivors Day gives us a chance to celebrate 
life and recognize that many people have survived this disease. 
It’s also a time to remember the important role that family and 
friends play in the lives of cancer survivors, as well as the many 
volunteers, health professionals and researchers who devote 
their lives to making life more comfortable for people faced 
with this disease. 
 
The Canadian Cancer Society Saskatchewan Division is part of 
a national community-based organization of volunteers, whose 
mission is to eradicate cancer and the enhancement of quality of 
. . . and to enhance the quality of life of people living with 
cancer. 
 
The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is responsible for the 
provision of cancer treatment, research, prevention and 
education to the people of Saskatchewan, operating the Allan 
Blair Cancer Clinic in Regina, and the Saskatoon Cancer 
Centre, the Screening Program for Breast Cancer and Research 
Unit. 
 
I would encourage all members to please get out and recognize 
this day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fundraiser Held in Whitewood 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday the community of Whitewood had a celebration, and a 
celebration of significance as we look back about six months to 
October 1999 when they were devastated by a fire that 
destroyed the centrepiece of the community, which was their 
rink. 
 
However, what Saturday showed was a resilience of a small 
community and surrounding area when more than 300 people 
bought tickets. In fact they had a waiting list to come to the 
dinner to raise funds . . . for a fundraiser to raise some funds to 
help rebuild the rink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the guest speakers were Bobby Hull, hockey 
legend, and Gerald Shymko, our famous curler from 
Saskatchewan, as well as three local boys who have done very 
well: Bruce Thompson, coach of the Regina Cougars; Brad 
McEwen, assistant coach and assistant general manager of the 
Swift Current Broncos Brent McEwen, general manager of the 
Saskatoon Blades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we saw on Saturday was a community 
rallying together despite the devastation and loss of their rink. 
And I’m happy to say today that the outline of the building is 
pretty well up and they’re beginning to put the walls on, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re hoping to be in their rink by this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of that fundraiser, the community and 
surrounding area raised over $25,000 for their rink. And I think 
that speaks well for residents of these small communities. 
Congratulations to Whitewood and surrounding area on a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1999 Lieutenant Governor’s Medal 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the words of the former Lieutenant Governor F. W. Johnson 
 

Dedicated public servants contribute much to our society and 
often their contribution is unrecognized. 

 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, it pleases me very much to inform 
the House that the Crown Corporation service division of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) has been 
awarded the 1999 Lieutenant Governor’s Medal of the Institute 
of Public Administration of Canada. 
 
The gold medal, Mr. Speaker, is awarded annually by the 
Regina Regional Group of the Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada to a person or a work team showing 
distinguished leadership and achievement in public 
administration in Saskatchewan. 
 
This team was awarded the medal for its work since 1997 on 
the Crown review in improving governance, performance 
management, and strategic planning systems and processes in 
the Crown corporations sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The medal was presented on Wednesday at a ceremony at 
Government House. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that the 
daughter of my predecessor as government caucus Chair, Vi 
Stanger, her daughter was one of the recipients of this group. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fire at Trailtech in Gravelbourg 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
inform you and this Hon. Assembly of a serious fire at Trailtech 
industries last night in Gravelbourg. The fire apparently flared 
up around 11 p.m. and destroyed the two original Trailtech 
buildings which are now dedicated to painting, decaling, and 
finishing work. 
 
The main production facility fortunately survived the fire so 
production will continue at least to some extent. Of course at 
this time Trailtech’s plans are still being assessed. 
 
This is a devastating setback and I’m sure that all members of 
this Assembly would wish to join me in expressing their 
sympathy and best wishes to Mr. Keith Brown and all of the 
dedicated staff at Trailtech industries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Wins Contest Award 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to rise in 
the Assembly today to tell all the members about a constituent 
of mine. Miranda Wells, a grade 12 student at Ernie Studer 
School, is playing a large part in fighting against drinking and 
driving. And her message is reaching an audience right across 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

Miranda is a regional winner in the CBC’s (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Extreme Attitudes Against Drinking 
and Driving contest. Segments from the winning entries have 
been aired on CBC-TV since the middle of May. I’m sure many 
of the members in this Assembly will have seen a number of 
her ads. 
 
Miranda’s commercial is entitled Class Reunion and stars her 
own classmates. In Miranda’s commercial, a boy approaches a 
girl and at first the girl is unable to remember who he is, but 
quickly recalls that he was a drunk driver in high school. 
 
The commercial asks the question, what will you be 
remembered for? Miranda believes this question is an effective 
one as people often wonder what they will be remembered for. 
 
Miranda is an example of the many young people in our 
province who are speaking out against drinking and driving and 
are taking a leading role in educating the public. I wish to 
extend my appreciation to her for her efforts to help raise 
awareness of this serious problem. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Miranda, a most thoughtful and exemplary 
young woman. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Liberal Position on Health Care 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
election the Liberal leader made all kinds of promises. Then he 
admitted that they were nothing but political rhetoric. Well here 
we go again. 
 
Now it’s the same Liberal leader who’s promising to save 
hospitals. That’s some joke. That’s the same Liberal leader 
who’s going to chain himself to the Plains hospital. It’s the 
same Liberal leader who is going to get rid of hacks and flacks. 
It’s the same Liberal leader who is going to scrap no-fault 
insurance. And now he’s going to save hospitals. Maybe he’ll 
chain himself to their doors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s get ready for hospital closures. To the 
Minister of Education: Mr. Minister, after all the times you 
betrayed Saskatchewan voters, why would they believe you 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as our Premier and the ministers of Health have 
indicated, we have been attempting to get a national review by 
the federal government to look at medicare in this country and 
how we can save medicare from the likes of the Canadian 
Alliance Party, the Conservatives in Alberta and Ontario, and 
the Saskatchewan Party here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t want to go to a two-tier health system. We don’t want 

to do what the member from Weyburn and what the member 
from Biggar have said: that we need to consider private health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan and private surgical 
clinics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a health review in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The health 
review is going to save medicare from the people over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal leader was really talking tough yesterday. He said if the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) doesn’t do what he says, you 
know what he’s going to do? He’s going to put stress on the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have news for the Liberal leader. He’s been 
giving the government stress for about nine months now. Every 
time he opens his mouth, he gives you stress. He never . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order! Hon. member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, to go to your question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, every time the 
Liberal leader opens his mouth, he gives the Minister of Health 
stress. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Madam Minister, nothing has changed. 
Nobody believes the hollow threats of the Liberal leader. Are 
you going to take them seriously now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only scary 
people in the legislature are those people over there, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re the scary people. And let me tell you why 
they’re the scary people. 
 
You know, when I look at the Sask Party platform when they 
became a political party, what did they say? What was their first 
point in their health and social policy platform? Allow private 
surgical clinics in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that is scary. That takes us to an American style of 
health care in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did they say about the Canada Health Act? 
They called the five principles of the Canada Health Act, which 
the people in this country believe in, as five mindless slogans. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I’m in Toronto trying to work with my 
colleagues from across the country to get more money from the 
federal government. What do they do? No . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it kind of reminds me of getting up in the middle of 
night. You want to get back to bed as fast as you can before the 
bed gets cold. I’m sure that’s just the way the Liberal leader is 
right now; he wants to get back into bed with the NDP before it 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

gets cold. 
 
Madam Minister, this Liberal leader has no credibility. He’s 
already admitted his election platform was nothing more than 
political rhetoric. He’s already said you can’t believe what he 
says in the middle of an election campaign. And right now 
there’s another election campaign on, a by-election. So who’s 
going to believe more political rhetoric. 
 
Madam Minister, you’ve been calling for a review of the health 
care system for some time following the lead of the 
Saskatchewan Party. When are you going to get on with our 
suggestion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what is their vision for 
health care? Private surgical clinics; the five principles of the 
Canada Health Act are called mindless slogans; a freeze when it 
comes to health funding in this province; and no more money 
from Ottawa; and they want an audit done by the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, their vision is a cold bed for private health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal-NDP coalition government is going to make sure that 
we keep a publicly funded, publicly administered, single-tiered 
health system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader’s little 
display of independence yesterday lasted about an hour. Then 
the Minister of Health came out and yanked his chain. 
 
She said that she was thinking about closing hospitals before 
and she’s still thinking about closing hospitals now. Nothing’s 
changed. In fact, she reminded reporters that the Liberal leader 
sits on the Treasury Board and she said he’s going to be part of 
the process of closing hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is the Health minister obviously isn’t 
worried about his hollow threat because she knows he doesn’t 
have the intestinal fortitude to carry out his threats and walk 
away from this government. 
 
Madam Minister, why don’t you table your health care budgets 
and let us know what hospitals you’re going to close? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, these 
people over here would sell health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan, not save it. This government on this side of the 
House is going to save a publicly funded, publicly administered 
health system in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s the difference. Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t need another Saskatchewan Party seat — backbencher — 
that believes in private surgical clinics, believes in a two-tiered 
health system, that believes that those people that have money 

should have access to health and those that don’t won’t have 
access to health. We got rid of that in 1962, Mr. Speaker. We 
got rid of those people in 1991, and this province isn’t going to 
let the private, right-wing agenda come to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Watrous Hospital Services for Camp Easter Seal 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — My question is for the Minister of Health. You 
talk about getting rid of those people when in fact you’re getting 
rid of the health system. 
 
Camp Easter Seal, located in the Watrous area, has been offering 
recreational programs to people with disabilities since 1954. The 
specially designed, wheelchair-accessible resort is a wonderful 
facility, and the Saskatchewan Abilities Council has made 
extensive upgrades to the camp. It is a state-of-the-art facility. 
 
But the operators of the camp are now extremely concerned about 
the future of the Watrous Hospital. They rely heavily on the 
hospital for emergency and supplemental health services, 
especially due to the special needs of the campers that they have 
each summer. 
 
Madam Minister, will you confirm that the Living Sky Health 
District plans to downgrade the Watrous Hospital to a health 
facility in the year 2000 budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this to 
the member. I was the minister responsible for New Careers 
Corporation when we significantly upgraded the camp at 
Watrous. This government upgraded the camp. And you know 
what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Here is the problem with their thinking, 
Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the House they said, let’s cut taxes, 
let’s cut taxes — the fuel tax. They say let’s cut taxes and let’s 
spend money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t do both. You can’t cut taxes and have 
increases in programs . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. These 
people would have us as the Alabama North . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. Minister of Health to complete 
her answer; I was not able to hear it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They don’t believe in Crown 
corporations; they don’t believe in government, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t even believe in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they talk about Alberta. Well the province of 
Saskatchewan doesn’t want to be Alberta the second; we want 
to be Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

Ms. Harpauer: — . . . talking cutting taxes, but you cut 54 
hospitals and you’re talking about cutting more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health needs of the children who attend Camp 
Easter Seal are such that 24-hour care and emergency services 
are needed within a close proximity of the camp. Camp 
operators say that they have experienced a two-fold increase in 
the demand for their service, and at the same time the hospital 
has experienced a corresponding increase in demand to meet the 
changing needs of these campers. 
 
They say that if the Watrous Hospital is downgraded to a health 
facility, then their whole camp operation will be in jeopardy. 
They must provide specific health services at a close proximity 
to the camp or they may have to be selective as to who they can 
accept. 
 
Madam Minister, will you assure Camp Easter Seal that they 
will have 24-hour emergency care available in the Watrous 
Hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s my point. These people want to 
cut taxes so that we become a tax-free zone and have no money 
for programs. 
 
I’m in Toronto, I’m in Montreal, speaking with the national 
Minister of Health. I’m speaking with the Health ministers to 
try and get the federal government to restore $4.2 billion. And 
what does that Leader of the Opposition say? He says, no more 
money for the provinces. Well you can’t have tax cuts, no more 
money for the provinces from the federal government, and keep 
spending money for programs. These people don’t know what 
they’re talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
opposite obviously wants to brag about what she’s done for 
Camp Easter Seal, but she doesn’t want to give Camp Easter 
Seal the assurance they need now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the need for expanded facilities and service at 
Camp Easter Seal has rapidly increased, so has the demand for 
the service of the Watrous Hospital. Camp operators say that if 
Watrous Hospital is converted or if there is any changes in the 
availability of the emergency services then the camp at Watrous 
is in jeopardy. 
 
Madam Minister, will you please let them know whether or not 
you are going to approve the budget plans of the Living Sky 
Health District? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, every day in 
the House, in this House, we have these people . . . Their 
mantra is this: cut taxes, freeze spending, and no more money 
for programs. And they say to Ottawa, no more money to the 
provinces for health care. 
 
The number one item in this province’s budget is $1.97 billion 

for health care. They say freeze it, they say cut taxes. Well how 
do you cut taxes, freeze spending, and do everything that these 
people want us to do? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, their logic makes no sense, and their figures 
just don’t add up. And you know what happens to the freeze 
people, Mr. Freeze eventually melts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Receipts for Political Contributions 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every other province in Canada is providing better health care 
and cutting taxes. Only this government in Saskatchewan is 
stuck in the 19th century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, one of the fundamental principles of a 
true democracy is fairness. All candidates and all parties must 
have the same opportunities to compete on a level playing field. 
That principle does not exist in Saskatchewan today. Right now 
in Saskatchewan we have two parties, two governing parties 
who are able to issue tax receipts for political donations and 
utilize government dollars. We have one party — the opposition 
party — that is not allowed to issue tax receipts. 
 
Mr. Premier, this unfair advantage has existed since the birth of 
the Saskatchewan Party three ago. When are you going to fix 
this flaw in The Election Act, 1996? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the members 
opposite. They will know that as recently as two or three days 
ago conversations took place between myself and members of 
their caucus about this very issue. And a decision was made that 
our staff — from your caucus and our staff — who will deal 
with this issue will be speaking. Phone calls have taken place. 
 
The issue is not as simple as the member would make out. It has 
to take changes to the income tax forms that have to be 
approved by the federal government. And this is being looked at 
and done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, isn’t it 
interesting, when they changed their name in the dead of the 
night, it was to get away from the connection with a federal 
party known as the Progressive Conservative federal party. That 
didn’t want any attachment. That wasn’t my decision, that 
wasn’t my decision — that was your decision. 
 
Now you find out you lost money as a result. That’s one of the 
benefits of changing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if there is 
discussions going on, our staff certainly don’t know about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s usually only Third World countries or banana 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

republics where the governing party enacts laws that give itself 
an unfair advantage over it’s opponents, but that’s exactly the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m not sitting very far from the 
member and I’m having difficulty hearing him. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m hollering 
as loud as loud as I can. If a Saskatchewan resident wants to 
donate $100 to the NDP or the Liberals they get a $75 tax 
credit, a return of $75 from the government. So it only costs 
them $25. There’s not many doing that. 
 
If you want to donate $100 to the Saskatchewan Party there is 
no tax credit, so the person donates a full $100. That’s a huge 
advantage to the NDP and the Liberals and a disadvantage to 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Premier, won’t you agree that this is grossly unfair and 
when are you going to rectify this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to challenge 
the logic of the member who was part of the Progressive 
Conservative Party and had the tax credit — and had the tax 
credit. Then they decided for political reasons because of 
certain things that were going on they had to change their name 
and lost the tax credit. 
 
I would suggest to the member opposite tomorrow, because 
you’re supporting Stockwell Day and Preston Manning, join 
their party, change your name, you’ll get the tax credit 
tomorrow. You don’t need any help from me — just change 
your name. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Deputy Premier is still fighting the 1980 campaigns, and 
that’s why we’re suffering in this province because it’s the year 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us are asking . . . all we’re asking for is 
fairness — either tax credits for everyone or tax credits for no 
one. Either bring in legislation creating provincial tax credits or 
bring in legislation outlawing the practice of funnelling money 
and laundering it through federal parties. We don’t care 
because, Mr. Speaker, we can win either way. All we’re asking 
for is a level playing field. 
 
Mr. Premier, you and I don’t agree on many issues but I’d like 
to think that we both believe in the democratic process. One of 
the principles is fairness . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ll ask all hon. members to 
kindly come to order. Kindly finish your question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Premier, isn’t it time to level the 
playing field — tax credits for everyone or tax credits for no 
one. Will you commit to that today? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the members 
opposite, they had the tax credit paid by the federal taxpayers, 
the federal government. They changed their name for political 
reasons and now they say Saskatchewan taxpayers should do 
the tax credit. 
 
I say to you, no! If you are honest . . . if you are honest, change 
your name to the Canadian reform alliance party, you’ll have 
the tax credit tomorrow paid by federal taxpayers, not by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
is the NDP Party that governs in Saskatchewan a provincial 
party or are they a federal party? 
 
Mr. Premier, you and I both know that support for political 
parties goes up and down. Your own provincial NDP secretary 
says that there are ebbs and flows in politics, and apparently the 
money isn’t exactly flowing into Tommy Douglas House. 
 
Mr. Premier, you may be surprised to hear this, but even the 
Saskatchewan Party has gone through slow periods in 
fundraising from time to time the point is it should be fair for 
everyone. Tax credits for everyone or tax credits for no one. 
 
Mr. Premier, in light of the current by-election in Wood River, 
later today I will be asking for an emergency debate on this 
issue. Will you support the Saskatchewan Party’s call for a fair 
election Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 
co-operation I want to make a suggestion of how the tax credit 
can happen immediately, and I do this sincerely. There’s a way 
to do it where it’s not paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
but paid for by the Canadian taxpayers, which I think we’re 
trying to do. 
 
The Premier and I have just had a small discussion, and we 
believe that rather than calling yourself the Canadian reform 
alliance party, or CRAP, say the Saskatchewan Canadian 
reform alliance party, SCRAP — that would work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask all hon. members to 
kindly calm . . . Order. 
 

SaskEnergy Headquarters 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
will have to thank the Deputy Premier for the introduction to 
my set of questions. Scrap is a perfect introduction to my 
question for Ron Clark and the Minister of CIC. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day both you and Ron Clark told us no 
decision had been made on the location for the office for 
SaskEnergy. Well, Mr. Minister, it looks as if that particular 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

group that owns that building has just gone ahead and received 
a $10 million mortgage on that particular building. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we know that there’s no way that they 
could receive that kind of a mortgage if you didn’t have some 
rental assurances. Would you, Mr. Minister, care to rethink your 
answer and tell us whether you’ve made any commitment to 
date on that building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I will say, as I said 
before, that this matter is in the process. 
 
I’m extremely disappointed though that the member didn’t ask 
me about the pipeline or about no-fault insurance. And so what 
I would like to say to that member opposite is that he has been 
up advocating in a very strong way for dealing with and getting 
rid of no-fault insurance in Saskatchewan. And he thinks he 
takes a very strong position that way; I think that whole side 
takes that position. 
 
What I would like to tell the House today is that I have received 
a letter from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities; they have a resolution from their convention in 
March. And it says this, therefor be it resolved: 
 

That SARM go on record as supporting the continued 
operation of no-fault insurance and advise the independent 
committee reviewing SGI’s no-fault operation accordingly. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we 
received an answer on no-fault. It seems that’s the only thing 
that he knew anything about today, he probably couldn’t get his 
buddy Ron Clark in here to answer his other question. 
 
Mr. Minister, on SaskEnergy where the question came from. 
You’ve raised SaskEnergy rates. Do you plan on raising 
SaskEnergy rates further this coming winter? Now you need 
some competition. You’ve got a pipeline that’s only running at 
half-mast. You’ve wasted tens of millions in dollars on that 
particular unnecessary pipeline. Now you have a building that 
you’re looking at renting you don’t need. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you reconsider that and give a commitment 
to the people of this province that you’ll not move into that 
building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our government we have 
processes that allow for competition in how you deal with and 
obtain office space. That process is set up. I’ve explained it to 
you before. I know that the officials have explained it to you 
before. 
 
When the process is complete, all of that information will be 
available, and probably the question that you’ve asked will be 
answered. But in the middle of the process, we don’t believe in 
giving all that information out. 
 

What I would say is that the member opposite needs to also 
acknowledge that some of the difficulties that we’ve had as a 
government, has been trying to clean up the mess that was 
created during the ’80s. That includes all the processes around 
obtaining buildings, and we are going to make sure that we 
have an open and accountable process and so that everybody 
can be there. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I will ask the hon. members to please refrain 
. . . hon. member for Canora-Pelly and Deputy Premier kindly 
refrain from debating when there’s a member on his feet asking 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I see 
we’ve been joined in your gallery by a former member of this 
Assembly, a member who also served the office of Lieutenant 
Governor with great distinction, the Hon. Jack Wiebe. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would invite members of the Assembly to extend a 
welcome to Mr. Wiebe. 
 
And I guess the question I would have for Mr. Wiebe is how 
well he’s doing on his model railway that he told us he was 
going to get right at building once he left the office of 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
So let’s extend a warm welcome to the Hon. Mr. Wiebe. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, also 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — It gives me great pleasure to join with the 
member from Moosomin in welcoming to the Assembly this 
morning, Senator Jack Wiebe, who I’m sure will serve this 
province with the same distinction in his new role that he has in 
his previous roles. 
 
And Senator Wiebe is joined in the gallery this morning with 
Emmet Reidy who is known to many members of this 
Assembly as well. Please welcome both of them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

to introduce to you and through you to the House, a friend and 
he’s business agent for Local 870 of the International Union of 
Operating Engineers, John Peterson. John is up in the west 
gallery. Welcome John. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 80  The Court of Appeal Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 80, The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Tax Credits for Political Parties 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today at the 
appropriate time of two hours before the House opened I sent a 
letter to you requesting, under rule 19, an emergency motion 
dealing with a matter of tax credits. I would ask for a ruling on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, as the Hon. Opposition House 
Leader has pointed out that this morning the Opposition House 
Leader delivered a notice for priority of debate to the Office of 
the Clerk as is required under rule 19(2). As members are aware 
it is the Speaker’s responsibility to determine whether the 
matter should receive urgent consideration and be permitted to 
proceed. 
 
The Opposition House Leader cites in his case a cautionary 
letter that I had delivered to each member on June 1, 2000 with 
respect to the prohibition on the use of public funds to influence 
the by-election to be held in the constituency of Wood River on 
June 26, 2000. 
 
The member goes on to make a case that an unlevel playing 
field presently exists because of certain unproclaimed sections 
of The Election Act, 1996 as well as because of some other 
issues. The member states that this state of affairs breaks the 
spirit of my letter and that because of the pending election the 
issue should be debated today. 
 
Under rule 19(5) there are a number of conditions that any case 
must be met, in any case must meet before the Speaker shall 
authorize a priority of debate. In this particular case the Speaker 
has no difficulty deciding this is a matter proper to be discussed 
or that it comes under the administrative responsibility of 
government and ministerial action. However rule 19(5) also 
states, and I quote: 
 

. . . the Speaker also shall have regard to the probability of 
the matter being brought before the House within 
reasonable time by other means. 

I point out to all hon. members that the vacancy in the Wood 
River seat was announced by the Speaker in the Assembly on 
May 24. The Opposition House Leader could have given notice 
on Friday, May 26 for the motion he would like to move today 
and it could have been debated on May 30. As well notice could 
be given today under rule 18(2) and this motion would be on 
the order paper on Tuesday, June 6. 
 
In addition, this has been an ongoing matter since 1996. There 
have been several by-elections and a general election during 
that time. This by-election does not constitute a new 
development in this dispute. 
 
I therefore find that the member has not made a sufficient case 
for the urgency of the matter and the request is denied. 
 
A second matter arising from the request . . . a second matter 
arising from the request concerns me. In making the request, the 
member violated the principle that the Chair must not be 
brought into the debate. The member’s letter blatantly attempts 
to involve the Speaker in the debate by referring to a letter from 
the Speaker to all members that was sent in the Speaker’s 
administrative capacity regarding members’ expenses. 
 
This attempt to involve the Chair in debate and to pressure the 
Chair is improper and unacceptable in parliamentary practice, 
as all experienced members know. 
 
I ask for the co-operation of all members in avoiding this in the 
future. 
 
(1100) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55  The Land Titles Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Land Titles Act, 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the existing land titles system is 
almost entirely paper-based and has not been significantly 
updated in many years. To address this the LAND (Land Titles 
Automated Network Development) Project was struck to 
undertake a broadly based consultative review process aimed at 
achieving three basic goals. 
 
The first was to re-engineer the land titles system to improve 
service to the public. The second was the computerization of the 
entire system. And the third was the replacement of the existing 
Land Titles Act with a new Bill to implement necessary law 
reform and to facilitate the re-engineering and computerization 
processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly today is the product 
of this extensive consultation process. Expert groups 
representing legal and land surveyors, communities, were 
brought together to assist in the development of the project. I’m 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

pleased to advice members that this legislation is strongly 
supported by the real estate associations, the Canadian Bar 
Association and the Law Society of Saskatchewan, and by a 
number of other client and stakeholder groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’d all agree this overhaul of the current 
statute is long overdue. The increased efficiencies will mean 
improved service and a better turnaround on land titles services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everything’s gone quiet; it must be that people are 
so interested in this Bill. 
 
Realtors and lawyers will be able to conclude . . . Oh, I spoke 
too soon. Realtors and lawyers will be able to conclude their 
business transactions much more quickly, Mr. Speaker. Other 
businesses and professionals like the home builders, surveyors, 
financial institutions, and the mining industry all stand to 
benefit from a more efficient land titles system. And as the 
activities of these and other businesses increase, so too do the 
benefits to the economy of the province. 
 
The enhancements to the land titles system will allow its 
integration with the geographic information system known as 
GIS. That will allow the creation of a seamless system for 
mapping the province that integrates two related but previously 
separate systems. The value to businesses such as real estate 
developers and mineral exploration firms as a result of 
new-found efficiencies will be significant. 
 
In order to assist in the integration of land titles and GIS, we’re 
developing an e-commerce and imaging system that will have 
countless applications that will mean improvements in other 
Government of Saskatchewan departments and corporations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it can be sold to other jurisdictions and to 
private industry, all of which will lead to direct benefits for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this work is being undertaken by SLIS, the 
Saskatchewan Land Information Services Corporation. The 
creation of the corporation means that land titles will be 
maintained as a public program while providing a corporate 
structure that can take full advantage of the commercial 
possibilities that will become available through the 
development of these important new systems. 
 
The corporation will also be able to expand the range of 
products and services to be offered by our new land information 
system and market these new products and services outside as 
well as inside the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this major rewrite of The Land Titles Act 
introduces the following changes: on-line search and 
registration capacity, separation of all surface and mineral 
rights, decommissioning of the general record and replacement 
with an auto-attachment feature for writs of execution and 
maintenance orders on future acquired property, rationalization 
of the title and registration procedure, separation of survey and 
title registration business functions, streamlining of the 
compensation and review procedures, implementation of one 
land titles district for the entire province with the continuation 
of the existing land titles offices as local service points, 
clarification of the powers and duties of the registrar and the 
courts under the Act, and finally, Mr. Speaker, provision for the 

necessary legal rules for the orderly transition and conversion 
from the existing legal regime to the new procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the land project is an ambitious task. It has gone 
well beyond simply updating an existing legislation or even 
computerizing the land titles system. This legislation is one part 
of a larger package of initiatives that will see the Saskatchewan 
Land Information Services Corporation operate as a central hub 
for the delivery of land services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as previously noted, this Bill is the product of 
extensive consultation with the community and represents a 
sincere effort to meet their needs. I ask that this Assembly join 
these groups and the government in supporting this essential 
restructuring of Saskatchewan’s land title system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
the Registration of Title to and Interests in Land and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation that the minister has just given second reading to 
certainly is a fairly large and all-encompassing Act. And just 
looking through the Act I think it’s going to take us a bit of time 
just to get to understand all the details of the Act. 
 
I understand what the minister is saying, Mr. Speaker, when he 
talks about the fact that we really haven’t had a substantial 
review of The Land Titles Act. And certainly I’ve had many 
individuals, from realtors to lawyers, who have discussed some 
of the areas that they feel really need to be addressed. And it’s 
time they were addressed and brought up in a timely fashion so 
that areas of concern can be dealt with, especially when it 
comes to the transfer of title and in land dealings within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we recognize the changes that have taken 
place and certainly the enhancement of computers in our 
province and the fact that bringing the land titles themselves up 
to speed so that transactions can take place a lot more quickly 
than they have been. 
 
If there has been an issue of concern, it is the time that is 
needed on a transaction in having land titles . . . the titles 
changed so that whether it’s an individual or a business that 
have been dealing with a change or dealing with a business 
deal, they can have the matter addressed in a timely fashion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it appears that we certainly do need a review, 
and I see the minister . . . as the minister has indicated, there is a 
substantial review and this legislation is looking at a number of 
issues and concerns that have been brought to the attention of 
government by realtors, by individuals within the Land Titles, 
and certainly the legal community of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate though I 
think to take the time to review this piece of legislation quite 
extensively, and it will take that time as a result of the extent of 
the changes that have been brought forward. And therefore, Mr. 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

Speaker, I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Surveys Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already addressed the Assembly on the Bill 
required to make important changes to land titles in 
Saskatchewan. And as you know, the existing land titles system 
is almost entirely paper based and has not been significantly 
updated in many years. 
 
To address this matter, the land project was struck to undertake 
a broadly-based consultative review process aimed at achieving 
three basic goals: re-engineering of the land titles system to 
improve service to the public; computerization of the entire 
system from plans through to titling; and replacement of the 
existing legislation to implement necessary law reform and to 
complement the re-engineering and computerization associated 
with the project. 
 
The Bill before the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 
the framework that provides for the surveying of land, and the 
creation and approval of plans reflecting those surveys. These 
plans in turn form a basis upon which a title to land is issued. In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, this Bill represents a key component 
of the titling system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the first major rewrite of The Land Surveys Act 
since 1930, this Bill provides for a number of things: the 
appointment of a controller of surveys with responsibility for 
the land survey system in the province; surveys in 
Saskatchewan to be conducted by and under the supervision of 
a licensed surveyor and in accordance with the Act and its 
regulations; types and surveys and for the basic legal concepts 
to support all services; types of plans, approval of plans by the 
controller, and filing the plans in the system. 
 
It also provides for a process to determine the location of 
boundaries to land, and, Mr. Speaker, the necessary legal rules 
to support an orderly transition from the former legal 
environment. 
 
As part of the consultation process, expert groups representing 
the land, the surveyor’s communities . . . community, and the 
legal community were brought together to assist in the 
development of the necessary legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill reflects those consultations and represents a sincere 
effort to meet the needs of those communities. 
 
And I’m pleased to advise this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the 
land project and its associated legislation is strongly supported 
by real estate associations, the Canadian Bar Association, the 
Law Society of Saskatchewan, and by other client and 
stakeholder groups. 
 
And I ask that this Assembly join these groups and this 
government in supporting this Bill which is an essential 
component of the restructuring of the Saskatchewan land titles 
system. 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act 
respecting the Surveying of land and the Approval of Plans and 
making certain consequential amendments. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again we 
have an Act presented to us that calls for some substantial 
changes, and especially, Mr. Speaker, talks about upgrades in 
legislation to deal with the changes that have taken place. And 
certainly the area of controller . . . of computers, computer 
networking, and bringing regulations and Acts up to date so that 
the transactions that we’re talking about in The Land Titles Act 
can be met in a more speedily fashion. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the land 
surveyors Act, it just seems that this legislation certainly would 
go hand in hand with the previous legislation, The Land Titles 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation though, just 
looking at the Bill itself, it’s quite obvious that there’s a number 
of areas that have had to be addressed, that have had to be dealt 
with; and we recognize the fact that there are a number of 
concerned individuals and groups who have put forward a 
number of suggestions as to how we can simplify the process, 
how we can bring it up to date so that we can meet the ongoing 
needs of land transactions in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when it comes to surveying of properties, any group that is 
involved — whether it’s municipal government or whether it’s 
realtors and the sale of property — I believe each and every one 
of these groups, and certainly lawyers, deal with it on an 
ongoing basis in regards to transactions of property. It’s 
important that we have pieces of legislation that are up to date 
and meeting the current requirements versus requirements that 
may be 10 or 15 or 20 years old or even older. 
 
And, having said that, Mr. Speaker, it appears that this piece of 
legislation is more of a housekeeping nature, however, it 
requires a substantial number of changes. And I know our 
caucus has had some representation in regards to this 
legislation. My colleague, the member responsible for the Act, 
certainly has been calling different groups asking for their 
input. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to indeed ensure that what 
the minister has been referring to, the groups he discussed . . . 
that have come to his office to ask for changes, groups that have 
discussed the specific legislation with us, that the needs of each 
and every group are being met. 
 
And that we’re also looking ahead to the future, because I don’t 
believe we want to just update a piece of legislation for today. 
But we want to try and look ahead into the future, look through 
the looking glass and just see what needs we might have down 
the road so we don’t have to address a piece of legislation like 
this in the immediate future again; we don’t have to resurrect it 
and make some more changes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we look at all these 
aspects, that we take the time to review, and that this piece of 
legislation not only addresses a current need but even addresses 
some of the projected needs that we will see in the immediate 
future. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be appropriate 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

to adjourn debate, review the piece of legislation a little more 
thoroughly before we move it on to committee. And therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I at this time move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of the third of the Bills relating to changes 
to the land titles system, The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
This legislation, as I say, is consequential to The Land Titles 
Act, 2000. The changes to the land titles system in that Act 
result in significant changes in processing of condominium 
plans and raising of titles during development stage, and also 
when the condominium land is land is subsequently dealt with. 
 
(1115) 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, a condominium plan goes to land titles 
where it’s registered and titles to the units are thereby created. 
In the new system, a condominium plan will be submitted by a 
developer to plan processing for approval, and then titles will be 
raised at land titles. As well, the changes reflect the fact that the 
corporate information regarding the condominium corporation 
will be maintained by the corporations branch instead of by 
land titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of consequential changes to documents 
and procedures associated with the formation of condominiums 
and subsequent changes to condominium plans and titles are 
required to accompany the changes in the land titling system. 
 
The Act also changes terminology in The Condominium 
Property Act, 1993 to correspond to the terminology used in 
The Land Titles Act, 2000. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, will ensure that the benefits of the 
new land titles system will extend to condominiums. And 
consequently, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Condominium Property Act, 1993. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the current 
Bill that the minister has been discussing, The Condominium 
Property Act, 1993 would certainly appear to have some minor 
changes that really bring the piece of legislation up to date. It 
would appear that this is a piece of legislation that certainly is 
needed, is an important piece of legislation. 
 
However it seems to cover a fairly large area and a broad area 
as well that, Mr. Speaker, I think certainly we should take the 
time to discuss. We need to review and determine whether or 
not it meets all the requirements and all the special needs of the 
individual groups out there who would be particularly affected 
by this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that because an Act of this nature doesn’t 
necessarily affect a large portion of the population. However, as 
members of this Assembly, it’s our responsibility to see to it 
that any time a new legislation is brought forward that it is 

brought forward appropriately, that it’s addressed properly, that 
it meets the needs of the individuals or the groups that will be 
affected by the legislation. 
 
And it would be appropriate for my colleagues and I to certainly 
take time to take the time necessary to review the legislation 
and to determine exactly the need for the specific piece of 
legislation and its involvement in regards to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 56 — – The Land Titles Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2000/Loi de 2000 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 
The Land Titles Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise again today to move second reading of The Land Titles 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed to the land 
titles system currently before this Assembly in The Land Titles 
Act, 2000 would result in significant changes to the current real 
property law in the province. Accordingly it’s necessary to 
make provision for the required legal rules for the orderly 
transition and conversion from the existing legal regime to new 
procedures. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides for consequential 
amendments arising from The Land Titles Act, 2000 to six 
bilingual Acts, and makes those changes in both English and 
French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Land Titles Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
actually expecting the minister to respond in French to this 
piece of legislation as we were making the changes, but . . . 
However, my French is probably as good as his, so I will refrain 
from saying anything in the French language. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, this, as you know, this Legislative 
Assembly, a number of years, adopted a policy whereby certain 
pieces of legislation would also be translated into French. 
 
And as I understand from the minister, that’s what this 
legislation is doing. While it addresses a number of areas that 
have been changed as a result of The Land Titles Act, 2000, it 
also is a piece of legislation that the government feels needs to 
have the bilingual interpretation as well on this piece of 
legislation. 
 
So while it seems to be fairly simple and straightforward, I 
believe my colleagues want to just review the legislation, make 
sure that it meets the requirements, and therefore at this time I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Bill No. 71 — The Health Districts 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000. 
This amendment corrects an error made when we first 
established the two northern health boards. 
 
Traditionally, district health boards are established by an order 
in council which confirms the jurisdiction of the district as well 
as establishing the district health board. After the order in 
council is signed, board members are appointed to the district 
health board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, due to an error that we only recently discovered, 
the Keewatin Yathe and the Mamawetan Churchill River Health 
District Boards were never formally established as health 
districts. This has left our northern boards in a very difficult 
legal position which we are rectifying with these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment does not provide special legal 
protection for our northern district health boards. It simply 
recognizes that the actions of the boards were done in the name 
of the district health board. This ensures that our northern board 
members who act in good faith while directing the activities of 
the district are not put into a difficult legal position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we accept responsibility for this error and bring 
this amendment to the legislature to ensure that our northern 
boards are able to operate freely in the interests of their citizens 
as all other health districts are allowed to do. As a result, the 
only amendment we are making at this time is to ensure that our 
northern board members have the same protection and 
recognition as other health board members in the province. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Health Districts Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Regarding 
the second reading of The Health Districts Amendment Act, 
2000 . . . and it does look like more of a housekeeping and a 
simple correcting of an error that was made a number of years 
ago when the health districts were set up. It is interesting 
though that I think if you looked at the health districts, there’s a 
lot of errors in the health districts and it can’t be corrected quite 
simply with an amendment to or a change in the regulations like 
these can. 
 
Fortunately enough, it’s as simple as that in these, but there are 
so many different health districts that are just struggling and 
struggling and struggling. We’ve talked many times in this 
House regarding the budget process that they’re going through, 
and some of the concerns that the people in the health districts 
have with that. And people that are appointed are frustrated 
with the whole system. 
 
And I realize that in this Bill it’s going to give them some 
protection, I guess, because the wording will be correct then. 
But I think when you look at . . . even when the wording is 
correct in all the other health districts throughout the province, 
there’s great concern with the way things are operated. And 

they have concerns and, you know, people are quitting left and 
right off of these health boards because they’re frustrated that 
they can’t go to the people and talk to them prior to making 
their budget plans. 
 
And certainly I can just think of a number of areas in my 
constituency alone, Indian Head-Milestone, where I . . . What a 
number of the communities are doing that have hospitals or 
having health centres is they’re creating a group, an advisory 
group within that community, and those people are spending 
hours and hours and hours on how can we save our hospital; 
how can we save our health centre? 
 
And, you know, they’re frustrated because they’re being kept 
out of the loop. They don’t get a chance to talk to the health 
board before these budgets went in, and they’re very, very 
frustrated. And so it really . . . 
 
The poor people on the health districts. Although this corrects it 
for the northern areas, and the southern areas or the rest of the 
province is under . . . has the proper legislation in place, the 
people on the health boards are very frustrated because they 
can’t really . . . they feel like they’re trapped in between 
government and what the local people want. And they’re not 
able to get in the loop and suggest possibilities of changes that 
may be good for all. 
 
And so although this is just a minor housekeeping, I did want to 
raise those points. And we’d like to do a little more research on 
this and make sure everything is exactly the way the minister 
had mentioned. So I move adjournment of debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to 
extend a special greeting. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Birthday Congratulations 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if you were in a certain washroom this 
morning, you might notice a furry chimpanzee. And if you 
clapped your hands in front of that furry beast, you just might 
hear a few choruses of the Macarena. And why might that be, 
Mr. Speaker? Well certainly to celebrate a special birthday. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I stand in my place to ask all members to join 
with me in congratulating and celebrating the birthday of 
Brooke. 
 
Happy birthday, Brooke. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 40 — The 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act, be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a great 
privilege to respond to the Bill, The Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies Act, that was put forth a few sittings 
ago. 
 
And it really is a great idea, you know. We on this side have 
talked, and it seems that any time we get into the debate on 
Native issues we get branded by names right off the bat. And 
it’s a . . . I’m glad to be able to discuss this so people 
understand more of where we come from on this whole issue, 
you know. During the campaign, we were the only party during 
the election that would discuss openly the whole matter of 
charging PST (provincial sales tax) to First Nations off-reserve. 
And we had a lot of people brand us and accuse us of certain 
things. 
 
And then it’s really quite interesting, shortly after that, that this 
government would come in and they’re not saying a word 
during the campaign, then put it in the budget right off the bat, 
as if there should be no talking about it before. It was really, 
you know, I would be offended if that had happened to me and 
people that I was representing. 
 
This Bill, talking about the Indian institute of technology Act, is 
a great idea, and we really commend the government for 
moving in this direction because we realize that the PST on 
off-reserve purchases is just a small part of the whole issue of 
the First Nations people. And so we support that. 
 
But there are a lot bigger issues. And getting more accessibility 
to education, and proper education, and education that’s maybe 
targeted a little bit more to the First Nations people, is 
something that we really can favour. 
 
But we do have some concern in the fact that this institute, the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology, can recognize 
certificates and diplomas, the post-secondary education and 
skills training needed for First Nations. In other words they 
have the ability and the authority to grant diplomas and things 
like that. 
 
It was not very long ago, in fact only about two or three months 
ago that we had a situation in our province where Canadian 
Bible College, CBC, was in our province and they were looking 
at relocating but would stay in our province if they had certain 
things that were recognized. 
 
And one of those very things was to recognize diplomas and 
certificates that they would present, issue. And unfortunately 
the government opposite didn’t think that was a priority and 
didn’t feel they could move in that direction. And as a 
consequence, we are going to lose that institute, that college, 
along with all the spinoff jobs and people that come with it. 
And it’s a real shame. 
 
Here in this Act they can automatically put this in place and 

now they can recognize the diplomas and certificates that are 
put forth by this institute and it seems so very easy. 
 
And I guess the concern that I have so often when I look at the 
members opposite is that it’s a cherry-picking. I talked about it 
yesterday with the film industry and how they can give tax 
exemptions to certain groups if they feel that to be necessary. 
And it’s the same as this Bill. They can recognize diplomas and 
certificates for certain groups if they feel that’s necessary. And 
they pick and choose. As opposed to saying yes we can, they 
pick and choose, say yes you’re the winner and you’re going to 
be the loser. 
 
(1130) 
 
Unfortunately the loser in this situation was CBC. They will be 
moving out of the province and we’re going to be losing a 
number of jobs and another training facility, which is just an 
absolute shame. 
 
I really feel that the education portion in this Bill is so 
important because we realize that the better educated people are 
the better chances of increasing their worth in society and 
adding back to the society. 
 
And so then when you deal with subjects like the PST it maybe 
isn’t quite as hard to take because they’re part of a greater 
economy and social environment and that’s what we all want to 
see. And this is one area that we feel that is a great step in the 
right direction. But we do have concerns with that as far as 
making winners and losers. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move a motion: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item 4 under private 
members’ public bills and orders, Bill No. 211, The 
Health-care Funding Audit Act. 

 
The division bells rang from 11:33 a.m. until 11:43 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 19 
 
Hermanson Julé Krawetz 
Gantefoer Toth Peters 
Eagles Bakken Bjornerud 
D’Autremont McMorris Weekes 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Kwiatkowski   
 

Nays — 26 
 
Romanow Trew Van Mulligen 
Lingenfelter Melenchuk Atkinson 
Goulet Lautermilch Thomson 
Lorje Belanger Nilson 
Hillson Kowalsky Sonntag 
Hamilton Prebble Jones 
Higgins Yates Harper 
Axworthy Junor Kasperski 
Wartman Addley  



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

The Speaker: — The motion is defeated. Debate will continue 
on Bill No. 40, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill, as my colleague was stating, is a very important Bill 
and is a new step forward, Mr. Speaker, in education in this 
province in that it allows another institute, another area of 
training, this one in particular, for the native communities. That 
they may have their own teachers and deal with the education 
system in a manner that bodes well for them and allows them to 
have role models that the students there can look up to as they 
progress through their education system. 
 
But there are a lot of issues involved in this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that need to be examined in a very serious nature and 
how exactly it’s going to integrate into the provincial education 
system, how it’s going to work in with the universities and the 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) system that are already in place, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 39 — The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to speak on Bill No. 39 which deals with 
post-secondary education and skills training. This Bill is of 
particular interest to me because I have two daughters who will 
be graduating from high school in only a few years and they’ll 
be looking into post-secondary education opportunities. And of 
course I would like for them to have as many opportunities 
available for them to choose from as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
gave us a brief explanation of this piece of legislation a few 
days ago, and in his explanation he stated that many sections 
contained within were clearly just housekeeping. And I agree 
wholeheartedly that that is a very good thing to do. It just makes 
sense sometimes to clean up the clutter created by having too 
many repetitious and overlapping Bills of legislation; and this 
should be very helpful in simplifying and clarifying matters for 
the minister and for the institutions involved and it will 
definitely . . . it demonstrates responsibility on the opposite 
member’s part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also pleased to hear the minister speak about 
building partnerships with companies, businesses, and 
employers because, as I mentioned earlier on, it is very 
important that as many opportunities as possible are made 
available for our students and for the Saskatchewan people who 
wish to train or retrain in one area or another. 
 
The partnership arrangements should also help steer this 
government in perhaps wiser choices on what programs we 
need to make available for the people in our province. Skills 
training are only valuable if there’s a need for that skill in the 

marketplace and employment can be obtained after the training 
has been completed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government’s anticipation of the need of 
the workplace hasn’t always been on the mark and that is a 
concern. This is best demonstrated by the fact that we’re now 
experiencing a serious shortage of trained nurses. And we’re 
being told that very soon we will also be facing a serious 
shortage of trained teachers. 
 
Partnership arrangements should help alleviate the short sight in 
some of these areas of training and hopefully the government 
can learn from their mistakes and improve in their judgment on 
the number of students that are needed to be admitted into 
programs at our institutes and universities where partnership 
programs are not available. 
 
Interestingly, Mr. Speaker, I had it brought to my attention just 
recently that many universities across Canada offer a type of 
co-op program to their students. These are rather unique 
programs that allow the students to study one term and then 
work the next term; and, more often than not, the result of these 
programs is that the students who participate in them have a 
much easier time finding employment once their training is 
completed because they’ve already had the work experience 
necessary. 
 
This seems to be quite a positive program available in these 
universities and perhaps our Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education will take a look at this and see if it could be 
implemented in a constructive manner in our universities here 
in this province as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite also briefly mentioned a 
Partnership for Prosperity program. And if I understood it 
correctly, it would hopefully assist those who are dependent on 
social services to access an avenue of training so that they could 
become more self-reliant. And I view this as an extremely 
positive step for our province. 
 
Gainful employment means better self-esteem and 
independence, and clearly many people in our province who, 
for one reason or another, have to become reliant on social 
services will welcome the skills training . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Hon. members, 
the noise level is just increasing slightly more and not allowing 
the hon. member to be heard. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
the gainful employment helps build self-esteem and 
independence. And clearly many of the people who have had to 
become reliant on social services will welcome these skills 
training programs with open arms. 
 
Gainful employment builds self-esteem. And I know the 
members on this side of the House have been advocating such a 
program for some time so it’s good to see that the members 
opposite are also taking a look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I read through the Bill my initial concern 
arose about a clause contained on page 2, under the headline of 
Agreements. It mentions how the minister responsible can: 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

. . . exercise any of the powers or the carrying out of any of 
the responsibilities or functions assigned . . . 
 

in reference to federal, provincial agreements. 
 
And then later on page 3, under the headline of Grants, it 
mentions that the: 
 

. . . minister may, for any purposes relating to any matter 
under the minister’s administration or for which he or she 
is responsible, make grants on any terms that the minister 
considers appropriate . . . 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the confiscation of this government of the 
federal government’s millenniums grant is an obvious 
demonstration of how unfair and irresponsible this government 
can be in this area. The federal government intended the 
millennium grant to be put in the hands of the most needy 
students in our province. And our government on the other hand 
decided that they were more needy than our students were and 
simply pocketed the money, to be allocated later where they 
decided it should go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation does nothing to protect 
our students in the future from this same action happening again 
and again. Our government was clearly . . . it was underhanded 
and borderline unethical in handling of the millennium grant 
and this legislation will only grant them the power to repeat 
these actions with future programs. Mr. Speaker, I believe this 
raises a lot of concerns and perhaps should be looked into a 
little farther to protect our students in the future. 
 
There was also some concerns which arose when I was reading 
through page 4 of the legislation. There is an extensive list of 
what the minister’s responsibilities will include. But included in 
this list is phrases such as: “encourage and stimulate job 
creation and job development efforts”; and “improve the 
employability of the workforce.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, considering how this government continues 
to alienate the business community at every chance that it 
possibly gets, I’m not sure how the Minister responsible for 
Post-Secondary Education is going to accomplish all these 
responsibilities of stimulating job creation and job development 
efforts and improving the employability of the students 
involved. 
 
It’s interesting to note, and perhaps a unique concept to the 
members opposite, that in order to obtain employment you need 
a company, a business, or an establishment of some sort that’s 
going to employ you. So with the high taxes, never-ending red 
tape, regulations, restrictions, and, of course, unionization from 
this obviously business-unfriendly government, we can train all 
the people that we want but there could possibly nowhere for 
these people to work. 
 
This government’s idea of stimulating job creation and job 
development efforts will only assist our middle-aged citizens 
who want to retrain to gain part-time or full-time minimum 
wage jobs and to assist our university graduates in finding the 
road out of the province where they can obtain employment 
they would like. 
 

The $350 tax credit that the minister is so proud of isn’t going 
to be enough to keep our students here even if they do find 
employment because the high taxes will absorb the $350 in a 
matter of a few short months. The reason why they’re calling it 
brain drain, Mr. Speaker, is because these students have enough 
brains to figure out that that’s going to happen and that’s why 
they’re leaving our province. 
 
Page 4, Mr. Speaker, of the Bill also refers to the minister’s 
responsibility to “levy fees and charges for any programs” in 
the case of colleges and institutions. On page 5, to “receive, 
allocate and distribute capital, and operating funds” for the 
universities. Again I’m concerned because we’re all well aware 
that one of the biggest obstacles of our students today is 
financial accessibility. 
 
This has been the minister’s responsibility up until now and it 
will remain so in this piece of legislation. But I don’t feel that 
this government has demonstrated a lot of concern in this area 
in the past and it’s definitely not a concern of theirs in their 
most recent historic budget. 
 
This government has underfunded our universities to the point 
that the buildings are crumbling around them. And they forced 
them to raise their tuition fees to try to make up for the lack of 
funds that they’re getting. 
 
Now in the budget the government is telling our students that 
they will no longer be granted the six-month interest free period 
on repayment for their student loans. And this is going to be an 
enormous hardship to our students, Mr. Speaker, and I believe 
that it demonstrates the total lack of commitment that this 
government has to the students in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many aspects of this Bill that my 
colleagues and I would like to look at a little further and so at 
this time I move to adjourn debate on the Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 29 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2000 by now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is an amendment to a Bill that was brought into the House 
about two years ago to correct a considerable number of 
inequities in the rental area of our province in the renting of 
homes. 
 
Prior to the changes in ’97, damage deposits were extremely 
difficult to deal with. They were set at a level of $125, Mr. 
Speaker, maximum of $125, regardless of the actual amount of 
the rent. 
 
The changes in ’97 changed that from $125 to one month’s rent. 
And that took, Mr. Speaker, a lot of lobbying by the people who 
rent out homes and accommodations — and even one of the 
members opposite from Saskatoon who wants to claim credit 
for it. But it was the executive director, Bonnie with the rental 



June 2, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

association that was doing a lot of the lobbying, and perhaps the 
member opposite finally listened to her entreaties and provided 
the change to it. 
 
So whomever made the changes, Mr. Speaker, and whomever 
wishes to have the credit for it, they may do so. But what it has 
resulted in is now we discover that there were some flaws in 
that Bill that need to be changed. So while there may be some 
credit, perhaps that credit is a little tainted in spots, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So one of the things that is being changed here is moving from 
a five-day reporting period. Once a tenant leaves and the 
landlord wishes to make a claim on the damage deposit, under 
the legislation that was brought forward with the support of the 
member opposite, people only had five days in which to file 
that claim. 
 
It didn’t take into consideration weekends; it didn’t take into 
consideration statutory holidays. So you may have had a 
situation, Mr. Speaker, where a tenant left on Thursday. The 
landlord had Friday to get the application in immediately. You 
had Friday and you had Saturday and Sunday as a weekend. 
You may have had Monday as statutory holiday, or even 
Tuesday in some cases as a statutory holiday. And so it was 
extremely difficult, Mr. Speaker, for the landlord to get those 
applications into the Rentalsman’s office to put a claim in on 
the damage deposits. 
 
These change that the government is presenting now will 
change that to seven days, and that will not include 
non-working days. It won’t include weekends, it won’t include 
statutory holidays. We were asking for that, Mr. Speaker, at the 
very time that the original Bill in 1997 was presented. We 
talked to them at that time — that your time frames are too 
short. 
 
(1200) 
 
Would they listen, Mr. Speaker? No. Just like today they do not 
listen to what the people of Saskatchewan have to say, in 1997 
they were not listening then either. 
 
So finally, Mr. Speaker, they have realized that there is indeed a 
problem here and now they’re making the moves to correct it — 
to correct a fault that they put in the legislation two years ago 
even though they knew at that time, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
going to be a problem. So I guess, Mr. Speaker, it’s a situation 
where better late than never, but wouldn’t it have been proper to 
have done it right in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other issues in this particular 
Bill that do cause me some concern. The landlord has to apply 
within seven working days to put a claim in on the damage 
deposit. At that time, they have to remit the damage to the 
Rentalsman. 
 
The Rentalsman holds that damage deposit for 120 days after a 
decision has been made, Mr. Speaker. So it seems a little bit 
inequitable that the landlord has seven days and the Rentalsman 
gets 120 to do the same sort of transfers. I think that that 
process should be shortened up considerable once the decision 
has been made. 

It should not have been . . . there should be no need to go 
beyond 30 working days, one month, Mr. Speaker. Surely the 
Rentalsman office can make those transfers, once the decision 
has been made, back to the landlord if that’s what’s happening 
or back to the tenant if it’s being awarded to the tenant. I don’t 
see any reason why that we need a 120-day period in there. 
 
One of the issues also in here, Mr. Speaker, is that if a landlord 
makes an application to the Rentalsman to retain the damage 
deposit, they have to provide the Rentalsman with the address 
of the tenant — the new address — or they have to provide 
evidence that they sought to find the address of that tenant 
before they applied to the Rentalsman. 
 
My question to the minister would be, what kind of evidence 
are you looking for — that the landlord tried to find out what 
the tenant’s address is? In some cases it’s fairly easy, the tenant 
says I’m moving, here’s my new address if any mail comes or 
whatever. In some cases though, Mr. Speaker, the rent runs out 
at the end of the month and the tenant is gone. And who knows 
where they went to? 
 
So we need to know, Mr. Speaker, what kind of evidence the 
government is looking for in trying to determine whether or not 
the landlord has done a sufficient job of trying to identify where 
that tenant has gone to. So that’s one of the issues here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other issue here, Mr. Speaker, in this particular Bill — 
because it’s a two-part Bill; it deals not only with The 
Residential Tenancies Act but it also deals with consequential 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act — and one of 
the main difficulties that landlords have had, Mr. Speaker, is 
dealing with Social Services and their clients as it pertains to 
the renting of accommodations; that all tenants, Mr. Speaker, 
when they rent an accommodation put up the damage deposit, 
up front. 
 
The previous Bill in place here, the one we’re operating under 
today, allows for those tenants who may not have two months 
worth of salary . . . two months worth of rent to put forward 
immediately, to pay in instalments. But, Mr. Speaker, the Social 
Service recipients do not put up any, any damage deposit, while 
they’re in their accommodations. The landlord, if he has a claim 
against the damage deposit, has to file an application with 
Social Services after the tenant has left. And that takes a 
considerable period of time, Mr. Speaker, to work through that 
process. And perhaps there could be some way to speed that 
process up. 
 
I’m sure that we don’t want to tie up government money on 
deposit with landlords. But on the other hand, the landlord 
needs to have reasonably timed access to those funds if they’re 
filing a claim against the damage deposit, and if that claim is 
upheld by the Rentalsman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, that’s another area, I think, that needs to be 
investigated to be . . . to find a speedier and more efficient 
method of dealing with those situations. 
 
So there’s a number of other areas, Mr. Speaker, that I think the 
minister needs to be taking a look at in dealing with this. 
Presently there’s about 5,000 security deposit hearings a year. 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2000 

That’s a lot of security deposit hearings, and it’s meant a 
considerable workload on the Rentalsman, has meant that his 
staff has to have been increased. 
 
And this change in the legislation of ’97 has meant that that 
change has gone from 1,000 a year to 5,000. But of those, Mr. 
Speaker, 2,000 people, the tenant doesn’t show up for the 
hearings. Even though a hearing has been awarded — the 
member has applied the . . . the landlord has applied to the 
Rentalsman and the tenant has said yes, he wants a hearing — 
2,000 of them don’t show up. And 2,000 of those 5,000, Mr. 
Speaker, they have no forwarding addresses for them. 
 
So they are lost in the process. But it takes time before that 
Rentalsman receives . . . that landlord receives his money in 
return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there is some more work to be done on this 
particular issue, therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much to the government 
members. It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a number 
of students and teachers seated in the east gallery. This is a 
grade 4, 5, and 6 from the Fort Livingstone School in Pelly, 
Saskatchewan, part of the Canora-Pelly constituency. 
 
I’d like to introduce 39 grade 4, 6, and 6 students, and their 
three teachers, Monica Dudeck, Colleen Robinson and Don 
Budz. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome this group to, not only to the 
city of Regina but here to the Legislative Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned until 1:30 
p.m. Monday. Have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:07 p.m. 
 
 
 


