





























































Hansard: June 27, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2197 
 June 27, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people who would like to 
see the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. And the 
prayer on this petition, Mr. Speaker, reads as such: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Semans. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d love 
to read a petition today to retain the hospitals at Watrous and 
Lanigan, but I don’t have one. So today, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to read a petition on cellular telephone coverage at Lake 
Alma: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at St. Alma to include 
usage for cellular phones, or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at St. Alma, Saskatchewan. 
 

People who have signed this petition are from Gladmar and 
Minton. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here today calling for a smoking ban in all public places. The 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are all from my hometown of Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan plus one from Weirdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the future of their hospitals in this 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Signatures on this petition are all from the community of 
Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
that was collected on behalf of youth in Saskatchewan, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are collected mainly in Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the constituents concerned with health care. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from folks from Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens opposed to 
nursing home fee increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in Creelman, Weyburn, Halbrite, 
and Yellow Grass. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here gathered on behalf of the youth of the province. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is from residents of Prince Albert. 
 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens in southeast Saskatchewan concerned about cellular 
service in their area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones, or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the great 
folks of Minton, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan, which reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is on behalf of the youth in P.A. (Prince Albert) 
and Birch Hills. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of persons in Saskatchewan who are 
opposed to nursing home fee increases. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to rescind the recent large increases in nursing 
home fees. 

 
And this is signed by citizens from Weyburn, Glenavon, and 
Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 
behalf of the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Assembly to 
legislate a total ban of smoking in all public places and 
workplaces in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Signed by people from Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Meadow 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a petition 
today to present on behalf of residents to do with the lack of cell 
service. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
utilize the present SaskTel tower at Lake Alma to include 
usage for cellular telephones or to construct a new cellular 
telephone tower at Lake Alma, Saskatchewan. 

 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Beaubier, Lake Alma, Tribune, and Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin a reconstruction of 
Highway 47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction No. 
1 Highway. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the good people of the 
Corning, Glenavon, Windthorst, Stoughton, and Crane Valley 
areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding highways and the poor state of our 
highways. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately take steps to begin reconstruction of Highway 
47 from the Handsworth turnoff to Junction No. 1. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from the people in Glenavon, Saskatoon, 
Windthorst, and even from Taber, Alberta have trouble on our 
highways. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition from citizens concerned about hospital closures. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Drake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to reduce 
fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince 
Albert, Chamberlain, and Davidson. 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with citizens 
concerned about closure of hospitals. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from the communities of Drake and 
Lockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition about citizens who are concerned 
and very distraught over the despicable state of our highways in 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide the necessary resources to restore the 
Paddockwood access road to an acceptable state. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Paddockwood and Christopher Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned about medical services 
in their community. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Cupar Health Centre remains open, and the physician 
services are retained in the community of Cupar. 

 
Signatures to this petition come from the community of Cupar, 
Lestock, and Miles City, Montana. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly to bring forth a petition for improved cellular 
telephone coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Prud’homme, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with plans to turn paved 
highways back to gravel. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways on the local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

The reconstruction of Highway 47 from Handsworth to 
Junction No. 1; 
 
Setting aside plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back 
to gravel; 
 
Halting plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
Ensuring the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
Legislating a ban of smoking in public places and 
workplaces; 
 
The restoration of the Paddockwood access road; and 
 
The rescinding of large increases in nursing home fees. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Thomson, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations, presents its first report 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move that: 
 

The first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 
 

Seconded by the member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce a gentleman in your gallery 
— a retired lieutenant colonel in the Canadian air force, 
currently a resident of Glentworth, Saskatchewan. A gentleman 
rancher I believe, Mr. Speaker. Also the director of the Moose 
Jaw Air Show and today he’s being mobbed by well-wishers, 
autograph seekers, so much so that he has two rather reluctant 
body guards sitting up there with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you the new MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Wood River by a 
prairie tidal wave, Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s our pleasure and 
honour to welcome the new member from Wood River as well. 
 
I want to also indicate that we will be moving later today a Bill 
that will allow for the new member to be seated, I think as early 
as tomorrow. And it’s fair to say that we’re going to give up our 
position and right for an immediate recount. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly a special guest that’s seated in your gallery. 
 
Our visitor’s name, Mr. Speaker, is Vicki Chittleborough. Vicki 
Chittleborough is a grade 11 student from Nildottie, a small 
community near Adelaide the capital city of South Australia. 
 
She has come to Saskatchewan for six weeks to visit Jordan 
Martens. I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate Jordan. 
He is going to be graduating from Balfour Collegiate this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been an Internet friendship that has 
developed and Vicki is going to be staying with the host family, 
of course Jordan Martens and his parents, Andrew and Karen 
Martens. 
 
I would ask them to stand and be recognized and welcomed by 
all members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
with the Deputy Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming Yogi Huyghebaert as the newly elected MLA for 
Wood River. And I’m sure that the debate in the Assembly will 
be heightened with his presence, and I look forward to that 
debate. 
 
Please welcome Yogi. Thank you, very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

privileged this afternoon to have in the Assembly, seated in 
your gallery, some guests from Bogota, Colombia. Mr. Speaker, 
we have with us Jorge Contreras, an exchange student, grade 12 
exchange student. He’s been hosted by Ruth Malo and her 
family in the Moosomin area, and he spent a number of months 
with us. And now he’s been joined today by his parents, Genero 
and his mother Veronica and his sister Laura. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Contreras family own and operate dairy and 
beef cattle operations as well as a number of butcher shops in 
the country of Colombia. And I’d like the Assembly to extend a 
warm Saskatchewan welcome to our guests from Colombia. I’d 
ask them to rise and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to have guests here in your gallery. Joining us is John 
Burton. John, as members will know, was a Member of 
Parliament from Wascana, I believe is the riding, elected in 
1968, and served until 1972. 
 
He’s joined today by his grandson Paul I believe is with him. 
But he also has some special guests joining him from 
Chilliwack, British Columbia, that being his sister-in-law and 
her husband, Amy and John Antoshchuk. And they’re also 
joined by Tyler Williams who is a young fellow from 
Vancouver who’s joining them. 
 
So if you’d join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it seems like it never rains; it 
pours. I have more guests to introduce. 
 
This time I’ve very pleased to introduce a couple of young 
ladies from my riding who are joining us here. Kaitlan Stocks is 
seated in the government gallery. Kaitlan was a very good 
supporter of mine and campaigned very hard for me, and I 
appreciate that. And she’s joined by her friend, Nancy 
Beleshinski. I practised it three times, Nancy. 
 
But I’m very pleased to have these young ladies from Campbell 
Collegiate here to watch our proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to the House, I would like to introduce a 
constituent of mine, Mr. Tom Cameron from Carievale. 
 
Tom is seated in the Speaker’s gallery and was one of the 
driving forces behind the southeast concerned farmers last 
summer as we were all being flooded out. Tom and his group 
were good spokesmen for the farmers of the southeast area in 
convincing the government that we needed assistance in that 
area. 
 
And I’d like everyone to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I’d 
like to introduce — he never was with the Snowbirds, but he is 
a frequent flyer in the legislature — in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, Paul Meid, who often takes in the proceedings. And 
welcome him again today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
people who do a lot of work on a daily basis to make sure that 
I’m organized and provide me with the support I need. And two 
of them are two beautiful women seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s Betty-Ann Donison and a young woman who’s come to 
work during the summer months, Kim Gebhardt. And they’re 
seated in your gallery. I’d ask all members to welcome them to 
proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome in your gallery and have the rest of us welcome Mr. 
Tom Cameron, who is a tireless worker for the farmers in the 
southeast and who is also a guide for me as I was attempting to 
learn more about agriculture to be able to be an effective 
support for the farmers of this province. 
 
So I’d like to welcome Tom as well and have everybody join 
me in that welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wood River By-election Results 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, 
well. It’s Tuesday, the day after the Wood River by-election, 
and it is good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yogi Huyghebaert for the Saskatchewan 
Party won the by-election in an avalanche. The government 
coalition of the NDP (New Democratic Party) and Liberals, as 
my colleague from Kindersley predicted, received the trashing 
of their lives. They were beat, Mr. Speaker, like a government 
mule. 
 
The numbers in the by-election, Mr. Speaker were: for Yogi 
and the Saskatchewan Party, 4,365; the NDP, 1,128; the 
Liberals, 754; and the New Green Alliance, Mr. Speaker, 429 
ex-NDP votes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals went from tied in the last election to a 
distant third place. The New Green Alliance almost beat them. 
 
The people of Wood River, Mr. Speaker, judged the coalition. 
They judged it lacking — for inaccessible health care, 
impassable roads, and forced rural amalgamation, and 
ever-increasing taxes. 
 

The people of Wood River spoke loudly. They wanted Yogi 
Huyghebaert and the Saskatchewan Party. Congratulations, 
Yogi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welcome to New MLA 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
members of the government, I want to congratulate the new 
member for Wood River on his by-election victory, Mr. 
Speaker. And for obvious reasons, Mr. Speaker, we are not 
going to ask for a recount. 
 
But all joking aside, Mr. Speaker, all members I am sure look 
forward to having a full representation in this Assembly for all 
the people of Saskatchewan. It is a certainty that the people of 
Wood River will be relieved to have a member in this Assembly 
who can speak and represent them to the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They have been without representation for too long. And it is 
worth mentioning that the speed with which this by-election 
was held after the resignation of the former member was made 
possible by the six-month legislation passed by this government 
and our belief in fair representation. 
 
We know from experience what it is like not to have 
representation in a constituency, Mr. Speaker, and we acted to 
remove that as a possibility in this case. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
later on today we will be introducing a Bill which will allow 
Mr. Huyghebaert to take his seat before this session concludes. 
 
We look forward to his contribution in committee and in debate. 
And once again we congratulate him on his victory. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Huyghebaert. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Plans Performing Arts Centre 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
indeed with great civic pride that I rise today to inform our Hon. 
Assembly of an event that took place on Wednesday, June 21. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert, in collaboration with its 
surrounding districts, is attempting to build their very own 
visual and performing arts centre — a centre that will enhance 
all visual and performing arts for both local artists, plus provide 
a venue to showcase professional artists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the aforementioned date, the goal of reaching 
the local commitment was achieved, despite vague promises 
from both the federal and provincial governments, to assist 
Prince Albert in realizing this dream. The total was only 
reached because Prince Albert and district believed in 
themselves and decided to reach their objective prior to any 
firm commitments from this NDP government or from the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attention needs to be brought to one contribution 
that is truly remarkable in today’s economic reality. Rawlco 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Communications, owner of the local radio station, is donating 
$1 million to ensure that the local commitment was reached and 
in fact was even exceeded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of patrons such as Rawlco and all those 
other committed patrons, myself included, Prince Albert and 
district will be a better place to live. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology Statistics 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) recently released 
its annual graduate employment statistics report. And the 
statistics this year again are very, very encouraging, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ninety-one per cent of the respondents indicated they were 
employed at the time of the survey. And of those, 95 per cent 
are employed right here in Saskatchewan. SIAST graduates get 
jobs, and they get them at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
SIAST is helping talented and skilled people, especially our 
young people in the province, where they can contribute to our 
communities and to our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The respondents, graduands of SIAST, rated the quality of the 
programs and services at SIAST as very high. Ninety-seven per 
cent of the respondents rated the overall program quality as 
good to excellent, Mr. Speaker. Ninety-two per cent of the 
graduands said that the training programs had met their 
expectations. 
 
SIAST is the pre-eminent training institute in Saskatchewan 
when it comes to preparing young people in particular for the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of 
investing in people through post-secondary education. Together 
with SIAST we are creating a brighter future for individuals, 
communities, and indeed for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Vintage and Antique Club Museum 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
weekend I had the distinct pleasure of attending the grand 
opening of the Humboldt Vintage and Antique Club Museum 
located five kilometres south of Humboldt on Highway No. 20. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the club members acquired the former auction 
mart building three years ago. They did massive renovations 
and have several displays set up presently. The most recent 
additions are a harness and wheelwright shop, a blacksmith 
shop, and a farm kitchen. 
 
Club member, Ed Brockmeyer gave a tour of the facility. And 
the club is now open to the public Saturdays and Sundays. 
 
The goal of the Vintage and Antique Club, Mr. Speaker, is to 

preserve the machinery and the tools of past generations so that 
future generations will not forget where their roots are. It is an 
admirable effort to preserve the history of how people worked 
when this province was in its infancy. 
 
The club members are to be commended for all of the fabulous 
work that they have done. The building and the renovations 
have been made possible by the generous donations and support 
from the membership. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 
president of the Humboldt Vintage and Antique Club, Tony 
Stroeder, and I’d like to also congratulate all the members on a 
job well done in preserving Saskatchewan’s history. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Increase in Stipend for Medical Students 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An active, caring, 
innovative government is distinguished equally by the number 
of small, significant actions it takes to assist people as much as 
it is known by the major decisions it makes. 
 
It was an NDP government that introduced medicare and it is 
this government that is reviewing it with a view to making it 
responsive and comprehensive into the new century. That’s a 
big decision. 
 
And here’s a small action, but a significant one, to help us along 
in our pursuit of the bigger challenge. Medical students at the 
University of Saskatchewan, between their third and fourth 
year, find it difficult to work in the summer in order to support 
their fourth year. To help alleviate this problem, in 1998 the 
government introduced a stipend of $6,000 for these students. 
 
Effective May 1 of this year, Mr. Speaker, to recognize 
increased student costs, this stipend is now increased to $6,300 
per student which keeps us well ahead of Alberta at $3,420 — 
another tarnish on the shine that is Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medical students, tomorrow’s doctors, play an 
important role in the delivery of health care in Saskatchewan. I 
congratulate the Minister of Health, her department, and the 
College of Medicine for recognizing their importance in this 
very tangible form. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Bison Association Summer Field Days 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The annual 
Saskatchewan Bison Association Summer Field Days were held 
in Weyburn, June 23 to 25. The bison field days attract about 
300 people, including bison producers from Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, Manitoba, British Columbia, and northern United 
States. 
 
The field days feature a trade show and a number of specialized 
speakers who address various aspects of production and 
marketing. The event provides producers with an opportunity to 
access information about the latest technologies and techniques. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bison field days are significant in that they 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

bring together a larger number of bison producers than any 
other event during the course of the year. Mr. Speaker, there are 
350 members in the Saskatchewan Bison Association and it’s 
estimated that there are about 420 producers in the province. 
 
Saskatchewan’s bison herd is about 20,000 in number as of 
mid-April this year — just as calving season was about to start. 
Calving concludes about mid-June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bison industry is helping to diversify 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy. Mr. Speaker, the total 
on-farm investment by Saskatchewan bison producers is about 
62.5 million. The average herd size 55 animals; the estimated 
total investment is about 700,000 a herd. 
 
Support bison — eat a buffalo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Wood River By-election 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the last week 
of June. This is when teachers all over the province are handing 
out report cards. And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Wood River handed its report card to the coalition government 
— a big, fat F for the NDP, and a big, fat F for the Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now clear that the NDP have learned nothing 
from last fall’s election. The NDP has no plan for health care, it 
has no plan for highways, it has no plan for agriculture. So 
that’s why the voters of Wood River and all over Saskatchewan 
are leaving the NDP and they’re coming to the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, will you now admit 
that your government is on the wrong track, obviously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by first 
of all congratulating Mr. Huyghebaert who’s in the gallery — 
sorry I couldn’t be here during the formal introductions — and 
the Leader of the Opposition and your party for the wonderful 
victory that you are enjoying, and rightly so, today, in Wood 
River’s election yesterday. 
 
But as one of my colleagues said to me in response to your 
question, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, this was a snap quiz, 
not the final examination that was conducted yesterday. And on 
a snap quiz we have many more yet to go through before the 
final examination. 
 
And I would remind the Leader of the Opposition that we have 
many examples. I remember losing as Leader of the New 
Democratic Party in Wood River — it wasn’t called Wood 
River at the time — in 1988, to the Devine administration in 
Assiniboia. And it looked like Premier Devine was going to 
come back, and was defeated in ’91. 
 
Nothing can be made of a by-election except that the interests 
of the folks at Wood River have to be taken into account, and 

our government’s going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I thank the 
Premier for those comments. And of course these snap quizzes 
always tell you who’s ready and who isn’t ready too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the government has written off 
entire areas of the province. The Premier and his ministers 
barely set foot within the boundaries of Wood River during the 
entire by-election. 
 
If the NDP were so proud of their record, why weren’t they out 
in Wood River talking to the voters? Where was the Premier? 
Where were his ministers, Mr. Speaker? Even on election night, 
the Premier doesn’t have the courage to go and stand by his 
candidate. Not one of the NDP leadership candidates had the 
courage to go and stand by their candidate. So they sent the 
poor, old Minister of Energy and Mines way down there to the 
end of the road, that we wondered, what did you wrong? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not my question. My question is to the 
Premier. How can you say you are truly listening to the people 
of Wood River when you don’t even want to talk to them 
during the election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’m not sure what the question was 
but I gather it was something to the extent, why didn’t anybody 
go out. I don’t understand this question, and to be quite frank 
with you, he talked about none of the so-called leadership 
candidates of the NDP. So far as I know there are no leadership 
candidates in the NDP. 
 
But what I have to ask about the Leader of the Opposition, 
where were your leadership candidates? How come they 
weren’t there, at the same time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the jocularity that we can have respecting this 
by-election is good enough. But look, the government has 
received, I think, loudly and clearly, a very important message 
about the need to deal with some of the problems specifically in 
the Wood River area related to roads and economic uncertainty 
occasioned by the agricultural crisis. 
 
We are trying very hard to balance the budget, reduce taxes, 
have a balanced government, and we need to do a lot more 
work. There’s no way we can claim anything else except the 
need for us to turn up our sleeves, roll up our sleeves, and work 
harder than ever in the interests of the people of Wood River 
and all Saskatchewan people. That’s the message. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well everyone 
including the Premier knows this is a wake-up call for the NDP. 
But it should be a breakup call for the Liberals. It’s time to 
break up this unholy marriage, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just the 
Saskatchewan Party that’s saying that. Yesterday the voters of 
Wood River spoke as loudly and as clearly as they could. 
 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

The Liberals went from over 3,000 votes down to 700 votes or 
800 votes. Mr. Speaker, more than three-quarters of the 
Liberal’s own supporters abandoned them yesterday. And I 
believe that’s because of the way they were stabbed in the back 
by the Leader of the Liberal Party. 
 
To the Minister of Education: if you won’t listen to us, will you 
at least listen to your own supporters? Will you now tear up that 
coalition agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly as 
the Premier has indicated in the answers to the previous 
questions, we have heard the message. This is a coalition 
government, a coalition government of two very proud parties 
who worked out to provide good government — an agreement 
to provide good government to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And we are doing that and we plan to continue doing that into 
the future. 
 
We also recognize that the coalition government has been in 
existence for nine months, that we’ve recently tabled a budget 
and a plan for health care review, for major tax cuts beginning 
July 1, to a completely changed tax system beginning on 
January 1, 2001. These are improvements that will have a 
tremendous impact on the people of Saskatchewan in the very 
near future. And no, we will stay within the coalition 
government and we will work every day, every single day for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Wood River have said this coalition government has 
been in power nine months too long. They want you to end the 
coalition. They want you to cancel the coalition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, they’re furious with the 
Liberal leader for signing the agreement, and then what does the 
Liberal leader do? He blames all those folks out there. He says 
people just don’t understand. He says he thinks they’re not 
bright enough to understand the coalition agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, people do understand the coalition agreement. 
They understand it very well. They understand that it’s a 
betrayal. They understand that it’s a sellout. They understand 
that they’ve been stabbed in the back. And that’s why over 
three-quarters of rural supporters abandoned the Liberal Party 
yesterday. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re the one that doesn’t get it. Will you now 
recognize your mistake and tear up the coalition agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition has basically asked the same question, and I’ll give 
him the same answer. No, we won’t be tearing up the coalition 
agreement. And we will be working every day for the people of 
this province. 

But when we talk about the impact of this coalition government, 
we’re very early in our term. We haven’t had an opportunity to 
actually see the impact on the people of Saskatchewan. And 
when they recognize the impact in their lives by having more 
money in their pockets, by having better health care, by having 
better education, and improvements to their highways and 
roads, then they will say that coalition government has been 
working. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that when we talk about coalitions, 
I see across there, it’s a coalition of sorts — a coalition of 
malcontents, a coalition of disconcerted people, an alliance of 
the unholy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re the happiest band of malcontents I’ve ever . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be serious. 
Is the leader, is the leader . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, is the Leader of the Liberal 
Party going to listen to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I ask all hon. members to please come to 
order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the Leader of 
the Liberal Party going to listen to voters or is he just going to 
listen to the NDP? 
 
Yesterday the people of Wood River said who they thought you 
should listen to. The people of Wood River said they wanted a 
watchdog — that’s why they voted for Yogi Huyghebaert. They 
didn’t want another lapdog like the Liberal leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the people of Saskatchewan have 
lost confidence in this government. So later today, the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion of non-confidence 
in the coalition government. 
 
To the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, will you listen to 
the message the voters sent yesterday? You have a chance now 
to support this non-confidence motion. Will you do that, or will 
you continue to prop up a failing NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the results of the Wood 
River by-election is a matter of record obviously. But when we 
talk about the issues that came forward in the Wood River 
by-election, they were issues about roads and highways. There 
was issues about health care. 
 
And these issues are social issues that this government has 
made a commitment to address and to continue to address over 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

the future. 
 
But when we talk about the commitment of the members 
opposite — when they talked about in their platform what they 
would do for health care, they said they would freeze spending. 
When they talked about their commitment to education, they 
said they would freeze spending on education. 
 
So here we have a situation where, what was the message? The 
message from the people of Wood River were to this coalition 
government that they would like help, that they would like 
assistance. And this government will work every day to provide 
that assistance to those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Investigation 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, my 
question is related to the terms of reference of the NDP’s 
investigation into the misuse of taxpayers’ money at the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority. 
 
While the investigation will include a review and . . . or will, 
excuse me . . . will the investigation include a review and audit 
of the financial operation of all casinos operated by SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) while Mr. Dutch 
Lerat served as CEO (chief executive officer)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned last week, the audit team has now been formulated. 
It works closely with the Provincial Auditor and will look into 
all aspects of SIGA’s operations. Many of those I mentioned 
last week — the structures that are in place, the internal controls 
that are in place. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I spoke very quickly about the 
integrity of the casinos and the operation of the casinos. 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority has many auditing 
processes in place and at work on a daily basis, a weekly basis, 
and through the months of the year to provide that confirmation, 
the integrity of those operations. 
 
One of the most apparent, of course, would be the electronic 
gaming machines, 95 per cent of the gaming in those casinos 
that are run through the Western Canada Lottery Corporation. 
So the answer is that has happened, that will happen, and it’s an 
on-going process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, have you 
ever been advised of financial irregularities at any of the four 
SIGA run casinos prior to the June 14 letter from the Provincial 
Auditor? And specifically, have you ever been advised of 
financial irregularities at the Gold Eagle Casino in North 
Battleford? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the answer would be no. 
The answer also is that our Provincial Auditor in his report 
says: 

The operation of commercial casinos in Saskatchewan is 
relatively new. Accordingly, the Authority faces a 
challenge in designing systems and practices to regulate 
and monitor SIGA casinos. 
 

We’ve done that, we are doing that, and we will continue to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor also goes on to say: 
 

We think the Authority has addressed this challenge well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question, 
Madam Minister, was have you ever been advised of financial 
irregularities at the Gold Eagle Casino? And further, has the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority ever conducted a 
review of the Gold Eagle Casino lease agreement between 
SIGA and 212317 Saskatchewan Ltd.? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, whether the 
member would like to admit it or not, if you look at the 
resolution before the Public Accounts Committee, this is 
certainly turning into something that they would want to see 
happen in advance of the audit proceedings. 
 
They want to conduct a full investigation of their own and 
develop insinuation and information that is not based on 
auditing reports that are presented before this Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, the auditing reports, before this one, came before the 
Assembly in the annual reporting. There were no irregularities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a regular basis and throughout the year, we 
have many audits in place for the casinos that are operating in 
the province. The other thing I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, 
is that on an on-going basis, we continue to do spot audits of 
those locations. 
 
And his answer again, Mr. Speaker, to the question about the 
Gold Eagle, is no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, has a 
lawyer named Rodger Linka ever prepared a report for the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority on the lease 
agreement between SIGA and 212317 Saskatchewan Ltd. with 
regard to the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, to detailed information 
like that, I do not have it before me. But I would say to the 
member opposite, instead of standing and providing insinuation 
or presenting information here, if he has that information he 
should step out the side of the Assembly, make the accusations 
so that we can look into those. 
 
I would say to this point that has not been done anywhere but 
here in an oblique and accusatory fashion, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s not appreciated. If there’s information presented to the 
Authority, and as is every other matter, we will act on it in all 
swiftness that we can provide to the Assembly the assurances 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

that I have in the past. We will act upon them and do it quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Madam Minister, these are issues for 
which you have accepted legislative and regulatory 
responsibility. Madam Minister, we have been informed the 
basic lease agreement for the Gold Eagle Casino in 1997-1998 
was $21.50 per square foot. 
 
We have been further informed that Rodger Linka prepared a 
report for the provincial government indicating the lease 
amount of $21.50 per square foot was well above market value 
lease rates of between $5 and $10 per square foot. If this is true, 
then 212317 Saskatchewan Ltd. was paid, overpaid, by about 
$275,000 in 1997-1998 for the casino lease space. 
 
Madam Minister, can you confirm this? Has this information 
ever been brought to your attention? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned to the 
member opposite, no it hasn’t. I have mentioned to the member 
opposite, instead of trying this out on the floor of the Assembly, 
he has not brought this to my attention nor has anyone on his 
staff done so. And I can also tell the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
that the audit is underway. 
 
And I’ve assured everyone the review will contain all aspects of 
issues identified. If this is another one that should be in that 
mix, we will look into that. We’ll review the systems that are in 
place, the controls, and the actions taken by SIGA, as I 
mentioned earlier, including the actions by the CEO at the time, 
the board of directors, and key staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members to let this process unfold, to 
provide any information that they would require us to look into 
further, and that will occur, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, is the Gold 
Eagle Casino in North Battleford required to notify the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority of massive over 
expenditures on promotions? And will you confirm that the 
Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford overspent its $468,818 
promotional budget by more than $1 million in 1997-1998? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been mentioned 
before that we have many ways that we look at the expenditures 
with regard to the SIGA operations and SIGA casinos. When 
matters are brought to our attention, we move swiftly to act on 
those and we also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, have a 
review underway. That I’ve assured the member that we’ll look 
at all aspects of the identified issues. 
 
If this is another issue that’s been identified and brought to my 
attention, if it’s brought to the attention of the auditors, it 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, it will be included in the normal audit 
review processes that are in place. 
 

The external audit team that we’ve developed that are going in 
and working in co-operation with SIGA will review systems, 
will look at the controls and actions of the SIGA board of 
directors, it will look at the operations, it will look at key 
staffing and any other matters that are brought to their attention 
to look at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the member to get his information to us quickly and we 
will act on it as we would any other information pertaining . . . 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Gaming minister. 
 
We have been informed that SIGA’s sponsorship budget for 
1997-1998 was $100,000. We have also been informed that 
SIGA does not have any specific policy with respect to the 
payment of sponsorships. Further, we have been informed that 
SIGA overspent its sponsorship budget in 1997-1998 by 
$161,826. 
 
Madam Minister, can you confirm this massive unbudgeted and 
unregulated expenditure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I think 
some of my members have stated in the Public Accounts 
Committee, a review is underway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to throw into the Assembly things that have not 
been confirmed, to throw in speculation or information that I’m 
not certain how he would have obtained, Mr. Speaker, I think is 
very unfair to this issue and borders on the cheap theatrics that 
are at the expense of many, many people who are employed in 
this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member opposite to stop putting 
in jeopardy 1,100 jobs in this province and table the information 
that he’s alluding to through his statements here. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, we’re asking these questions on behalf of individuals 
who are concerned about accountability. 
 
Madam Minister, we have been informed that for the fiscal year 
1997-1998 expenses for SIGA’s entire operations, including the 
head office and all four casinos, was $8.2 million over the 
approved budget. Can you confirm this, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated before, and 
I’ll ask the member again to table all of his information. 
Certainly when this issue came to the forefront, when I made 
my statements, I’ve received many calls of, could you look into 
this, or have you heard that, Mr. Speaker. It’s highly unfair to 
this process to begin to speculate on what is the correct 
information, what can be verified, and what is not verified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an audit process that’s underway that will 
review all aspects of the issues identified. It’s going to go 
through an auditing process that will look at the systems and the 
controls, the actions taken by SIGA, Mr. Speaker, including the 
CEO, the board of directors, the key staff — some of the issues 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

he’s alluded to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d urge him to please table the facts in this case so that the 
auditor can include that in the process underway. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 
question for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, the 
information we have received raises some very serious 
questions. 
 
You’ve said that irregularities in SIGA’s finances were limited 
to Mr. Dutch Lerat. You’ve said that the irregularities are 
limited to only the most recent fiscal year. You have said the 
financial irregularities are limited to SIGA’s head office and not 
to any of the SIGA operated casinos. And you have stated that 
you became aware of the problems only after the Provincial 
Auditor brought them to your attention. 
 
But the information we have received suggests that 
irregularities are not just limited to Mr. Dutch Lerat; they date 
back to previous years and to SIGA casino operations. And the 
information suggests that the provincial government was aware 
of these irregularities for at least the past two years. 
 
Madam Minister, what did you know, and when did you know 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say there was a 
limitation on the issues I presented to this Assembly and I 
presented to the people of Saskatchewan. What I said was in the 
letter to me dated June 14, the Provincial Auditor, in 
conjunction with KPMG, the official auditor of record for 
SIGA, had brought those two issues to my attention. 
 
The Provincial Auditor also says he would like to take the 
summer months to look further at some other items he’s 
identified of concern. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’ve got an 
auditing team that is willing to do that. 
 
This is a relatively new operation in Saskatchewan. The 
Provincial Auditor said, accordingly we face many challenges 
as the Authority in designing systems and practices to regulate 
and monitor SIGA’s operations and the casinos. 
 
This is an ongoing process. We have been trying to work with 
them to develop the processes that would be in place. The 
auditor himself says, we think the Authority has addressed the 
challenge well . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the House, 
sitting in the west gallery, the Chair of the Legal Aid 
Commission in Saskatchewan, Jane Lancaster Q.C. I’d ask you 
all to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I 
would beg your leave to make an important statement of 
acknowledgement and gratitude to some special people in the 
Assembly here today and every day. Do I have your leave, hon. 
members? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Recognition of the Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I thank you so much. And at this time, hon. 
member, I would like to ask our pages to please, as they’re 
called, come forward and stand in front of the dais facing the 
Assembly. 
 
And I would call Rachel Birns, Charla Borowski, Carla Huber, 
Brooke Johnston, and Terry Rushworth. 
 
Pages of the first session of the twenty-fourth legislature of the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, we thank you for your 
service to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all hon. elected members of this 
Assembly, I want to recognize you and congratulate you for the 
work you have done for all of us. This has been a real special 
legislature for many of us, both personally and historically — 
first legislature of the millennium guaranteeing a special place 
in history; first legislature for a number of new members 
elected last fall. 
 
Your work here has provided a unique opportunity to observe 
parliamentary democracy in action. Sometimes this may have 
been exciting and other days perhaps rather routine. 
 
But you have observed both the passionate debate, and you 
have enjoyed as well the debates from day to day that have 
occurred on a calmer scale. Certainly many of your recent days 
have been long ones. Sometimes we appreciated and we 
thanked you. Perhaps other times, people were a little bit 
preoccupied or perhaps tired and did not in fact recognize your 
efforts. 
 
But today we want to compliment you on your professionalism. 
We have sometimes ignored your presence as conversations 
swirled around you. But please understand the ultimate 
compliment that that implies — our implicit trust in your 
discretion and confidentiality. You are one of us. 
 
(1430) 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

I know some of you may be returning to school to continue 
your studies this fall. Some of you are looking for employment 
following your time here. I hope your time here has fuelled 
perhaps a permanent interest in the issues and politics of this 
great province of ours. Perhaps one or more of you will, one 
time, sit in one of these desks as an elected member. 
 
Whatever path you may wish to follow, I wish you well. 
Members please join me in a round of applause for our pages of 
the first session of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Thank you, hon. 
members. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Tobacco Control 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, by 
leave of the Assembly, I would like to move a motion, seconded 
by the member from Estevan. The motion would read: 
 

That the Special Committee on Tobacco Control be 
authorized during any period of adjournment of the first 
session of the twenty-fourth legislature to make a report on 
its inquiries by filing the same with the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly, and that the report be distributed in 
accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act. 

 
I ask leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Here’s the motion, Mr. Speaker. I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased on behalf of 
the government that’s open, accountable, and responsible to 
supply the answer to question 202. 
 
And, by leave of the Assembly, include questions . . . answers 
to 203, 204, and 205. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Those answers are tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Non-confidence Motion 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to stand in this 
Assembly today to move a very, very important motion 
forward. It is a very unusual motion and we do not do it very 
lightly, Mr. Speaker. This is a motion that we present to the 

Assembly not on behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
but on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have watched with great interest 
since September 16, 1999, when a minority government was 
elected, Mr. Speaker. And through some backroom dealings, 
through some interesting deals that were struck, we now have a 
coalition government that has been in power for at least nine 
and a half months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night’s activities in the constituency of Wood 
River, I think, highlight the kinds of concerns that people have 
not just in the constituency of Wood River, but right across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We see that the outcome of the Wood 
River constituency in a constituency that is . . . has been 
predominantly Liberal or NDP for a number of years. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liberals received 40 per cent 
of the vote in 1999, and the NDP received 20 per cent of that 
vote. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a combined total of 60 per 
cent of the votes cast supporting either the Liberals or the NDP. 
 
Last night the people of Wood River spoke very, very clearly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have produced the results that show 
that only 26 per cent of the voting population yesterday voted 
for the NDP and the Liberals combined — combined, Mr. 
Speaker. Nearly two-thirds of that vote for the NDP and the 
Liberals has disappeared — has disappeared since the creation 
of the coalition back after last September 16. 
 
The Wood River seat is a very strong example in rural 
Saskatchewan of probably the largest strength that the Liberals 
and the NDP have, combined. These two parties have controlled 
that part of the province for many years with very few 
exceptions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Wood River rejected this 
coalition last night. And the feelings that were expressed by 
those people in Wood River are not unique. In fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think those feelings are expressed everywhere in this 
province — from the east to the west, from the north to the 
south. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know it’s very interesting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Many people stop me and ask me, you know, what the 
coalition is up to. And why in heaven’s name would a political 
party elected on September 16, ’99 with the balance of power in 
their hands, the most important thing that they could have done 
was to maintain balance of power? 
 
And they sold it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They sold it to a deal that 
was struck in the dead of night to ensure that this coalition 
could have a majority. People are fed up with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s look at a few of the things that have 
transpired over the last nine months since this coalition has 
taken power. Let’s look at taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the budget of March 27, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very first 
thing that occurred wasn’t the tax break effective immediately. 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

It was an expansion of the PST (provincial sales tax). More 
taxes on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t see a small . . . a 
very small reduction until July 1 of this year. Overall for the 
fiscal year 2000, the people of Saskatchewan have an increase 
in taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We start to look at the fees, the premiums, all of the increases 
that people have been forced to pay as a result of the budget on 
March 27. We see utility rate increases. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Wood River recognized that last night 
and they responded accordingly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, for days we’ve heard 
about the highways of the province of Saskatchewan. My 
colleagues, many of my colleagues have been out with people 
in the province of Saskatchewan looking at the highways. 
 
And you know what the result is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? There 
wasn’t a single mention in the campaign of either the NDP or 
the Liberals that said that they would convert miles and miles of 
road to gravel. Not one single mention. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, the situations of conversion, 
and you know that word is not only synonymous to the health 
care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s also in Highways. We hear that 
word conversion. 
 
When we start to look across the province and see what’s 
happening . . . I have in my hands, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an 
article from the Norquay North Star talking about what might 
happen with Highway 8. And it says . . . The heading, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is “Highway 8 north to Swan Plain to revert to 
gravel surface.” 
 
In this article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a quotation from a 
resident that lives on that highway, and he says this: 
 

The maintenance on the road over the past few years was 
inadequate and that has affected the condition of the 
pavement. 

 
This is not something that has just happened because now we 
have larger volumes of grain moving on that highway. This is a 
plan that has produced a situation where the highways are 
crumbling. 
 
We have reduced maintenance crews; we have reduced the 
number of crews that are out there. We have a situation where, 
yes, we recognize that the weather conditions in this province 
will contribute to the breakup of roads. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you know very well, as do the people of 
Saskatchewan, that when a pothole appears and it’s a very small 
pothole, if you don’t get out there and fix it, it’s going to be a 
large pothole very quickly. And that is what happened across 
this province. There is no plan by this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at health care. In the last 
campaign not a single mention was made about additional 
health care closures. We have not heard about hospital closures; 

we have not heard about health care conversions, health centre 
conversions. In fact we have never, never heard from either the 
Liberals or the NDP about long-term care facility closures. 
 
But that is what is happening out in the province of 
Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Boards are 
considering all of those things because this government does 
not have a plan for the people of Saskatchewan to deal with 
health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s look at municipal control and 
municipal government. Not a mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the campaign literature of either of the NDP or the Liberals 
about amalgamation. In fact no mention of the word, forced 
amalgamation. 
 
And here we sit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the last number of 
months debating the Garcea report, debating the Stabler report 
— reports that show that they would love to have forced 
amalgamations and do away with small municipal governments, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
People of Saskatchewan will not stand for that, Mr. Speaker, 
and they have lost the faith and the confidence in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at agriculture. And this 
session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, began with a debate on 
agriculture, a very important debate on agriculture back last 
December. And we heard very clearly that this government was 
in favour of looking at long-term assistance to farmers. And in 
fact in the Throne Speech it indicated that there was going to be 
a need to address a plan that would produce a long-term care 
. . . a long-term aid to farmers. 
 
What happened? This government was proud of the fact that 
they cut a deal with the feds where farmers would be able to 
acquire $400 million of an advance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the advance is the farmer’s own money. 
It’s a loan. And we know that all loans come due, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So farmers have been put in a predicament where they 
have to put their crop in, and many have taken advantage of that 
$400 million advance, but it is their own money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This isn’t a plan to ensure that there is viability and stability in 
the agricultural sector. This is telling the farmers, well we’re 
going to postpone that ultimate decision that you’re going to 
have to make until next year because that’s when your advance 
is going to come due. What a joke, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Last fall we also introduced . . . the Official Opposition 
introduced a motion. That motion said that we should take 300 
million from the liquor and gaming fund to use it as a lever to 
get $1 billion worth of additional assistance from the federal 
government. The response by the government coalition was this 
was going to break the province because 300 million out of the 
liquor and gaming fund was impossible — even though the very 
budget of that government from last year indicated that they 
were prepared to spend 190 million of that liquor and gaming 
fund. 
 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at the current 
budget for this year and I see within the Estimates that the total 
transfer from the liquor and gaming fund to the General 
Revenue Fund will be $695.4 million. A fund that was 
supposed to be broke. All of a sudden — $300 million which 
we were asking for was an impossibility — and now in this 
year’s budget we find that indeed that fund had $695 million. 
 
The plans don’t fit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a 
government that doesn’t know what direction it’s going in. It 
has lost the support of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at a couple of issues in 
education. For many years people of Saskatchewan, the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, have said that the downloading to 
the local taxpayer has been excessive. Everyone recognizes that. 
I’m sure that the government members have recognized that as 
well and they’ve indicated that they need to put in place a plan 
that reverses the 60/40 split — 60 per cent from the local 
taxpayer and 40 per cent from the government. 
 
What occurred this year? Forty-four school divisions in the 
province of Saskatchewan are going to receive less money — 
less money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What’s the options for the 
boards of education in those divisions? Increase property taxes 
— increase. That is not going to change the 60/40 split, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the correct direction. 
 
(1445) 
 
That’s going to enhance that 60/40 and we’re probably going to 
be looking at 62 to 38 per cent in a very short time. That’s the 
average — that’s the average across the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we know in many school divisions that that is . . . 
that the percentage that is paid for by the local taxpayer for 
education is nearing 85, 90, 95 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There is no plan. There is no plan by this government to say 
that over the period of time we’re going to move forward. We 
hear from the Education minister that oh yes, oh yes, I’m aware 
of this, and we’re going to move in the right direction. And in 
the meantime we see the kinds of changes that have occurred. 
 
We don’t even have a provincially negotiated contract yet, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we’re already knowing that taxpayers 
have had huge increases in their taxes. This, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is not an example of a government that is leading with 
a plan that is producing an idea — ideas for the people of 
Saskatchewan that people can rally around. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people have also expressed concerns 
about a number of the government’s handling of many issues. 
We start to look at the social services issues, the policing issues. 
Thousands, tens of thousands of people have abandoned this 
coalition because they feel the coalition has abandoned them. 
 
Or to put it in the words of a former Wood River member, the 
former New Democrat, the Liberal, and I don’t quote him too 
often but I’ll do that today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He says this: 
 

The Premier and the Liberal leader have spent all their time 
on creating this coalition through deals struck in the dead 
of night and not dealing with the issues. 

That’s the clear picture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
has not moved forward with the issues. And on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan I would like to move the following 
motion, seconded by the member from Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its non-confidence in the 
current provincial government. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
speak briefly on this very important issue that’s before the 
Assembly here this afternoon, in support of my colleague from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
It certainly is time for the coalition government to take stock. 
It’s time to see how it’s going so far. And I would ask the 
member from North Battleford to seriously think about what 
him and his colleague might be prepared to do here this 
afternoon. 
 
The Premier last fall, you will remember, after the election, said 
that the government has listened; they have heard the people of 
this province. They have listened to the mistakes that they have 
made, they are going to act on them, and they’re going to move 
forward in a positive direction. 
 
And I would ask the people of Saskatchewan and the member 
from North Battleford, what was the actions that they wanted 
from this government? They wanted some changes in terms of 
health care policy. They wanted some changes in terms of 
highway policy. They wanted some changes in terms of 
agriculture and taxation policy. They wanted changes in terms 
of this government’s direction in terms of municipal 
amalgamation. 
 
And have we seen anything in terms of those in a concrete 
fashion? And I would argue that the people of Saskatchewan, 
voiced by the constituents of Wood River last night, have said 
overwhelmingly that no, you haven’t changed direction; you 
haven’t been prepared to listen to the people of this province. 
You simply have gone along and continued down the path that 
you did since 1991 across Saskatchewan. 
 
At that time the Premier of Saskatchewan, in 1991, got up 
before the people of Saskatchewan and laid out a whole list of 
promises that he was going to put forward. He also didn’t say a 
whole bunch of things about what he was going to do in a 
number of areas. 
 
And you will recall this. You will recall there not being one 
single word of mention about anything in terms of a health care 
restructuring plan. Not a single word in the ’91 election 
campaign. And then we saw 52 hospitals in this province close. 
And then we saw after that the Plains hospital close. 
 
And the member will recall that, because he argued from that 
very seat I believe there, strenuously in opposition to that 
closure at the time. And his leader at that time was saying 
something as ridiculous as saying that he was going to chain 
himself to the front doors of that hospital to ensure that it 
wouldn’t close. 
 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

As ridiculous of a statement as it was at that time, the people of 
Saskatchewan supported him in that view. They supported him 
because they knew it clearly was the right thing to do; it clearly 
was what the people of Saskatchewan wanted. It clearly was 
what they were opposed to, from a government that just simply 
didn’t listen to the people of Saskatchewan, continues not to 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan. It was tired rhetoric from 
a government that simply has lost touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it never is more evident than after the 
by-election last evening in Wood River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Nothing has changed whatsoever in the direction 
of this administration, Mr. Member, and you know it. And the 
people in your constituency know it and now the people after 
last evening’s by-election in Wood River, now the people of 
Saskatchewan clearly know it. Nothing has changed from this 
government. 
 
The only thing that remains the same after the election in 
September of last year is your support for administration that is 
failing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Just want to remind the 
hon. member for Kindersley that all comments are to be 
directed through the Chair and I just ask that the member abide 
by that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan realize 
now that — unfortunately they realize now, even after last 
night’s by-election — that there isn’t an opportunity really to 
make much difference. They’re stuck with you. The problem is, 
that they are faced with, is simply a government that doesn’t 
want to make any changes whatsoever in policy direction — 
none whatsoever. 
 
But there is an opportunity to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan here this afternoon. There is an opportunity that’s 
unparalleled before the people of this province in this legislative 
term, this legislative session right now, right here this afternoon 
to make a change in direction for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is what the people of this province want. This is what they 
are saying to you here this afternoon. This is what the people of 
Wood River have said repeatedly last night after you people 
have received, and your coalition government have received a 
message that should be as loud and as clear as anything can 
possibly be — you were wrong. 
 
Everybody makes mistakes. We make mistakes all the time. All 
of us make mistakes. I believe, I believe in your heart of hearts 
you know, Mr. Member, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that 
you made a mistake. 
 
It’s time to pull that mistake back. It’s time to hold the 
government accountable. It’s time to live up to the election 
promises that they made at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
time to listen to what the people were saying in the election in 
1999, last fall, and the election last evening. This is the 

opportunity that you may never have again for a long, long time 
to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We are not going to be 
in this legislative session that much longer. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are demanding change. They are 
saying to this government that there needs to be a change in 
terms of health care policy; there needs to be a change in terms 
of highway policy, in agriculture policy, in taxation policies, in 
municipal amalgamation policies. Item after item, department 
after department, they have given your government a failure 
record — a big fat F. That’s what your government has 
received. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have spoken. They have said to 
you, even though you have made the mistake of your life and 
probably your political life, now is the opportunity to correct 
that record. Now is the time to change your direction; now is 
the time for this government to change its direction. And if they 
are unprepared to change their direction, the people of 
Saskatchewan will change this government. 
 
Unquestionably the people of this province have said time and 
time again that it’s over, as far they are concerned, with your 
coalition government. 
 
And all you have to do is look at some of the things that are 
going on in the Department of Highways these days or in the 
liquor and gaming department or SIGA — all of those kinds of 
things. It is just a disaster as far as the people of this province 
are concerned. 
 
Right in your backyard in North Battleford, there are all kinds 
of problems and I predict they’re going to come to light in a 
very, very serious way in the next few days. And I think you 
know that there are problems there, Mr. Minister. 
 
Just as the Minister of Highways knows that in 19, 
approximately ’92-93, when Bernie Wiens was talking about 
gravelling highways in this province, there was such an uproar 
that the government at least listened to the people at that time 
and abandoned that program; backed off because they realized 
that it was simply something that the people of Saskatchewan 
would not support. 
 
And now we have the Minister of Highways, in his normally 
sneaky fashion that he administers his department, going out 
and gravelling highways. Not telling anybody about it until 
after the fact. All of those kinds of things that this province is 
sick and tired of. 
 
And that’s why, that’s why last evening in the election you got 
what you deserved finally. You got what you deserved finally. 
The people of Saskatchewan don’t agree with this 
administration. You didn’t have a mandate to do many of the 
things that you are doing to the province today. And that’s why, 
Mr. Member from North Battleford, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s why the people of Saskatchewan want you to correct the 
record. And that’s the opportunity that we are giving you here 
this afternoon. And that’s the record . . . that’s the opportunity 
that we are going to give every single member here this 
afternoon, if — and it’s a big if — if you allow this 
non-confidence vote to take place here this afternoon. 
 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

We want a standing vote in this Assembly. We want you on 
record of either continuing to support a failed administration, or 
have some courage here this afternoon and correct that record. 
And stand up for what you have believed in, what you said 
when you were on this side of the Assembly, what you said to 
the people of Saskatchewan in the last election campaign, and 
what you should have been saying to them in a by-election 
campaign. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opportunity is before us. Let’s see and 
let’s challenge the people of this Assembly this afternoon here 
today to see whether the people of Saskatchewan and the 
members of this legislature have any confidence left in this 
administration. 
 
I predict, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on this side of the Assembly 
we are on the side of the people of Saskatchewan. We have lost 
confidence, the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence — 
have you lost confidence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
take a couple of minutes to wrap up why we have no confidence 
in this government. Mr. Speaker, we have no confidence in this 
government because this government has no confidence in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they have no vision for the province 
of Saskatchewan, and that was exemplified by the results of the 
Wood River by-election last night when Yogi Huyghebaert won 
an outstanding victory at the expense of the NDP and Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the facts; and members opposite, I 
would ask them to consider with us, Mr. Speaker, the facts for 
the Wood River by-election victory for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
First of all, taxes have actually gone up in Saskatchewan. We 
had a government that promised they would lower taxes, but yet 
they raised them first thing. The first budget increase? Increase 
the PST. Mr. Speaker, they increased fishing licences, camping 
fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government, that government had the nerve 
— had the nerve — to raise the fees for long-term health care 
patients. How low can you go, Mr. Speaker. How shameful can 
you be to raise fees for the most vulnerable, needy people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s why we don’t have 
confidence in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can go on to look at the whole health care 
field. They said we didn’t need an audit of the health care 
system. They said our health care system was the best in 
Canada, and Canada’s was the best in the world. Well the other 
day we found out that Canada ranks number 30, and we know 
that Saskatchewan is at the bottom of the list in Canada. Under 
their watch, Mr. Speaker, health care has deteriorated 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are out there wondering, is our 
hospital going to be closed? Is our hospital going to be 
downgraded to a health care centre? And the Minister of Health 
doesn’t have the nerve and doesn’t have the courage to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what her plan is for health care in this 
province. That’s why we don’t have confidence in this 
government. 

Mr. Speaker, education — this government for years has 
underfunded education. And under the new Minister of 
Education we have labour problems, we have the teachers 
prepared to go on strike, we have not resolved the funding 
problems, we have not resolved the high burden of education 
borne by property taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals 
promised to fix that. They’ve been no influence in this coalition 
government. That’s why we don’t have confidence in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we drive on the highways in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, we see every day when we drive down secondary 
highways, even primary highways in Saskatchewan, why we 
don’t have confidence in this government. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t have confidence in a government 
that says, go out and fix your own highways. How despicable. 
How shameful. That’s why we don’t have confidence in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers and people in agriculture don’t have 
confidence in this government. We see this government propose 
an AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) package 
and then we hear the other day that you might not get the 
money — might not be there. Hurry up and get your 
applications in early, the Minister of Finance says, or you might 
not get any money from AIDA. That’s why we don’t have 
confidence in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at small business and labour. We hear 
small business talking about leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan because of unfair labour legislation, because of a 
terrible labour climate. I get letters in my office from workers 
saying, don’t force me to join a union. Stop this government 
from their uncaring ways. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we don’t 
have confidence in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this coalition has been an absolute disaster. Mr. 
Speaker, there was some very prophetic words spoken by the 
former leader of the Liberal Party after the current Liberal 
leader agreed to form a coalition. She said, the former Liberal 
leader, this is out of The Leader-Post, Friday, October 1: 
 

(And) Former Liberal leader Lynda Haverstock warned 
Melenchuk not to get too big for his . . . (new baseball 
pants). 
 

She said: 
 

Understand, they’re going to be way out of their league 
around that cabinet table because they have no experience. 
If they’re attempting to paint the picture that this is a great 
opportunity for tremendous influence around the cabinet 
table, then they must think we’re all fools. 
 
She scoffed at Melenchuk’s comment about lighting a 
candle. 
 
Lighting a candle is doing more than serving yourself. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we don’t have confidence in this 
government. The coalition was a grab at opportunism; it was 
not done in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have confidence in this government 
because they don’t even have confidence in themselves. Ned 
Shillington, former front-bencher for the NDP, left the province 
and went to Calgary. He didn’t have confidence in this 
government; why should we have confidence in the NDP 
government? 
 
Doug Anguish left even before that. He lost confidence in this 
government years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the Premier is frantically trying to 
find a way to get out of the province himself. I think he’s 
looking for a way out right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he’s doing some soul searching. 
He said today, after the results of the by-election, doing some 
soul searching. Well the last time he did the soul searching, Mr. 
Speaker, he found three souls. They were for sale and he bought 
them and that’s why we have a government today that we don’t 
have confidence in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, that’s why I ask the members 
to reconsider their support of the government — particularly the 
Liberal members — to reconsider their support of this 
government. And I ask them to support this motion of 
non-confidence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
government caucus Chair it’s my pleasure to rise in the 
Assembly this afternoon and speak briefly to some of the issues 
raised by the members of the opposition in their motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a non-confidence motion such as theirs suggests 
that a government has been not listening to the people. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the facts are right to the contrary in the 
history of the government . . . of this particular government 
since 1991. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1991 this government, and what 
particularly now since the last election, this coalition 
government, has listened to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
the advice of people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we have more to do? Yes, we do. Mr. 
Speaker, have we made some mistakes? We have. 
 
But we have listened to people. We listened to people, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1991 when they wanted fiscal responsibility and 
integrity restored to this province. We did that. Mr. Speaker, we 
listened to the people again in 1995 when they asked us — now 
that the fiscal responsibility was restored — to look at spending 
increased funds in health, education, highways, and other areas. 
Mr. Speaker, we increased spendings in all those areas during 
the second terms of our office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 we also listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan after the election. The new coalition government 

in response to the farm income crisis and the rural economy 
directed increased funding from our province, and also in 
conjunction with the federal government, to farmers, to rural 
Saskatchewan, and to agriculture in a number of areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also 
since the election listened to the people when they said to us we 
would like a tax cut. Mr. Speaker, we responded in this past 
budget with the largest ever income tax cut in the history of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Over the next two years our taxpayers in 
this province go from being the second highest to I think fourth 
. . . or fourth I think in the province. Mr. Speaker, it is a great, 
great step for taxpaying citizens of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take just a couple of minutes to 
talk . . . the opposition has been focusing on the by-election last 
night, and, as my colleagues did before, I add my 
congratulations to Mr. Huyghebaert on his win last night. But 
I’d like to take a couple of minutes and talk about by-elections 
over the last 20 years in this province and what they have 
meant. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by-elections are a snapshot in a particular 
part of the province and of activities going on at a particular 
point in time. They do not necessarily represent a trend. I would 
point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 1980 Grant Devine lost a 
very safe Tory seat in Estevan in a by-election. We all know 
what happened in 1982 — two years later — quite a different 
result. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1984 the NDP took a by-election in 
Regina Northeast with a resounding majority which brought 
back Ed Tchorzewski into this legislature. His margin of victory 
I think was in the order of 77 per cent of the vote — yet the 
NDP did not win the next provincial election just a year later. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What per cent? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Seventy-six. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1988 
the Tories won a decisive by-election in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the same general area as Wood River, 
and very much a part of what the Wood River seat was. Did this 
mean they would win the next general election? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it certainly did not, when the NDP government came 
to power with a resounding majority government in 1991. 
 
Even in more recent history, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in 1994 a 
year before the second majority government of this current 
term, the Liberals won a by-election in Regina Northwest with 
quite a substantial majority. Much of this constituency is in the 
area that I represented and was first elected to in 1995. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the result from this area in 1995 was 
very much different from what it was in 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact, if we might talk about even more recent 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

history, there have been six by-elections in the province of 
Saskatchewan since the creation of the Saskatchewan Party. 
And, Mr. Speaker, how many have they won? They have won 
two. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, moving on to another topic on this, 
concerning this motion, we must take a look at who is moving 
the motion of non-confidence. Mr. Speaker, motions of 
non-confidence are moved usually by opposition parties with a 
plan, with a vision, with a clear idea of what they would do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what have we seen from this opposition? 
What have we heard from this opposition? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this opposition continuously criticizes the people and 
institutions of this province. They have Alberta envy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this opposition has spent 2 billion more in this 
session alone in promises than we have in all our entire budget 
in resources and income. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
highest in the history of this province. They’ve spent 2 billion 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s easy to govern 
when you’re in opposition. Opposition is the easiest thing in the 
world. Governments, on the other hand, and we on this side of 
the House have had to make and take important, substantive 
decisions. It is not an easy time to do under the pressures we 
have to maintain a balanced budget and also the expectations of 
our population for more money in health, more money in 
education, more money in highways, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
less taxes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this coalition government in the 
light of this expectation of our public, has done a very good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to also take 
a look at where the motion is coming from, the opposition 
party. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent press articles, in recent 
publications by the financial industry, I haven’t seen any 
evidence of non-confidence in this coalition government. 
 
In the financial service sector, I seem to recall that a month or 
so ago the credit rating of this province was increased. Just as 
early as last week the Royal Bank of Canada is predicting that 
coming up . . . which was a bad year in our economy in 
1999-2000 — that we’re coming into a year where we are 
expected to grow in excess of 2 per cent and in the year after, 
upwards of 3.5 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is from the 
Royal Bank of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, also in recent reports 
from Sask Trends Monitor and other institutions, we are having 
one of our . . . we have the least unemployment we have had in 
the history of our province. There are more jobs available even 
for our young people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are not the signs of an economy or 

population out there that is expressing non-confidence in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in summary I’d just like to summarize a 
little bit of what I said. First of all on behalf of all of us, I again 
want to express our congratulations to the new member from 
Wood River constituency. I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want to 
send our congratulations to all the candidates who ran. Robert 
Anderson for our party, Jerry Ruehs for the Liberals, and Peter 
Borch for the New Green Alliance. 
 
I also want to point out what’s pointed out by our colleagues a 
little bit earlier. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be introducing a 
Bill in the legislature later this afternoon, that will short-circuit 
some of the normal conditions and will allow us to seat the new 
member of Wood River constituency as early as tomorrow, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to conclude, the election results are not 
about this coalition government. The results are about issues 
that have been of particular concern to constituents in Wood 
River constituency, issues like highways and the rural economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard the message. This coalition 
government has been responsive and will be responsive. We 
will do our utmost to work in the interests not only of the 
constituents of Wood River, but all the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has a history of 10 years 
of a balanced approach to government, and I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it will serve us well in the years ahead. My colleagues 
and I will not be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As a member 
of this coalition government, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 
to be able to stand here today and let this province know just a 
few of the things that this New Democratic government has 
accomplished over its last two terms, and what this coalition 
government has begun to accomplish in these last nine short 
months. 
 
The New Democrats have done a great deal of good work for 
the people of Saskatchewan. From our beginnings in 1944, the 
list of positive accomplishments is considerable. From medicare 
to the child action plan, from public insurance to public 
accountability, the list of New Democratic accomplishments 
over the last half of this century has been truly remarkable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the New Democrats came to power in 1991 
this province was in shambles. People had left our province in 
droves during the 1980s. We had acquired a huge debt and 
bankruptcy threatened our province. During the early- to mid- 
1990s, Saskatchewan had some very stressful times. Drastic 
budgets, yes, Mr. Speaker, and some tax increases were made to 
help revive our province and bring us back from the brink of 
bankruptcy. The people of Saskatchewan realized that drastic 
measures were needed to combat a desperate situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the true Saskatchewan spirit — through hard 
work, making some tough financial decisions, and by making 
sacrifices and sticking together in our resolve to make 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

Saskatchewan a better place to live — we have come through 
the worst of it. Balanced budgets and fiscal responsibility 
marked our first two terms of government. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
testament to the conviction and dedication of our Premier and 
the government caucus during those tough times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during our first two terms of government, and 
although our financial situation was far from the best, this 
government began to ease the tax burden on Saskatchewan 
people. As early as 1992, this New Democratic government 
began a balanced and sustainable series of tax reductions. A 
balance that encouraged growth in many sectors throughout the 
province in a sustainable way. Tax reductions within our means 
that would not cause reductions in other areas. 
 
(1515) 
 
Corporate income tax, E&H (education and health) tax on 
manufacturing, royalty structures were improved for the oil and 
gas industry, aviation fuel tax was reduced — these are but a 
few during this time, Mr. Speaker. And they may not seem huge 
reductions, but it was done with a balanced approach to 
stimulate our economy and begin our climb to a better 
tomorrow. 
 
Before the provincial election last September, one of the major 
concerns that was heard on doorsteps was a concern over our 
taxes in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this government heard 
those concerns and responded in our budget with a package that 
gives Saskatchewan residents the largest personal income tax 
cuts in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Lower tax rates, Mr. Speaker, significantly 
higher personal tax credits, the elimination of the flat tax, the 
debt reduction surtax, high-income tax surtax, Saskatchewan 
sales tax credits for low-income family and seniors, 55,000 
low-income earners will no longer be on our provincial tax 
roles — Mr. Speaker, this tax reduction package begins July 1. 
It means fairness for families and competitiveness with 
neighbouring provinces, Mr. Speaker; $260 million in overall 
income tax reductions done in a fair, balanced, and sustainable 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past fall the full effect of world commodity 
prices and distorted trade subsidies hit home to all of us in this 
province. Our farm families and rural citizens have been forced 
into a new way of doing business in an industry geared not to 
local, provincial, or even Canadian markets, but geared and 
dictated to by world demands. 
 
Their traditional lifestyle is now changing, and changing, Mr. 
Speaker, at lightning speed. Mr. Speaker, when many people 
think of family farms, we think of our grandparents, aunts, and 
uncles, mixed farms — geese, chicken, pigs, cattle, grain. Those 
days are gone, Mr. Speaker. That traditional lifestyle has been 
forced to change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this traditional lifestyle has been pushed from all 
sides. Changes to traditional crops grown, transportation 
upheavals, input costs, machinery costs — Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
never-ending list. 

This government heard those concerns and acted on them. In a 
special sitting of this Legislative Assembly last December, we 
heard reports and presentations from producers and agricultural 
representatives from across this province. This special session 
resulted in eventual added dollars from the federal government 
and from this coalition provincial government to help our rural 
citizens adjust to market and transportation changes, and to ease 
what has become an immense burden and stresser on many 
farm families. 
 
More issues were addressed in our last provincial budget, Mr. 
Speaker. The removal of the fuel tax rebate cap and property tax 
rebates will be given to rural residents who need much needed 
relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government . . . (inaudible) . . . and acted upon 
concerns of this province. Is this a case of solved, over and 
done with? Definitely not. Agriculture is a never-ending, never 
. . . ever changing — sorry, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture is an 
ever-changing industry. Talking to producers, researchers and 
development, diversification, and value added are all 
commitments of this government in this term of office and into 
our next, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, huge challenges still face our province — 
transportation issues, municipal concerns, health care, and 
education. This government is committed to listening to the 
people of Saskatchewan and acting on their concerns. 
 
The round-table discussions currently being held with the 
municipalities is a very good example of public and stakeholder 
input into our direction and our policy. Also the Fyke 
commission that was recently announced by our Premier will do 
a full-scale review into our health system. We are listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan and we will act on their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I first heard this motion I couldn’t believe it. 
A motion of non-confidence from an opposition that has 
demanded extra financial expenditures from this government in 
the last three months totalling well over $1.4 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spend, spend, spend and while you’re at it, cut the 
taxes. And in your spare time, privatize and sell off everything 
that the people in Saskatchewan have worked for 90 years to 
build. That is all we’ve heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, non-confidence suggests a government that hears 
nothing and does nothing. This government listens and acts on 
citizens’ concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, we have much more to do 
in the next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the opposition member’s 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of 
all, I wish to join with, I’m sure, all of my colleagues in 
extending my congratulations to Yogi Huyghebaert on his 
magnificent win yesterday and say that I am sure that he, like 
all members and like myself, entered public life in the hope that 
he would be able to make a contribution to the building of his 
community and his province. That is why we all go into public 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And whether the tack we take, whether the stance we take, 
whether the work we do in fact aids in the growth and 
development of this province and of its people is something that 
we must leave to history. But I wish to say that I am confident 
that what this coalition is doing is working for the benefit of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — We know there are serious challenges, 
Mr. Speaker. First of all we have the challenge of maintaining a 
decent level of quality public services in roads, in education, in 
health care. We know that we have a serious challenge in 
maintaining a competitive tax rate, particularly in view of our 
position in Canada being next door to the lowest tax jurisdiction 
in Canada. 
 
We know that we cannot afford to have a tax rate seriously out 
of whack with that of our neighbours. We know that we need 
opportunities for our young people to end the migration of our 
young people seeking opportunities elsewhere. And we know 
we need to end the marginalization of our Aboriginal people, 
which has been a blight on this province from its earliest days. 
 
How you accomplish all of those goals at the same time is 
frankly not easy, whether one comes from a right or left 
perspective. How one maintains a good level of public services 
and a competitive tax rate is frankly not easy to see at first 
blush. 
 
But I would encourage hon. members opposite not to turn this 
into a shallow and simplistic debate in which they promise that 
they can solve all the problems in highways and health care 
while dropping the province’s tax level to nothing. We know 
that does not make sense. 
 
We need to rejuvenate this province. We need to practise the 
politics of inclusion, the politics which brings us together as a 
province and as a people — rural and urban, north and south, 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal. 
 
Well we had a by-election last night. And may I say, I think we 
had an excellent Liberal candidate, and the results are such as to 
cause some serious soul-searching in our party. 
 
We need to reconnect with rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan has to know that this party and this government 
is committed to rural Saskatchewan and its future and to the 
maintenance of good public services for our rural areas. Yes, 
there is a message in the results last night, and I must say for 
myself and my party and this government, we are committed to 
reconnecting with rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But may I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one by-election is not the 
whole story. Hon. members may recall that I myself was elected 
in a by-election. And I remember particularly the hon. member 
from Kindersley working in that by-election. 
 
Now in that by-election the hon. member for Kindersley led his 
party — the Conservative Party at that time; that was the label it 
went under at that time — and I must say they ran a wonderful 

campaign. They spent I think twice the amount of money I 
spent, they worked very hard, and they got 400 votes — and 
they got 400 votes. So they spent a lot of money, they worked 
hard, they got 400 votes. 
 
And I must say on the night of that by-election, if anyone had 
predicted that a rejuvenated and reconstituted Conservative 
Party would come close to winning the province in three years 
time, I’m sure they would have been told they were crazy. In 
point of fact that’s what happened. 
 
I give that example to the hon. member for Kindersley to point 
out that one disappointing by-election result is not the whole 
ball game — if it was, he wouldn’t be here. 
 
But Churchill’s famous observation of a day being a lifetime in 
politics was certainly born out by the by-election which elected 
me and the by-election which indicated that the Conservative 
Party — no matter how much money they spent — could go 
nowhere. 
 
And I have to . . . I say this not to be critical. I say it, I say it as 
a matter of humility that, as I say, anyone looking at the North 
Battleford by-election results would have said it was over. And 
yet in a few months later the Conservative Party managed to 
reinvent itself and is now . . . that has led to the magnificent 
result that they achieved last night. And I congratulate them on 
that. 
 
Well what is the purpose of the coalition government? I say we 
know, we know we have some serious challenges in this 
province. We know the maintaining of the province’s highways, 
our education system, our health system — this is a challenge. 
We know and we have moved to bring down our income tax 
level to one competitive with the province of Alberta. 
 
These are not easy things to do, but this government is 
committed to the task and is working hard on it. And that is 
why I say this province needs stability. Election after election 
after election, throwing governments out — is this the way that 
we can address the serious problems of our province? 
 
Now the hon. member for Canora-Pelly said that, oh this 
coalition was a dead-of-night agreement. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think we have to look at the history. The hon. 
member for Canora-Pelly ran for election as a Liberal. He then, 
shortly after his election, participated in dumping its leader. He 
then ran to replace her and be the leader. And then when he was 
defeated as leader, he ran off . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now the 
hon. member for North Battleford has the floor in this debate. I 
ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member to make his 
presentation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — So then he joined the Tories. Now he 
says that he’s worried, he’s worried that I betrayed the Liberal 
Party. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look across the way, I have 
to say I’m getting pretty tired of being lectured about political 
loyalty by a bunch of people who have no more sense of 
political loyalty and no more respect for political loyalty than 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

an alley cat has for marriage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I realize I have . . . I realize that there are 
some new developments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member from 
North Battleford . . . Order. The hon. member for Indian 
Head-Milestone will please come to order. Order! 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — I realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those 
of us who maintain party labels that have a long and historic 
tradition maybe don’t understand some of the current trends in 
our politics when we have people who take the attitude that 
whether they are called PC (Progressive Conservative) or Tory 
or Reform or Alliance or Saskatchewan Party, really doesn’t 
matter; it’s kind of all the same thing and probably another 
name tomorrow. And maybe that’s for the best. 
 
They tell me that the realignment of our national politics will 
benefit this country. That may be the case, Mr. Speaker. But I 
. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mean this is really quite amazing. I 
see before me catcalls from people who dumped their Liberal 
leader, dumped their party, wanted to run for the Liberal 
leadership, and when they couldn’t, they left the party. And 
now they’re worried about my loyalty to the Liberal Party. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I just don’t understand it. 
 
But I want to say, I’m committed to the same things I was in the 
by-election. I’m committed to North Battleford. I am committed 
to the improvement of our highway system. I am committed to 
the building of our community. I am committed to a 
competitive tax rate that will not drive our young people west. 
 
I’m committed to bringing Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
people together in this society. I am committed . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Clearly there is a great many 
members who wish to get into this debate. I just wish to remind 
you that all hon. members have an opportunity, but for the 
moment the hon. member for North Battleford has the floor, 
and I ask that members respect his right to make a speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I 
want you to know that I understand that if you throw a stone in 
the dark and a coyote yowls, you’ve probably hit the coyote. 
 
Now I want to say that I’m still committed to the principles that 
led me into public life — the building of my community and the 
building of this province. And I believe that the stability offered 
by the coalition government is still the best way to proceed. 
 
As we look at our health care system, the first serious look at 
our health care system since it was founded now nearly 40 years 
ago, how do we modernize our health care and make it 
sustainable and viable into the 21st century? 
 
How do we rebuild a highway system, which frankly, was built 
decades ago using a system, the TMS (thin membrane surface) 
system, that was not regulation in other provinces and is simply 

not able to cope with the heavy grain traffic of the new grain 
handling system. 
 
This is a challenge. It’s a serious challenge. And frankly, the 
results of last night shows that we haven’t done a good enough 
job connecting with the people of rural Saskatchewan and 
telling them that this government cares about them and their 
future and is committed to the maintaining of high quality 
services for them. We have to do that. 
 
If I thought that defeating this government and throwing out the 
government, having an election and possibly, as my friends 
across the way would hope, electing a government which is 
narrow and mean-spirited, if I thought that could benefit the 
province, I would do it. But I do not believe that that is the way 
to build this province. 
 
I know that the challenges before us are difficult, and I also 
know that it would be much easier to be in opposition now, 
because when one is in opposition it’s quite simple to double 
spend and halve taxes and then the math still comes out. That’s 
possible in opposition. Unfortunately in government it’s far 
more difficult to square that circle. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m committed to that 
job. And I’m committed to the principles which initially 
brought me to the Liberal Party and which initially brought me 
to public life. And that is why I’ll be voting against this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:36 p.m. until 3:49 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Eagles Wall Bakken 
Bjornerud D’Autremont McMorris 
Weekes Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Stewart Kwiatkowski 
 

Nays — 30 
 
Romanow Hagel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Melenchuk 
Cline Atkinson Goulet 
Lautermilch Thomson Lorje 
Serby Belanger Nilson 
Crofford Hillson Kowalsky 
Sonntag Hamilton Prebble 
Jones Higgins Yates 
Harper Axworthy Junor 
Kasperski Wartman Addley 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Members, please 
come to order. Order, order. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Tabling of Information regarding Gold Eagle Casino 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
leave to move a motion related to the tabling of documents for 
information regarding the Gold Eagle Casino and the motion 
would read: 
 

That this Assembly direct the member of the Legislative 
Assembly from Carrot River Valley to officially table the 
information regarding the Gold Eagle Casino referred to in 
question period of June 27, 2000. 
 

I ask leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Move to Government Business 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to move to 
government business. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, members 
on both sides of the House will come to order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 59 — The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill 59, The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2000 
represents anything that is wrong with this coalition 
government. 
 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
stand in this House today and continue to speak out against this 
Bill, as many of my colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party have 
done for a number of weeks — not only to speak out against 
Bill 59, but continue to inform the public of the two 
consequences of the Bill and correct the many 
misrepresentations and false statements made by the Minister of 
Labour and outline the real reasons the NDP is so desperate to 
pass Bill 59. 
 
The news release on March 14 announcing the amendments to 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992, tries to 
highlight conditions in the construction industry that does not 

really exist. The news release reads: 
 

The amendments will bring stability for the construction 
industry, reducing the tensions within the industry. 

 
The construction industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has enjoyed 
labour peace for over 18 years. Instability and tension in the 
construction industry is something contrived by the NDP spin 
doctors to justify these amendments. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of these misstatements the minister 
has made or government documents that suggest the wages in 
the industry are in decline — not accurate. The . . . (inaudible) 
. . . wage survey and the federal wage represents . . . schedule 
represents an average of wages paid across the industry. Wages 
being paid are fair and competitive. 
 
The NDP government leaves the impression that wages need to 
be addressed in order to attract new people to the industry. The 
government also feels that a stronger union sector will ensure 
that wages are addressed in a way that will attract new people to 
the industry. Nothing is further from the truth, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Comparisons between union and open shop entry level wages 
rates indicates that union wages for level entry positions are at 
least $2 an hour lower than the open shop rates before union 
dues are deducted — $2 an hour lower. 
 
Young people struggling with starting in a trade are up against 
substantial joining fees and union fees as much as 12 to $1,800 
a year, will actively consider their options in the open shop 
sector. This clearly contradicts the notion that unions offer a 
better way for young people to enter the trades, and 
demonstrates a very real road block faced by the trade unions. 
Government intervention to attempt to address the unions’ 
problems in this area will be a disaster. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government leaves the impression that 
safety is addressed by . . . through a union-only site. Well the 
Saskatchewan Construction Safety Association has trained over 
12,000 people in the years ’94 to ’99. It is clear that safety is a 
priority in the workplace for open shop sectors as well as union 
sites. 
 
The government would also like us to think that so-called 
double breasted companies are in conflict of interest position if 
they are allowed to be involved in collective bargaining. The 
Queen’s Bench decision and the subsequent Court of Appeal 
ruling clearly indicates that this argument has no merit. The 
proposed amendments are seen as means of circumventing the 
judge’s decision and rewriting that to fit the argument. 
 
Another misconception, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that union 
pensions are best for workers. Comparisons of costs for open 
shop and union plans again clearly show the fallacy in this 
statement. 
 
Open shop workers enjoy the participation of the employers and 
the self-directed RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plan), 
with the employer matching contributions up to 3 per cent of a 
worker’s gross pay. Union plans are not worker-directed and 
carry huge administrative costs that adversely affect the final 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

benefit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the intent of the amendments is to 
promote building trade unions, experience has proved that this 
will not occur. The CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) was a failure, and efforts by other NDP 
governments in Ontario and British Columbia were also 
unsuccessful. 
 
Forcing all contractors to abide by union agreement will only 
push up the cost of construction in Saskatchewan. And with 
Saskatchewan’s current economy and the global 
competitiveness, the contemplated amendments will further 
damage Saskatchewan’s fragile economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many projects are not proceeding because 
the return on investment is not great enough for investors. By 
further increasing costs there is a chance that even projects 
currently being contemplated will not proceed. 
 
The major long-term contracts who have significantly 
contributed to the development of Saskatchewan’s economy 
will be forced to pull out of the province if they cannot compete 
and their places will not be taken by union contractors, but by 
open-shop contractors who will move in from other provinces 
free of any union obligations. 
 
The current coalition government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would 
be wise to remember the damage caused by restrictive 
legislation introduced by the NDP government in Ontario. 
Several corporate offices relocated out of the province, and 
many contractors pulled out of the province. There were no 
gains made by the building and trades in Ontario during the 
tenure of the Rae government. 
 
When the PCs came back into power the restrictive legislation 
was revoked, the economy of the province started to blossom 
again, and many of the corporate offices and contracts have 
returned. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in British Columbia the unionized 
marketplace has dwindled to an all-time low. And because of 
the NDP’s anti-business policy, investor business confidence in 
the province has significantly diminished. As a result, the 
majority of the major unionized general contractors have been 
forced out of their province and open-shop contractors have 
taken their place. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, several First Nation companies 
which have established joint ventures and alliances with major 
contractors, will be put at a very great disadvantage if this 
legislation is invoked. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the passing of this Bill the coalition 
will clearly have a new partner and a whole new focus. The 
partner will be the trade unions, and the focus will be the 
agenda of the trade unions to increase their presence in 
Saskatchewan regardless of the wishes of the workers in the 
sector. 
 
Workers’ rights . . . workers’ Charter rights to freedom of 

choice and freedom of association will be violated with the 
imposition of collective agreements on workers, while denying 
them the right to vote on the matter. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is nothing but forced unionization. 
The minister tries to hide behind a statement that the companies 
are unionized, not the workers. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
workers, even though they’re not unionized, will have union 
dues deducted from their cheques, and worse yet, they will not 
even be able to participate in union business because they aren’t 
an official member. 
 
And of course in the construction industry it’s seasonal . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the Government 
House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — With leave, to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly, a friend and a constituent 
— Phyllis Mews from the constituency of Elphinstone who is a 
regular visitor here to the Assembly. And I would like all 
members to join with me in welcoming Phyllis here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act, 2000 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, this Bill is nothing but forced unionization. Again the 
minister tries to hide behind the statement that the company is 
unionized, not the worker. But unfortunately the employer will 
have to deduct union dues from that worker, and the worker 
will not be able to participate in union business even though 
they’re paying the dues. 
 
And of course in the construction industry it’s very seasonable 
— seasonal work. And when they are laid off and rehired in the 
springtime, and when there’s new work, they will be forced to 
join a union. And again forced unionization comes to the front. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the government will argue that this 
legislation will only affect those companies currently with 
spinoffs, it will actually go much deeper than that. The way 
several of the province-wide collective bargaining agreements 
are written, subcontractors are required to operate under union 
rules and pay union benefits. One of the province-wide 
contractors even requires subcontractors to purchase supplies 
from union only shops, severely limiting the competitiveness. 
 
In other words, the changes made in this Bill will affect many, 
many smaller construction companies throughout the province 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

who do construction work for the larger companies that the 
government says it has targeted. In reality, the effects of this 
will be far more wide reaching. In other words, the so-called 
mom-and-pop operations will be affected by this forced 
unionization as well. 
 
Another aspect of this Bill is the Labour Relations Board will 
need a second Vice-Chair. Well we ask why? Well it’s only . . . 
the Chair will only be there to force unionization down 
workers’ throats. 
 
Another part of this Bill is, not only the workers don’t have a 
secret ballot when it comes time to join a union, but they’re not 
even going to be allowed under the present conditions of 
signing a certification card. They will be forced to join a union 
without a vote, without any consideration to their concerns — 
let alone freedom of speech. There’s no opportunity for the 
employer to discuss this with the workers. The workers don’t 
even have an opportunity to discuss this with the union. They 
will be forced to be unionized. 
 
The question has to be asked, why in the last 20 years has the 
spin-off companies not been unionized? Even with all the 
advantages that the union has, they have been unable to certify 
these companies. Why? Because the workers choose not to 
belong to a union. 
 
The construction companies of Saskatchewan are productive 
builders in this province, job creators, taxpayers, employers. 
This NDP-Liberal coalition view this valuable sector with 
distrust and contempt. And big brother, the NDP, feel they must 
watch over the shoulder of these construction companies. 
 
I’d like to quote from a letter sent to the Premier from the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth. The letter reads 
in part: 
 

This letter is written on behalf of the recently formed 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth, which 
represents the majority of businesses from across the 
province. Our main focus (Mr. Deputy Speaker) is the 
development of labour policies that will help foster, rather 
than hinder . . . growth. 
 

And I’d like to read for the record the members of the 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth. The members 
include: the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
North Saskatoon Business Association, Prairie Implement 
Manufacturers Association, Regina Chamber of Commerce, 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Saskatchewan 
Construction Association, Saskatoon and District Chamber of 
Commerce, Lloydminster Chamber of Commerce, Estevan 
Chamber of Commerce, Moose Jaw Construction Association, 
Prince Albert Construction Association, Regina Construction 
Association, Saskatoon Construction Association. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also includes: Road Builders and Heavy 
Construction Association, Lloydminster Construction 
Association, Electrical Contractors Association, General 
Contractors Association, Mechanical Contractors Association, 
Merit Contractors Association, Saskatchewan Masonry 
Institute, Saskatchewan Drywall Association, Saskatchewan 
Steel Fabricators and Erectors Association, Saskatchewan 

Construction Labour Relations Council, Saskatchewan 
Professional Painting Contractors, Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council, and last but not least, the Canadian Restaurant and 
Foodservices Association. 
 
But no, the government will not listen to these people. It goes 
on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

This Act sends a very negative message to the business 
community in and outside Saskatchewan, and suggests the 
Coalition government does not understand the impact of 
overzealous labour legislation on the economy, nor that 
they are prepared to listen to the concerns of the business 
community. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

The Minister of Labour has stated that the Act does not 
require all construction companies to become unionized 
nor does it require contractors to hire unionized 
sub-contractors. (It says) we would suggest that your 
government revisit both of these points. 
 
While there are no provisions in the proposed legislation 
that forces anyone to join a union, the impact of this 
legislation on employees of companies caught in the 
legislation will essentially force them to pay union dues 
and ultimately once laid off will force (them) into a union. 

 
Forced unionization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Further, essentially every collective agreement in the 
province has subcontracting conditions, which make it 
illegal for (a) unionized (company) to hire non-unionized 
sub-contractors. Contractors caught by the new legislation 
will be forced to abide by the terms of these agreements. 
(This) provisions will ensure the proposed legislation will 
far transcend the “big” construction companies and impact 
the mom and pop businesses operating all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The letter goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The Alliance is also concerned that this Act will impact the 
employment of Aboriginal people in this province. There is 
nothing in the legislation that speaks to the First Nations 
joint ventures, which will be dramatically affected if one of 
the partners in the joint venture is forced into unionization. 
There is absolutely no evidence to support your 
government’s assurances that the unions have agreements 
in place with the First Nations. 
 
Despite (Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on to say) the 
Minister of Labour’s assurances, we do not believe this Act 
will bring Saskatchewan into line with all other provinces. 
We have asked the Minister of Labour to direct her staff to 
review the legislation in Ontario, New Brunswick, and 
Alberta, and the construction agreement in Manitoba, 
where they will find completely different provisions. For 
instance, in Alberta, section 45 (3) of the Labour Relations 
Code prohibits a spin off application being filed against an 
employer engaged in the construction industry. Also in 
Alberta, the power of the Labour Relations Board are 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

limited in section 190 (3) and prevents the Board from 
declaring the common employer in the construction 
industry if the company does not employ employees that 
perform work of the kind performed by the applicant trade 
union. 

 
I’d also like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, other areas 
where Saskatchewan law differs from many other provinces. In 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the employer must prove 
that it’s innocent in Saskatchewan concerns with labour 
problems. In British Columbia there’s no reverse onus clause, in 
Alberta, no reverse onus clause, and also Alberta allows for a 
secret ballot if workers want to joint a union. 
 
Manitoba, no reverse onus clause and allowed to vote for 
certification. Ontario, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no reverse onus 
clause and also allowed to vote for certification. New 
Brunswick, no reverse onus clause. Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Nova Scotia, no reverse onus clause and allowed to vote for 
certification. Prince Edward Island, no reverse onus clause. 
Newfoundland, no reverse onus clause and allowed to vote for 
certification. 
 
The letter goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The fact is this legislation is not good for the business 
community. The provisions of the Act which repeal the 
section entitled “Rights of (the) Unionized Employer” 
essentially strips unionized employers of their democratic 
right to choose their own bargaining representative. 
Instead, CLR has been forced upon employers. This 
association is union-dominated and has been found by the 
courts to have violated the Canadian Charter of Rights, the 
Non Profit Corporation Act, the Construction Industry 
Industrial Relations Act, in addition to denial of natural 
justice. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the North Saskatoon Business Association 
has invited the Labour minister to debate with the 
Saskatchewan Party this Bill and she has refused. The 
Saskatchewan Alliance for Economic Growth has asked the 
Premier to sit down and discuss the Bill’s implications in this 
province. Again, he has refused. 
 
My colleague from Swift Current had brought forward a motion 
to hoist this Bill for six months, delay the Bill for six months 
while the people of Saskatchewan and the people involved in 
the construction industry has a chance to bring forward their 
concerns to this government, and again the government has said 
no, they will not. The Premier said there isn’t enough time in 
order to discuss this situation. Isn’t that a shame. He doesn’t 
have time to discuss this Bill before it’s passed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the union movement in Saskatchewan has 
had a long and important history. The Saskatchewan Party 
believes in the rights of workers in this province to join a union 
and believes union will continue to play an important part in our 
society. 
 
The question today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the behaviour of the 
coalition government and its reason for introducing this forced 
unionization Bill. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if it might have something to do 
with this — the fundraising schemes of the NDP. This is quite 
an incestuous little relationship the NDP has going with the 
unions. The NDP need more money from the unions; the unions 
need more money from the workers. 
 
So the NDP gives money to a union organizer to recommend 
forcing more workers into the union, so the unions can extract 
more money from the workers and the NDP can extract more 
money from the unions. What a cozy little arrangement. Except 
it completely ignores the wishes of 80 per cent of the 
construction workers who don’t belong to a union and don’t 
want to belong to a union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new legislation will force thousands of 
workers to join a union against their will. This Bill is unfair and 
undemocratic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there instability and tension in the 
construction . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. If I were to name all of the 
members that were speaking, I’m afraid we would completely 
lose quorum. So I ask all hon. members to simply allow the 
member for Redberry Lake to continue with his speech. Order, 
order, order! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I nearly forgot to point out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the results of the fundraising scheme — $300,000 
from the unions to the NDP Party; over $30,000 from 
construction unions to the NDP Party; and even $6,500 to the 
Minister of Labour’s own campaign fund. Thank you for 
allowing me to remember that small point. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question is, is there instability and 
tension in the construction industry? No. The only instability 
and tension that exists in this province is around the coalition 
government cabinet meetings and the NDP caucus meetings and 
the potential NDP leadership candidates’ teams waiting for their 
old and tired leader to step down. And the Liberals, considering 
their dismal performance after yesterday’s by-election, I think 
instability and tension will be the theme of your next 
convention. 
 
This coalition government is responsible for failing health care, 
deteriorating highways and roads, forced amalgamation, and 
now with Bill 59 — forced unionization. 
 
I ask this coalition government to put Saskatchewan and the 
people ahead of its own narrow interest and the Liberal cabinet 
minister’s support of the NDP to keep their cabinet positions 
and salaries, as well as the NDP Party’s fundraising schemes. 
 
Do the right thing. Withdraw Bill 59. Stop this forced 
unionization. Get back to basic democratic rights to 
construction workers. Allow them the right to make an informal 
decision through . . . an informed decision through a secret 
ballot — whether to be unionized or not. Withdraw this forced 
unionization Bill now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 
 
The Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the Hon. 
Minister of Justice to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to introduce to the Assembly, to my right, Susan Amrud, 
who’s director of legislative services branch in the Department 
of Justice; to my left, Tom Irvine, in the constitutional law 
branch; and behind me, Jane Lancaster, Q.C., the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, committees, and 
minister, welcome to your officials. 
 
With respect to Bill 63, we do have a number of questions that 
we would like to ask this afternoon. And in the course of 
consulting with different parties on this particular Bill, some 
have had fewer concerns than others. And some have 
characterized it as a major disappointment. Some, right in the 
legal community, have characterized this as a major 
disappointment. 
 
They question whether some of the major problems that exist 
with Legal Aid in our province and with the commission have 
indeed been addressed by the Bill. And so I do have a few 
questions, Minister. And I guess the first one would be more of 
a general question on behalf of those who have some concerns. 
And I think their concern can best be characterized by referring 
to those who fall somewhere in between but probably at the 
lower end of those who can easily afford their own counsel, and 
then still others who simply can’t. 
 
I think one individual characterized it as people who would be 
the working poor or perhaps those who are just outside or just 
fail to qualify for legal aid. Those restrictions haven’t . . . or 
those limits haven’t been changed at all. And I wonder if you 
can answer why that is. Because I know you would have had 
some significant input from people who made that request to 
the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question. The member’s right that the focus of legal aid is on 
those who have least resources and therefore least ability to hire 
lawyers of their own. He’s also right that as with so many 
programs designed to assist the most disadvantaged in our 
society, those who are above the most disadvantaged and not 
wealthy have sometimes quite a burden to . . . in order to 
provide for the services they need. 
 
In fact it’s the case that those who work but don’t have 
enormous resources are assisted by the Legal Aid program. And 
as an example . . . for example a single mother with two 
children who makes $1,200 a year would be assisted for 

example by the program. And indeed if she, just as an example, 
she earned more money than that in a month, she would still be 
assisted but would be expected to make some contribution to 
the Legal Aid fund as a result of receiving that legal assistance. 
 
So there is the availability for those who are, as the member 
described, working to receive assistance from the Legal Aid 
program. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. Nothing also in this Bill 
addressed the tariff, the Legal Aid tariff in the province of 
Saskatchewan and that of course is also a concern to some and I 
guess that would be my next question. Why did the department 
in drafting the Bill decide not to change the tariff for Legal 
Aid? And what in the Bill — I guess I’ll just ask two questions 
here, Minister, if I can — what in the Bill addresses the concern 
of people who see judges changing the . . . basically changing 
the tariff arbitrarily in certain cases? 
 
So those would be the two questions: one, why didn’t the Bill 
contemplate the tariff and a potential change; and two, what in 
the Bill would guard against people who aren’t elected, people 
who do not have the authority to expend taxpayers’ money, 
doing so from the bench? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. The member asked 
two questions — one dealing with the tariff for private lawyers 
doing Legal Aid work. And this is of interest in some smaller 
centres where it makes more sense to have private lawyers 
doing that work rather than have a full-time Legal Aid lawyer in 
that community. And also where other eventualities, such as a 
particular skill or the workload of those in Legal Aid make . . . 
ensure that it makes sense to hire outside lawyers. 
 
And he wondered why there was nothing in the Bill regarding 
changing the tariff. I should say that the Legal Aid Commission 
has been discussing this matter with lawyers, and I’m pleased to 
let the member know that as of October 1 this year that fee will 
increase to $60 an hour. And that the . . . that’s actually, in 
terms of rates across the country, I think a satisfactory rate. The 
range is from $51 an hour to $63 an hour in various provinces. 
So that will go to $60 an hour on October 1, 2000. 
 
(1630) 
 
In terms of, I think, the member’s other question regarding 
lawyers who are appointed, who are not Legal Aid lawyers but 
are appointed to provide legal services to clients and are 
originally appointed at the tariff rate, and the member asks why 
. . . what have we done here to ensure that judges who aren’t 
elected don’t make decisions about how much a lawyer should 
receive. 
 
And in fact, invariably — and I think the response to the 
member’s written question would indicate this some time ago 
— invariably the decision about how much that lawyer should 
be paid is made by court services in the Department of Justice 
in conjunction with the lawyer themselves. So not in fact made 
by a judge, but made by an official of the Department of Justice 
working in consultation with the lawyer who will take the case 
on. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, and I guess I’ll just . . . two 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

questions. The first one’s fairly quick. The $60 an hour rate that 
will be effective October 1 — is that for both research time and 
case work? That is — I can see an official nodding. Because 
now of course there’s a split; $45 I think is research and $55 
court time. So it’ll be $60 for both of those things? Okay, thank 
you. 
 
With respect to the latter question of the non-Legal Aid lawyers 
who are getting paid at a higher rate, at the higher hourly rate — 
I guess the fact that it’s going to be increasing to $60 October 1, 
perhaps it’s going to mitigate that. It’s probably going to cut 
that down in terms of that being as frequent an occurrence as it 
has been. 
 
But I guess I’d just like to pursue that a little bit. And it may not 
be related directly to the Bill, but the arrangements that’s made 
with the court services in the Department of Justice, how does 
that process work? Who is applying for the increased rate, and 
under whose authority, and under what legislative authority 
then does court services have to arbitrarily increase that rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question there, there are a number of ways in which this 
situation might arise, but likely the most common is where an 
accused feels in order to be properly represented, he or she 
needs a lawyer who’s not a Legal Aid lawyer and makes that 
claim. 
 
If the discussions between court services and the Department of 
Justice and that lawyer are not resolved — in other words they 
don’t come to some decision as to how much the lawyer should 
be paid, and generally the court services attempts to keep the 
private tariff, the fee for the non legal aid lawyer within the 
tariffed amount — but if that’s not possible, then a judge would 
look at both the complexity of the issue and indeed the financial 
implications. 
 
And while a judge would not normally dictate how much a 
lawyer should be paid, it would be possible for a judge to 
essentially stay the proceedings and with the view that the court 
services and the lawyer would discuss this matter again and 
hopefully come to a more satisfactory conclusion. 
 
So it’s a process of negotiation which the judge can assist in 
from time to time, but generally these matters are resolved 
effectively by the executive director of court services and the 
lawyer involved. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman of 
Committees, and members, I’ll move on but I would like to say 
this. That I think . . . and you’ve outlined quite clearly that it 
can happen. It can happen and it does happen that an elected 
individual then can effectively spend the money of the province 
of Saskatchewan without legislative authority to do that. 
 
And I think that should be a great concern. If it happened only 
once and amounted to only hundreds of dollars, and I know 
that’s not the case, but if that was the case that is not acceptable, 
I do not believe. Because we are all sent here by our 
constituents for that expressed duty, among others, but that 
prime among them I would say. 
 
And I think it’s absolutely unacceptable that at any time, any 

time in the province of Saskatchewan, someone who is 
unelected can effectively spend taxpayers’ dollars without the 
legislative authority to do so. They are not answering to the 
Legislative Assembly. They don’t answer to Public Accounts. 
They frankly don’t answer to the Department of Justice, 
obviously for very good reasons. And that would be a concern, 
a great concern, that we on this side of the House would have. 
 
Could you just very briefly explain, Minister, the removal of 
section 29(1) — the decision with respect to removing the 
choice of counsel for murder and high treason. The rationale 
quickly for the removal of section 29(1), please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me deal with the member’s last 
question first, then I’ll return to his comment because I think it 
deserves to be clarified a little. 
 
The original arrangement with the federal government over 
legal aid ended in 1996 with a new agreement which took away 
the federal government’s requirement that Legal Aid plans 
provide a counsel of choice for offences punishable by life in 
prison — basically murder and high treason. 
 
So originally that requirement was there because the federal 
government required it. Once the federal government took that 
requirement away, it was possible for the Legal Aid 
Commission and the Department of Justice to reconsider that 
issue. 
 
It is now the case that those offences are dealt with in the same 
way as any other offence for the purposes of providing legal 
aid. In other words, an appropriate lawyer will be sought within 
the Legal Aid Commission to defend the person in question. 
And of course that happens on a regular basis even for these 
more serious offences. 
 
So faced with the situation of sometimes very high legal bills as 
a result of a whole string of events for those kinds of penalties, 
and because we’re no longer required to provide the choice of 
counsel, the decision was made to treat every offence in the 
same way. 
 
I’d say with regards to the member’s first point that, in fact, 
judge’s do not set Legal Aid tariffs. They, under no 
circumstances, would do that. What they will do is assess 
whether or not the accused’s Charter right to a fair trial can be 
. . . or in order to ensure that that right to a fair trial is available 
to the accused, they will assess whether or not a higher tariff 
than that agreed to by court services, or discussed by court 
services and the lawyer in question, needs to be . . . whether the 
fee needs to be higher than that. 
 
If it does, in the court’s mind in order for the Charter right to a 
fair trial requires more intensive legal work at a higher rate, 
then they will order a stay of the proceedings so that the lawyer 
and court services can discuss the matter further. If there is no 
possibility . . . If an agreement is not reached, the proceedings 
will remain stayed and as a result that charge will not be 
pursued. So the judge does not specify how much a lawyer 
should be paid. 
 
And I would just say one other point here. I mean, judicial 
independence is an important price we pay to live in the kind of 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

society in which we live. Only in totalitarian states does 
anybody ever think it’s appropriate to interfere with judicial 
independence. And we surely do not want to move in that 
direction. It is awkward sometimes when judges make decisions 
which we don’t like. 
 
And we might, for example, easily agree that the Supreme 
Court of Canada in dealing with the Bill C-68, a reference, the 
firearms reference, was not acting in a way that we would have 
hoped. We plainly are disappointed by that decision. 
 
But there are other decisions which courts make which we fully 
agree with. There will be some that you agree with that I don’t 
agree with and vice versa. So I think it’s critically important 
that we regard judicial independence as a cornerstone of our 
democratic society, that we don’t try to tell judges what to do, 
and particularly that we don’t try to tell them what to do if we 
are not totally familiar with the case in question. 
 
And we will never be as familiar as the case in question as they 
will be, and neither will we hear the . . . in particular trial levels 
will we hear the evidence from both sides and be able to be in a 
position of interpreting what the appropriate decision is in that 
case. 
 
We can more easily at higher court levels — Court of Appeal 
and the Supreme Court of Canada, for example, or the federal 
Court of Appeal — read and hear the judgments . . . the 
arguments presented by lawyers in those cases, and we can 
assess perhaps whether or not we agree with the court. But I 
think it’s critically important that we maintain vigilance over 
judicial independence, even when judges are deciding things in 
a way in which we do not agree. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I don’t 
think you’re going to have an argument on this side of the 
House from your last point. I don’t think you’re going to have 
an argument about the absolute, the absolute requirement that 
the judicial branch of our government have that independence. 
 
But where I think you will find some disagreement then, from 
what I’m hearing, is — and depending how you want to 
characterize it here — what you’ve outlined as the process by 
which the tariff can be exceeded is still, in my books — and I 
guess we all have the right to be wrong — but I believe that 
what you’ve outlined is the delegation of the expenditure of tax 
dollars to the bench, to unelected people — be they from court 
services or the judge. 
 
And I think we ought to take the opportunity to take . . . to 
make . . . When we’re making legislative changes like we’re 
talking about here today, I think we ought to take the 
opportunity to address that because there is a great demarcation 
between the independence of the judicial branch of our 
government and the need for the sole authority to levy and 
expend tax dollars to be with those who are elected — that’s 
what this place is all about in my view. And in my view, I think 
what you’ve described is still the delegation of that authority to 
. . . (inaudible) . . . people. 
 
So you might want to comment on that again, and I’ll invite you 
to do that. But I’ll also ask another question so we can continue 
to make some progress. 

The other concern that I have, Minister, and that the members 
behind the bar would share as well, is that the change in the 
definition of solicitor in this Act seeming to lift the current 
restrictions on them being Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And I wonder, Minister, if you could explain that a little bit? 
There’s a great deal of concern out there. There’s a particular 
lawyer that some Saskatchewan lawyers refer to who has billed 
almost 10 per cent of the entire Legal Aid budget in a very 
celebrated case. And I think there is . . . or at least that’s the 
cost of that particular case, and I’m sure his bill is somewhere 
approximating that. And he’s clearly not from here. And I think 
there is great unease within the legal community that this Bill 
seems to further loosen the definition of solicitors under the 
particular Act to include people from Saskatchewan. 
 
And when they raise that concern, they point to other attendant 
issues — not the least of which is the request on behalf of 
lawyers to incorporate. And of course they’ve made that request 
for different reasons; one of them is financial reasons, some of 
them are bottom-line reasons. 
 
But they make a good case about the number of Saskatchewan 
lawyers who are leaving or planning to leave Saskatchewan, 
setting up shop in Alberta, with the full intent of continuing to 
practice here in the province of Saskatchewan. But they’re 
doing that for various tax reasons, and it’s part of their 
argument when they make a request to be incorporated as 
professionals. 
 
And so when you combine that fact with the provision in this 
Bill that changes the definition of solicitor to those so they 
don’t have to be ordinary residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they have some valid concerns, and I’d like, 
Minister, if you could address those please. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I’ll start by the first 
point the member was concerned about with regards to 
unelected officials setting Legal Aid tariffs for the private bar. 
 
The court services is a department within the Department of 
Justice, and therefore for the purposes of this discussion is 
essentially the Minister of Justice. And therefore the work done 
by court services in assessing and coming to agreement . . . 
assessing acceptable fee levels and coming to agreement on fee 
level is essentially then done by an elected official, because it’s 
done under the authority of the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well no, it’s done under the authority of the Minister of Justice 
and so therefore, I think, doesn’t meet your concern. 
 
With regards to removing ordinary residents in Saskatchewan 
as a requirement for using a solicitor for legal aid purposes, 
there are a number of points here. We have, as the member 
rightly pointed out, removed the choice of counsel so the issue 
of Fisher case, for example, will no longer arise. 
 
And there are issues — they’re two issues really; I suppose 
there are maybe three — one where to rise over in a situation, 
geographic situation like Lloydminster, for example, where it 
might very well be it wise . . . or it may just happen that a 
lawyer who lives in Alberta is chosen to represent an accused 



June 27, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

here in Saskatchewan obviously would have to be a member of 
the Saskatchewan bar or be admitted for the purposes of that 
trial. 
 
There may be, in some instances, conflicts which require a 
lawyer from outside of the province. And lastly, the agreement 
on internal trade requires us to be much more flexible with 
regards to professionals from other provinces operating here in 
the province. And I know the member will be supportive of 
freer trade within the provinces. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. We have no 
more questions on this Bill other than to restate the concerns 
that we’ve suggested already and to thank your officials for 
their attendance here today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, let me thank the 
officials for their assistance here today, and of course 
throughout the year, and move that we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. To the 
minister, could you with respect to Bill 50, I guess the question 
that I’d start with is: could you provide an example of the . . . 
could you provide a concrete example of the problems that this 
. . . that you hope to address through this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me thank the member for the 
question because I presume it wouldn’t make very much sense 
to propose legislation if there wasn’t a problem to be addressed. 
But he might argue that we’ve done that before and we might 
do it again. 
 
But the problem arises here because of conflicting 
interpretations of the deputy ministers’ and other officials’ 
powers. And so there are conflicting court . . . judicial 
interpretations of when the powers of the minister can be 
administered, carried out by someone else. 
 
So the purpose behind the Bill is to clarify that and ensure that 
the ministers’ responsibilities can effectively be carried out by 
members of the department and particularly by the deputy 
minister. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. That will be it for 
questioning on that. And I can point out to the committee 
members that since 51 is a consequential amendment Act, when 
we get to that point, there’ll be no further questions on that Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Interpretation Act 
Consequential Amendment Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 46 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Court of Appeal Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
The Chair: — Minister, same officials or do you have new 
officials coming in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, we will be joined by Andrea 
Seale who will sit on my right, from the Department of Justice. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees and Mr. 
Minister. With respect to Bill 80, could you explain the 
rationale for changing the ability of the cabinet basically, the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, to decrease the size of the 
court so that it will now be done by the Legislative Assembly? 
 
I don’t think individually or we as a caucus have any problem 
with that, but I’d be interested in the rationale for coming to that 
decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well in response to the member’s 
question, I can say that only Alberta and Ontario allow the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to increase the size of the court 
and no other province allows the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to decrease the size of the court in any province. 
 
And the Chief Justice raised a legitimate concern about judicial 
independence, of which we just discussed, and the appearance 
really that this provision would interfere with judicial 
independence, and so consequently that provision was 
eliminated. It’s probably been in place from the beginning of 
the Act, which would be about 85 years. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, maybe 
you could also outline why we would want to reserve for 
cabinet the power to increase the number of judges from the 
current nine. What circumstance would you see where nine 
wouldn’t be enough? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to that question, 
the department was attempting to respond to the concerns of the 
Chief Justice in regards to these provisions, and the Chief 
Justice did not raise an issue of concern about increasing the 
size of the court. The member probably knows that the court at 
the present time has a vacancy and it is not likely that that 
vacancy will be filled in the near future because the work of the 
court doesn’t seem to require it and certainly the Chief Justice 
does not ask for it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. On 
this particular Bill that would conclude the questions that I 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2000 

have, and once again I thank the minister for the answers and 
thank the officials for their resource as well. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member for Swift Current. 
 
Committee members, this Bill is in English and in French, is 28 
clauses and 19 pages long. 
 
 I’m going to simply remind members when we’re voting in 
English we’re also passing the French version. And after . . . I’ll 
do the first page and the last page by clause and the rest, can I 
do by page? That’s agreed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Legal Aid Amendment Act, 2000 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi d’inteprétation de 1995 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 50 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Interpretation Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Court of Appeal Act, 2000/ 
Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Mr. Thomson: —Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to 
move a motion concerning the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, I 
regretted that we were supposed to move an additional motion 
coming out of our report to the Assembly. The motion moved 
by myself, seconded by the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, is: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations have 
the authority to travel and hold meetings away from the 
seat of government in order that the fullest representations 
may be received without unduly inconveniencing those 
desiring to be heard. 

 
And I would so move, seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 


