





























































Hansard: May 16, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1229 
 May 16, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions today from citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
who would like to see the provincial and federal government 
take the initiative of reducing fuel tax by 10 cents a litre. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, from Melfort, and from the James Smith Reserve. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens with their continuing concern about the high 
price of fuel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort, even 
from Lacombe, Alberta. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present petitions 
regarding the fuel tax. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe the petition is signed by individuals 
from the community of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I also have a 
petition in regards to the high cost of fuel. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce the fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition regarding the high cost of fuel, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Kinistino, Saskatoon, Melfort, 
and Nipawin. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people concerned about the high price of fuel. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Swift 
Current, and a gentleman who apparently feels sorry for us, 
from Medicine Hat. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from signatures in 
Strasbourg, Unity, Bulyea, Duval, and a good many more from 
Strasbourg. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a 
petition regarding cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from citizens in the Strasbourg, Duval, 
Govan, and Bulyea area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to bring a petition to this House to stop 
municipal reserve account confiscation. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 
And it is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Paddockwood, Christopher Lake, and Candle Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of citizens concerned with poor cellular 
telephone service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular service in the districts of 
Strasbourg, Duval, Govan, and Bulyea. 

 
And the petitioners come from the communities of Strasbourg, 
Silton, Duval, Govan, Cymric, and numerous other 
communities. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition regarding the high price of fuel. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And the petitions are signed by the good citizens from the 
towns of Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on 

the following matters: 
 

To halt plans to proceed with the amalgamation of 
municipalities; 
 
To provide funding for the Swift Current Regional 
Hospital; 
 
To cause the federal and provincial governments to reduce 
fuel taxes; 
 
To abandon plans to confiscate municipal reserve 
accounts; and 
 
To ensure reliable cellular service to Watson, 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Wartman, as Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills presents the second report of the 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 
Bill No. 301 - The Mennonite Central Committee 

Saskatchewan Act 
 
Bill No. 302 - The Renaming of The Regina Golf Club 

Act 
 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 

Dioceses Reorganization Act 
 

And further that the fees respecting Bills 301 and 303 be 
remitted to the petitioners less the cost of printing. 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here regarding 
the . . . it’s Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of The Regina Golf 
Club Act. And I’m a little confused as to which step I’m 
supposed to be taking here at this moment. I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . To read this Bill in? 
Thank you. 
 

That the committee report the Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, please. I believe 
the member would wish to move a concurrence motion at this 
time. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to the 
Clerk that I have the correct motion here; moved by myself, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in and that the 
said Bills be accordingly referred to the Committee of the 
Whole by leave of the Assembly later this day. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to welcome in the east gallery 37 
students, grade 8 students, from the Rosetown Central High 
School. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by three teachers: 
Miles Bennett, Melody Newman, and Val Honekey. I hope I’ve 
pronounced that last name correctly, and one chaperone Mr. 
Freistadt. 
 
It’s a great pleasure to have a grade 8 class from my riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar here. They are seeing some sights in Regina. 
They are here to observe the proceedings of the legislature and I 
have an opportunity to meet with them after question period. 
I’m looking forward to it. 
 
Would all members of the Legislative Assembly welcome the 
grade 8 class from Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got the pleasure today of having some guests 
from the Midwest legislatures in the United States. And 
yesterday of course I was very pleased to be at the ceremony 
presided by yourself, Mr. Speaker, where the Saskatchewan 
branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
affiliated with and signed an affiliation agreement with the 
Midwest senators and legislators and by doing that we have 
formalized a relationship with them. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, the visiting members I want to 
report are having a busy day. They got up prior to 8 o’clock 
because they had to be in House leaders at 8, then went to see 
the cabinet for a while — cabinet meeting — had a bit of a 
coffee break, went to private members’ Bills in a committee 
meeting; went to see how the coalition caucus operates, to this 
afternoon, they’re going . . . after question period they’re going 
to be going to Moose Jaw, maybe get into the pilot’s seat for a 
little while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want the legislature once again to welcome Senator — and 
if they could stand please — Senator DiAnna Schimek from 
Lincoln, Nebraska; Senator Paul Feleciano from Wichita, 
Kansas; and Senator Rick Wardner from Dickinson, North 
Dakota. And these are the three stalwart ones. Senator Bob 
Drake has left for Winnipeg and back home earlier today. So 
welcome again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all colleagues in 
the Assembly seated in the west gallery, 58 grade 4 students 
from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in the constituency of 
Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker and colleagues, our guests in the gallery have been 
part of a wonderful adventure — first to gather information and 

material for a time capsule and had some of their fellow 
students come earlier to put that into the dome area of the 
legislature. So following the question period today, I’ll meet 
with them and we’ll have an opportunity to go up and look at 
the placement of the time capsule and have a chance to visit. 
 
Saint Marguerite is partnered with SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) on also helping to update 
and maintain material on a web site on the history of the 
legislature and the progress on the work that’s being done to 
restore this wonderful capital of ours. So we do have an 
exciting afternoon planned. 
 
The students today are accompanied by Ms. Porter — their 
teachers, Ms. Porter, Ms. Davies, and Ms. Faber. I ask all 
members to join me in a warm welcome for the students from 
St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
also my pleasure today to introduce to you and to my colleagues 
in the legislature, through you, a group of 22 grade 6 students 
from Dieppe School in my constituency of Regina Sherwood, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve been here for a visit. We’ve had a chance to have a 
short visit with them already and picture taking. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Wally 
Sadowsky. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say, like my 
colleague from Regina Dewdney, would also like to pass along 
hello to Mr. Sadowsky, and please join with me in welcoming 
all my students from Dieppe School here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you two guests who are joining us in your gallery 
today. We have with us Father Ken Miller who is the Vicar 
General of the archdiocese, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of 
Regina. Father Ken if you could just stand up. Thank you. And 
then accompanying him is Maurice Rieder who is the business 
manager for — and my favourite word — Archiepiscopal 
Corporation of Regina. If you’d join with me in welcoming our 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome Father 
Miller who is representing the Roman Catholic diocese of 
Saskatchewan here today. As well as welcoming Mr. Maurice 
Rieder. 
 
In addition, I would like to take the opportunity to welcome to 
the proceedings today members of the Mennonite Central 
Committee, and they are seated just behind Father Miller. 
 
And so if the Assembly would join me in welcoming these fine 
people today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
join with my colleagues in welcoming Father Ken Miller. He 
may not remember, but I’m one of his parishioners in Holy 
Trinity. I say this fondly, Father, as our children go to school at 
St. Mary and we try to attend Holy Trinity when we can. But 
welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
great pleasure to introduce to you two people seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery who are living representatives of the 
Mennonite Central Committee mission statement. I would like 
to introduce to you the Chair, Lucille Wall, from Swift Current 
and the executive director, Bruno Baerg, from Saskatoon. 
 
Both these people work to demonstrate God’s love; to serve as a 
channel of interchange by building relationships that are 
mutually transformative; and they work for peace, justice, and 
dignity of all people. I would ask all members of the House to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to join with 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast in welcoming the 
representatives from the Mennonite Central Committee, 
especially its Chairperson, Lucille Wall, who is from Swift 
Current and my constituency. And we also go to the same 
church. And before I started taking on other duties, we ushered 
together for a while. But I’d just like to join with the hon. 
member in welcoming Lucille here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Hon. members, the Speaker also has 
someone special in his gallery today and I would ask that you 
allow me to introduce to you and welcome my nephew, Blain 
Van Melle. Blain is a student, he’s studying agricultural 
economics. He’s here to see the proceedings and I ask you to 
welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Junior Debating Championship 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, and to the attention of this 
Assembly a significant event that occurred in my constituency 
in the town of Edam and the Edam community last Thursday, 
Friday, and Saturday. 
 
The event was the National Junior Debating Championship. 
There were 48 young debaters all between the approximate ages 
of 13 to 16. These young people represented Canada from 
British Columbia to Quebec, from the Maritimes to the 
Northwest Territories. 
 
The level of debate was excellent and an example from which a 
politician like myself could learn. The political teams were 
outstanding representatives of their province and demonstrated 

excellent examples of enthusiasm, and commitment, and the 
maturity of our future adult citizens. 
 
Winners were judged from each province as well as overall 
individual and team debaters. And I was particularly proud of 
the Saskatchewan team and their performance. Actually just to 
be selected for this competition was in fact to be a winner. 
 
I would like to compliment the community of Edam, the local 
high school and staff, the Turtleford School Division, and many 
citizens that volunteered as hosts, billets, organizers. And a 
particular commendation must go to Mr. Byron Merkosky for 
spearheading this national event. 
 
And in a word, to Edam and community, well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Paragon Awards 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my pleasure to attend this past Saturday evening here in 
Regina the first annual Paragon Awards of the Regina Chamber 
of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of these awards are to recognize 
business excellence in Regina and area. And congratulations, 
Mr. Speaker, should go out to the Paragon Awards committee 
of the Regina Chamber of Commerce, and their Chair, Barbara 
De La Sablonniere and her committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were seven awards that were handed out on 
Saturday night, and I’ll just read through them very quickly in 
the time that I have, and the sponsors. 
 
Mr. Speaker the Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award, 
sponsored by Scotia McLeod went to Ecol Laser Services; the 
Community Involvement Award, sponsored by CTV (Canadian 
Television Network Limited) Regina, went to the Cathedral 
Village Free House; the Marketing and Promotion Achievement 
Award, sponsored by the Business Development Bank of 
Canada, went to Rainbow Cinemas in the city; the Export 
Achievement Award, sponsored by SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) went to Off the Wall Productions; 
the Customer Service Excellence Awards, sponsored by 
Advantage Sign and Display Systems, went to the Regina 
Travelodge South; The New Business Venture of the Year, 
sponsored by the Regina Regional Economic Development 
Authority, went to Allstar Technologies Incorporated; and the 
Business of the Year, Mr. Speaker, sponsored by the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce, went to Bennett Dunlop Ford. 
 
Congratulations from all of us to these winners and the chamber 
on the first annual awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Big River Regional Health Care Centre Opens 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not always that I 
get to stand in this Assembly today and give credit to a member 
opposite but I will attempt to now. 
 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure I stand today to give credit to the 
Minister of Health on allowing the opening of the Regional Health 
Care Centre in Big River. Yesterday my wife and I, along with the 
minister of mines from Prince Albert, attended the grand opening. 
Although it is not classified as a hospital, it is a health centre 
which offers much to health care in and around the Big River area. 
 
I also want to extend congratulations to the people in and around 
Big River area for coming together and help making this dream 
come true. Also the staff of this new regional health care centre are 
to be commended for their commitment to this project as well. 
Their visions, their goals, and their objectives have been realized. 
And they are the ones who should be recognized here today. It 
is important to remember that accessibility is one of the five 
guiding principles of health care as listed under the Canada 
Health Act, something that we are all entitled to. 
 
As we look forward to the future we must work to build a place 
in which our children can also work and prosper in, where they 
can see hope and opportunity and optimism. To the residents of 
Big River and area, sincere congratulations are in order on a job 
well done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure today in joining the member from 
Spiritwood in congratulating the Minister of Health for a job 
well done. As he indicated we joined the Parkland Health 
District and the town of Big River, there were surrounding RMs 
(rural municipalities), people from those municipalities, and we 
gathered to celebrate the opening of an integrated health care 
facility. 
 
And I think that really does demonstrate what can happen when 
communities work together with their local governments, the 
district health board, and the province of Saskatchewan. That 
group raised in the neighbourhood of $1 million towards a $3 
million integrated facility that includes new acute care beds, the 
nursing home, a trauma centre, and other services. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, congratulate all of the people in the Big 
River district for working together to deliver to themselves a 
service for themselves that I think will go a long way in terms 
of the stability and the health of what is a very, very vibrant 
logging and farming community. So I congratulate them all and 
I know the member from Spiritwood will ensure that the folks 
are well looked after during his tenure as the MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) for that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today in recognition of North American 
Occupational Safety and Health Week. Mr. Speaker, this year’s 
theme is “Work Safely for a Healthy Future,” and this is a very 
important message that all people in the workplace should 
adhere to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was not too long ago that we recognized all 
those workers who have lost their lives or have been seriously 

injured on the job, and it is all of our responsibility to ensure 
that the workplace is as safe as possible. 
 
Safety affects all people of all ages. And as the saying goes, Mr. 
Speaker, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. If all 
the workers just took a few minutes to familiarize themselves 
with their surrounding and all the work-related hazards, many 
injuries could be prevented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend all those involved with 
raising safety awareness and hope that all workplaces in our 
province and across Canada remain as safe as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

By-election in Newfoundland 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in 
Newfoundland the NDP (New Democratic Party) came within a 
fraction of winning the by-election in St. John’s West. Greg 
Malone, actor and committed social activist, took the NDP from 
15 per cent of the popular vote in the last federal election to 
over 35 per cent in last night’s by-election. 
 
Since the beginning of the current session, the Reform Party, 
turned to a party referred to by the initials CRAAP (Canadian 
reform and alliance party), turned Canadian Alliance, have 
hammered the federal government on the HRDC (Human 
Resources Development Canada) scandal while Alexa 
McDonough and the NDP have continuously fought for issues 
most important to Canadians — jobs, the economy, and in 
particular health care. 
 
The results last night spoke volumes. When you speak up for 
ordinary Canadians, ordinary Canadians will trust you with 
their vote. 
 
Last night also shed some light on other political parties. Joe 
Clark’s Tories held on for a win in a seat that has been solidly 
Tory since Newfoundland joined Confederation. And the 
Reform Canadian Alliance, they finished with a resounding 4 
per cent of the popular vote. So much for their attempts to 
revamp themselves as the new alternative to the Liberals. 
 
The Alliance finished only 1,000 votes ahead of the candidate 
for the Extreme Wrestling Party, who received 1 per cent of the 
vote. 
 
I’d like to ask the members opposite, who consider themselves 
to be an alliance of right-wingers, which national party do they 
identify with? You say you aren’t Tories, so we won’t even 
ponder that question. Are you supporters of the Canadian 
Alliance? Your party has been called the prototype . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Letters of Concern about Pornography 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
rising today in this Assembly in front of my colleagues on both 
sides of the House to tell you about some letters that I have 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

received in my home constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these letters are from people concerned about 
government-funded pornography. These letters are on top of the 
numerous phone calls my office and our caucus office has 
received on this particular issue. The letters are from the 
communities of Birch Hills and Weldon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these letters show concern from the people of this 
province about government-funded pornography. The letters 
state very strongly their objections to what the government did. 
 
The letters, Mr. Speaker, are also opposed to SaskTel providing 
funding for the screening of pornographic films. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people told me what they like to do is have 
these letters entered into the record. So, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure this afternoon to be able to table these letters on their 
behalf. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Straw Bale House 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have good news for 
families in need and good news for constituents in my 
community. A partnership between Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation and Namerind Housing Corporation has 
constructed a new and innovative type of housing — a straw 
bale house. 
 
The design of this house is unique in that it uses straw bales in 
the construction of the walls and ceilings. This creates a high 
insulation factor well beyond that of conventional homes. 
 
Also, contrary to what most people would think when first 
hearing about a straw bale house, this type of construction 
appears to be more resistant to fires than the standard wood 
frame construction. 
 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation provided the land and a 
$25,000 capital grant towards this innovation. Namerind 
Housing owns and manages the house. This means that an 
actual family in need of good accommodations will be able to 
access quality shelter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project, in partnership with Namerind 
Housing, is another example how innovative and creative 
housing solutions can be achieved when people work together. 
And, Mr. Speaker, despite all the huffing and the puffing of the 
opposition, that’s one straw house they won’t be able to blow 
down. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Construction Industry 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Labour. Madam Minister, in 1998 your department hired a 

retired union organizer, Gus Zaba, to do a report on the issue of 
spinoff contracting. And you paid Mr. Zaba over $20,000 for 
two months’ work. It must have been quite a report. 
 
Madam Minister, taxpayers paid over $20,000 for this report — 
will you table this report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because this 
report predated by time this minister, I have been told about the 
substance of the report but I do not actually have a copy. So I 
will get back to the member with what we have in regards to 
that report. I just don’t have a copy with me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, it’s our understanding that 
Mr. Zaba met exclusively with unionized contractors, with the 
exception of one five-minute meeting with the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association during which he said the only solution 
was to sweep all the non-union contractors into the unions. 
 
Madam Minister, you paid a union organizer $20,000 to meet 
with unionized contractors and promote your forced 
unionization policy. Isn’t that a typical NDP process? Tell the 
guy what you want him to say and then pay him $20,000 to go 
out and say it. 
 
Madam Minister, will you table a list of the companies Mr. 
Zaba met with during his two month contract? Will you release 
his final report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have had opinions, Mr. Speaker, 
from Mr. Zaba on this, but we’ve also had opinions from Mr. 
Kelleher and from Larry Seiferling and from many other legal 
people. So I would have to say that in a matter like this, you try 
to get a range of opinions that represent all points of view. 
 
But I would have to say is that it makes sense to me that you 
would hire someone who is sensitive to the issues that might be 
raised by people and who understands the issue, because it’s 
clear to me, over and over again, that the opposition does not 
understand this issue. Because otherwise, I don’t see why they 
would suggest we would have a Bill that’s different than the 
same Bill in every other province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Madam Minister, we understand it very 
clearly. Mr. Speaker, let’s just review this independent report 
the minister commissioned. You hire a union organizer, he goes 
out and talks to unionized companies. Then he comes back and 
recommends forced unionization. You give them a pat on the 
head and $20,000 and then you use this financing to bring in 
your forced unionization policy. 
 
Madam Minister, this had nothing to do with what’s best for the 
industry. This has nothing to do with what’s best for the 
workers. This has everything to do with paying off the unions 
who in turn pay off the NDP. 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

Madam Minister, will you release Mr. Zaba’s report? What are 
you hiding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how I can 
be more clear. No matter where these companies operated in 
Canada, they would be operating under exactly the same rules. 
In fact, the Government of Ontario recently reviewed their 
rules. They did a three-month survey of the industry and they 
ended up not changing the same provisions that these members 
are referring to. 
 
So I would have to say that any company that operates in 
Canada operates under these same rules in every province, and 
why these people think that working people in the industry 
should have a different standard here, I can’t understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, this is quite an incestuous little 
relationship the NDP has going with the unions. The NDP 
needed more money from the unions. The unions needed more 
money from the workers. So the NDP gives money to a union 
organizer to recommend forcing more workers into the union so 
that the unions can extract more money from the workers and 
the NDP can extract more money from the unions. What a cozy 
little arrangement — except it completely ignores the wishes of 
the 80 per cent of construction workers who don’t belong to a 
union and don’t want to belong to a union. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam Minister, your new legislation will 
force thousands of workers to join a union against their will. 
Will you cancel this unfair and undemocratic Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I don’t understand why the 
opposition is so anti-worker, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the 
matter that they have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, 
that they have totally bought into the editorial line of the 
aspiring Lord Black does not surprise, given the size of 
donations that he made to their party. But if they feel a need to 
do that I guess that’s their choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Home Care in Living Sky Health District 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. Mr. Speaker, there is an elderly gentleman in the 
Living Sky Health District who receives one and a half hours of 
home care every two weeks. He paid $30 a month for this 
service, and he required this service because he was going 
blind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a letter dated April 20, the health care district 
notified all of their home care clients saying that they would be 
reassessed, and they may be discharged from services. They 

notified this man who was extremely limited in vision, by a 
letter. Within one week they discontinued his service without 
any further notice. 
 
Madam Minister, what reassessment criteria was used to 
determine whether or not a person needs home care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Living Sky 
had a review of its home care services and found that they were 
using different criteria than other districts in the province. 
They’re now going to use the same criteria that Saskatoon and 
Regina use. 
 
I do want to say though that the CIHI, which we spoke about — 
it’s the Canadian Institute of Health Information — has said 
that Saskatchewan health care is very strong, and public 
spending in health care in Saskatchewan is very strong. It says 
that we have the second highest among the provinces. And it 
reports that public dollars account for almost three-quarters of 
the spending in health in Saskatchewan. So we do have a very 
strong, publicly supported system, including home care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The home care 
service was so important in Living Sky Health District and they 
knew their recipient so well that this man received an obscure 
letter from the health district saying that clients might be 
discharged from home care. And then without further contact, 
his service was just stopped. The provider never even bothered 
showing up. 
 
When he contacted a home care coordinator he got an 
answering machine, which said that she was off on stress leave 
indefinitely. The second coordinator he talked to didn’t even 
know what his status was. 
 
This man just two years ago personally donated $100,000 to the 
local hospital. He also donated 10,000 to the health lodge. He 
was paying for his service, $30 a month. 
 
Madam Minister, why are home care clients in the Living Sky 
Health District being discharged so abruptly, with no time and 
no consideration to help them find alternatives for service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have one of 
the best home care systems in the country. 
 
Other provinces, other provinces do not support the integrated 
system that we have. We are the envy of many of the provinces 
in the country and we do have a very high amount of public 
spending in our home care system. 
 
This year of our hundred and thirteen new million dollars into 
the budget, much . . . five-point-something million dollars went 
into home care to strengthen our home care services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Long-term Care in Esterhazy 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are also for the 
Minister of Health. Home care service is critical to keep people 
out of long-term care. And, Mr. Speaker, the long-term care 
system is far past its limit. 
 
The case of a 79-year-old woman now occupying a bed in the 
Esterhazy hospital is an example. She is paying $25 a day to stay 
in that bed because she is not an acute care patient and a long-term 
care bed is not available. She can’t walk and needs help with 
feeding, bathing, and all personal care. 
 
Yet the health district is saying she needs to be reassessed to 
determine if she even qualifies for long-term care. The family 
feels they can’t deliver the care she requires. The hospital says she 
is taking up a bed they need. And if she qualifies for long-term 
care, she will be last on a 50-person waiting listing. 
 
Madam Minister, how are seniors supposed to have any 
confidence that the health system in this province will deliver the 
long-term care they require? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before 
about home care, we have the best long-term care system in the 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We do have . . . We have 9,200 residents 
living in home . . . in long-term care facilities. They receive 
personal care, nursing care, room and board. Total care is provided 
in long-term care facilities. 
 
We do support that through the publicly funded system and as I 
said before the CIHI information has said that Saskatchewan 
spends the second highest among the provinces on our publicly 
funded system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Health. I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan would like to take a vote 
on whether they think long-term care is good in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, when this woman receives an 
assessment and if she is deemed as needing either level . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, when this woman receives an 
assessment and if she is deemed as needing either level 3 or 4 
care, to find a bed in an appropriate facility near her family she 
will be last on a waiting list of at least 50 people. If she is not 
assessed level 3 or 4, her family does not know how they will 
cope. She cannot continue to take up a hospital bed in Esterhazy 
and she cannot afford private care. 
 

Your government took away level 1 and 2 nursing home care 
and replaced it with home care. Now you are cancelling these 
services. The only option they have are private care personal 
homes which most seniors cannot . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, order. Order, 
please. The hon. member has been quite lengthy in her 
preamble, kindly go directly to your question. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, your government is abandoning 
seniors in this province. Madam Minister, where are these 
people supposed to go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If there are 
certain cases where people have problems, we do welcome 
those individual cases to come directly to our offices. 
 
But one thing I would like to say is one of the options that the 
opposition has put forward, including the member from 
Weyburn, is that we would privatize our health system. I 
wonder then which would be the first services to go? Would it 
be the acute care? Would it be home care? Would it be 
long-term care? 
 
I think we would seriously look at what their platform would 
provide with no funding and privatization of the health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Health. The Minister of Health tells us that we have the best 
long-term care in this province. We have the best home care in 
this province. I would like to ask . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — We have people across this province that are 
asking everyday where can I access long-term care and where 
can I access home care? What are the people of this province 
supposed to do for care, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, we do have 
the best long-term care program in the country. We do have 
people . . . We have very few districts that have waiting lists. 
 
We have alternatives to living in long-term care. We have a 
very strong home care system. We have a very strong support 
system. We have an integrated system where people have the 
option to stay at home if possible. We have a coordinated 
assessment unit so that people are coordinated through the 
system at one single entry point. 
 
We have things in our system, Mr. Speaker, that are truly to the 
benefit of all the people that are in the health care system. And 
we do continue to try and make improvements in our system. 
We continue to add money, unlike the members opposite who 
promise nothing for health care and have no options but to 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

privatize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budgets of District Health Boards 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, 
yesterday was the deadline for all the health districts in the 
province to submit their 2000 plans including their 2000 
budgets. Madam Minister, as of this afternoon how many health 
districts have submitted their 2000 budgets to you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can report is that of the 32 districts, 29 districts have 
signed off their health plan and we have received another three 
draft plans. And my understanding is that the board members 
will have an opportunity to sign off on those three health plans 
by this evening. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I can report is that we have 32 health 
plans in my department, 29 have been approved by their boards, 
and we’re waiting for three to be approved and I understand that 
they’ll be approved today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, my question again then to the minister is if you have 
all of the plans in your possession, how soon are going to 
release those plans to the public? Madam Minister, we need a 
timeline on when you’re going to do this. 
 
When are you going to release the plans? When are you going 
to release the information about how many closures of facilities 
there’s going to be? When are you going to release this plan and 
is it going to be before June 1 of this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can say to the member is that the Department of Health 
is going to be analysing all 32 health plans within a provincial 
context. Once we have undergone that work, and it requires 
detailed work, then all of the information will be released to the 
public. And I expect that the information will be released to the 
public in three to four weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again to the minister. Madam Minister, in questions we’ve 
asked you before you’ve said you’re going to indeed, and 
confirmed today, review these plans, then you’re going to 
approve, reject, or modify. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I have said that once 
we’ve had an opportunity to review all of the health plans 
within the provincial context, we will either approve the plan, 
disapprove the plan, or vary the plan for each of the health 
districts. But, Mr. Speaker, we want to review it within a 
provincial context. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again to the minister. Well, Madam Minister, what’s 
up with this process? You put the district health boards through 
this whole convoluted thing that they have to do in secret. 
 
Then you sit here and say to the Assembly and to the people of 
this province that it doesn’t really matter what these health 
boards submit to you if you don’t like it, because you’re either 
going to modify it and send it back, or you’re going to reject it 
and send it back. And if you approve it, it’s only because 
they’ve complied with your draconian directives. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you going to do if a health board 
refuses to implement the modifications that you’re going to 
pose on them? What are you going to do to them? Are you 
going to fire them, or what are you going to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, each day in 
this legislature we listen to the members opposite use words 
like forced amalgamation, which this government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, each day in this 
legislature we hear the members opposite use words like forced 
amalgamation, confiscation, forced unionization, and now gag 
orders, Mr. Speaker. And they call us pornographers. 
 
Well I want to say this to the members opposite. There will be 
two things that this government will not do. We are not going to 
privatize health services and go for private . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are not going to freeze health 
spending in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are not going to say to the federal 
government, don’t give the provinces any money. Because 
that’s what that member opposite has said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we are going to defend publicly funded 
and publicly administered health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what 
the minister’s going to do. She’s going to order up a bunch of 
closed signs and putting them on health care facilities in this 
province. That’s what she’s going to do. 
 
Madam Minister, again you ducked the question. I asked you, if 
district health boards are not going to implement your modified 
plans or your rejected plans, what are you going to do to those 
communities? Are you going to go in there and heavy-handedly 
close facilities anyway? Are you going to impose on them your 
will? What are you going to do, Madam Minister, if district 
health boards refuse to go along with modifications to their 
plans? 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to do what 
we’ve done for the last seven years with district health boards, 
and that is to continue to work with district health boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are not going to do, what we are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. The question has 
been asked and yet the response cannot be heard. Kindly allow 
the minister to answer the question. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what we are not going to 
do is freeze health spending. What we are not going to do is 
privatize surgical services in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we are going to live up to the five tenets of the Canada Health 
Act which that party calls mindless slogans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. Madam 
Minister, you know this whole budget process is flawed from 
the very beginning. 
 
You sit here and pretend that you have a transparent process 
that has good communication and dialogue and discussion with 
the communities. And yet time after time we demonstrated — 
and we’ve got a copy of the letter from your deputy minister — 
that district health boards were not allowed to discuss their 
plans that they are submitting to you. They’re only allowed to 
get consultation in the process before they make the plan, and 
afterwards you are saying to this House that you may arbitrarily 
modify the plans, that you may arbitrarily reject the plans. 
 
Madam Minister, this process is not democratic and it doesn’t 
involve the people that are involved, either the health boards or 
the communities they serve. Madam Minister, you have to 
recognize this process is fatally flawed. 
 
This afternoon I’ll be introducing a motion that will suggest the 
process be changed. Will you support that motion, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the member is 
saying is, he doesn’t want the government to modify health 
district plans. Let me just give you an example. 
 
We have a health plan that came from the Living Sky Health 
District. And, Mr. Speaker, in that health plan they talk about 
the possibility of closing hospitals along the Yellowhead 
highway between Yorkton and Saskatoon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. The members on this side 
of the legislature are not going to agree to a health plan where 
there is no acute care facility between Yorkton and Regina. And 
I am surprised that that member wouldn’t support that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, the whole process is as a 

result of your imposed limitations on district health boards. 
You’ve got them with their backs against the wall. You created 
a system whereby you’ve left them with virtually no choice. 
 
How in the world can they meet arbitrary budget targets of the 
900 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, please. Order please. 
Kindly allow the question to be asked. And I would just remind 
the hon. member to kindly direct comments through the Chair. 
That it’s not a personal issue from both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask the minister how she expects the possibility of 
district health boards to be able to meet the kinds of 
commitments of $900,000 reductions in budgets. You can’t do 
that by cutting back on the paper clip budget, Madam Minister. 
You are leaving them no choice. You’ve made them the target 
of a firing squad that you’re manning. 
 
Madam Minister, this is an impossible process. District health 
boards, including discussions at the SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) convention said the 
process is fatally flawed. South East District wrote you and said 
the process is flawed. 
 
Madam Minister, will you support the proposal that we’re going 
to make this afternoon that calls for an open, accountable 
system, and will you guarantee that there’ll be no closures until 
you know what you’re doing, which may take forever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Paul 
Martin, the federal Minister of Finance, brought down his 
federal budget, I indicated at that time that there simply was not 
enough money for health care in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the ministers of Health in this country were 
meeting to put pressure on the federal government to return the 
money that was taken out of the Canada Health and Social 
Transfer, what did the Leader of the Opposition say? The 
Leader of the Opposition said that Ottawa should hold back on 
more cash to the provinces. He . . . (inaudible) . . . in this country 
so that they can privatize it and the members opposite will 
never agree to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

Bill No. 301  The Mennonite Central 
Committee Saskatchewan Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

pleasure and privilege to speak on behalf of Bill 301 because, as 
members will know, it is both a fairly non-controversial Bill, 
and at the same time an extremely important Bill for a very 
important group in Saskatchewan society. 
 
This Bill will provide for a continued system of governance that 
the MCC (Mennonite Central Community) of Saskatchewan 
have been using for many, many years, but they will now be 
able to continue this as a not-for-profit corporation. This will 
allow . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, by passing this Bill, this will 
allow the Mennonite Central Committee of Saskatchewan to 
continue the work that they have been doing, along with MCC 
International, in over 54 countries. 
 
(1430) 
 
They have been doing relief, helping communities recover from 
natural disaster and human conflicts. They have been working 
to develop locally rooted, sustainable services in food security, 
health, education, and income generation. They have been 
working with community groups to build bridges of 
understanding and to develop peace-building skills. And they 
have been facilitating interchange and mutual learning so that 
all may give and receive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have been doing this because they 
have been following very carefully the words of one of their 
original founding leaders, Menno Simons, who said in 1539, 
and I quote: 
 

True evangelical faith cannot lie dormant. It clothes the 
naked, feeds the hungry, it comforts the sorrowful, it 
shelters the destitute, it serves those who harm it, it binds 
up that which is wounded, it has become all things to all 
men. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, MCC Saskatchewan supports the global 
work. They have an annual budget of around $2 million a year 
— all of which is raised locally. They have developed 
incredible community responses for disasters such as Hurricane 
Mitch; and they have as well as an international perspective, 
they have many important Saskatchewan programs. 
 
And I would like to mention just a couple of them. One of them 
is a program called Aboriginal neighbours. This is a program 
that resulted specifically from recognizing that there has to be 
an attitude of mutuality between Mennonites and Aboriginal 
people. If I may again quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this time 
from an Australian Aboriginal elder. And I think that the quote 
from Australia applies equally well to Saskatchewan. Lila 
Watson said, quote: 
 

If you have come to help me, you are wasting your time. 
But if you have come because your liberation is bound up 
with mine, then let us work together. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think in a nutshell captures the 
essence of the work of MCC in Saskatchewan and around the 
world. They work and help people with mental health problems 
and disabilities. They work on gender issues. They work 
specifically on peace and restorative justice. 
 
Most of us know the MCC because we know their thrift shops, 

and we know their international job creation program called 
Ten Thousand Villages. We go there perhaps at Christmastime 
to buy various gifts from around the world. What we are doing 
when we do that is helping support their global job creation 
program that supports over twelve and a half thousand people. 
 
I would like to say in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what 
MCC Saskatchewan does is truly an embodiment of a quote that 
I would like to read to you from the Bible from Micah, chapter 
6, verse 8. 
 

and what does the LORD require of 
you 

but to do justice, and to love 
kindness, 

and to walk humbly with your 
God? 

 
I would ask all committee members to support Bill 301. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of the Regina Golf Club Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s quite an 
opportunity actually to be able to speak to this Bill. 
 
The Regina Golf Club has been a part of Regina for quite a 
number of years and right next to the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police training academy and museum. 
 
And after several years of working through the process, they 
have received the official designation of royal from London, 
from the palace in London, and it is now our opportunity to pass 
this Bill which will rename the Regina Golf Club officially and 
call it the Royal Regina Golf Club. 
 
That will make it one of only five royal golf clubs in Canada. 
So quite a designation and quite a historic step for this golf club 
in Regina. It will probably draw some tourists to the city and I 
think will be a real plus for our city to have that right next to the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) training academy and 
museum. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Bill No. 303 – The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Dioceses Reorganization Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure on 
my part today to sponsor this Bill. We had a very interesting 
discussion this morning in committee which I think all members 
quite enjoyed as we listened to how this Bill had come together 
over the last three years. Work on this began back in 1997. 
 
And of course it involves a series of administrative issues, a 
great deal of the history of this province in terms of the 
development of the Roman Catholic Church and the fostering of 
various parishes throughout the province. 
 
This Bill is primarily an administrative Bill. It brings current 
practices into a legal being, and I think it moves a long way 
towards providing a very strong foundation for the Roman 
Catholic Church to continue on in our province. 
 
I am very happy that we are joined here by such distinguished 
guests today who have done so much work here and throughout 
the province to build support for this. And I would ask all 
members to support this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just wanted to 
make a few remarks in respect to the Bill at hand. We had 
opportunity this morning in the Private Members’ Committee to 
look at all three of these Bills. And I’m very proud that 
members of our province have come this far in making sure that 
initiatives that have been put forward to work together more so 
in the province in a more expedient manner, and a manner that 
provides for the authorities at large to be able to do the work 
that they must do in order to basically take care of our people 
better. 
 
And so I’m just wanting to put forward to the Roman Catholics 
of the province who were actually some of them wondering 
about this Bill and so on, that we had extensive questioning this 
morning in committee regarding the assets and liabilities of the 
specific dioceses in question. And that I was quite satisfied that 
there would be responsibility taken in these areas. 
 
And so I too would like to just commend all the members of the 
Roman Catholic Diocese in Saskatchewan for their work. And I 
know that there will be new and wonderful things happening 
because of this sort of reorganization. So thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedules A, B, C, and D agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Mennonite Central 
Committee Saskatchewan Act 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
301, The Mennonite Central Committee Saskatchewan Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of The Regina Golf Club Act 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 302, The 
Renaming of The Regina Golf Club Act be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Dioceses Reorganization Act 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
move that Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Dioceses Reorganization Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

District Health Care Budgets 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to initiate the debate on this very important topic 
today, because we’re in the middle of a process that many 
people are finding fatally flawed. Madam Minister . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I apologize, I’m used to asking questions of the 
minister rather than having a discussion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in 1993 we initiated, not only in this province 
but across Canada and North America, a very important 
discussion about the future of health care and health care 
service delivery in our country and indeed in the western world. 
And Madam . . . Mr. Speaker, through that whole process, 
through that process there were some very, very important 
changes that happened in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government at the time decided that they were 
going to go to a new model of health care service delivery that 
they called the wellness model. The wellness model is a very 
interesting terminology because it implies that if all is . . . all 
that you need to do is to treat people in a way that they will be 
well, they will stay well. 
 
Well it isn’t that simple, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately the 
best laid intentions seem to get mislaid somewhere along the 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time, there were some radical changes to the 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

delivery of health care in Saskatchewan. And we were told at 
that time that these changes were going to be necessary in order 
that we could sustain the system. And there were all kinds of 
things that occurred at the time. 
 
And there were quotes that were made, that said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, by way of advertisements and quotes in articles 
by the then minister of Health, Louise Simard, that basically 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan that if they complied 
and agreed with the changes that were being proposed at the 
time, that they could count on this system then to deliver 
services into the far future in a fair way to the people of the 
province. 
 
And so they changed from the number of health districts there 
were, they eliminated many of the volunteer health boards that 
served their communities and their facilities very well over the 
years, and they went to the district health plan. And they said 
that these changes are going to be necessary and this medicine 
is going to be good for you. 
 
They made the commitment to people in Saskatchewan that if 
they put up with all the facility closures that there were, and if 
they put up with the fact that instead of having a hospital many 
communities were only going to have a so-called health care 
facility, that that so-called health care facility was going to be 
there for them into the future, and that the system would be 
much more appropriate and would be sustainable in the long 
term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time there were even almost full page ads in 
the newspapers that were run, and, in my hand, I have one right 
now from April 3, in The Leader-Post of 1993. And the 
headline reads, “An important message to the people of 
Saskatchewan.” And this is under the signature of the then Hon. 
Louise Simard, minister of Health at the time. And I’d like to 
quote some of the commitments that were made at that time to 
the people of this province. It said, and I quote: 
 

We will ensure that all Saskatchewan residents continue to 
have access to acute and emergency services. 
 

It went on to say that: 
 

We will design a health care system that meets the needs of 
today and tomorrow. 
 

It says: 
 

We will build a health system that is more effective, 
responsive, efficient, and stronger than anything we might 
ever have thought possible. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are in the year 2000 and the system 
is not living up to those commitments. The system quite 
honestly is not living up, not only to those commitments, but to 
the expectations that were given and the promises that were 
made to the people of the province at that time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we simply cannot continue down the path 
that we currently are walking on if we’re going to build a 
sustainable long-term health care system in this province. 
 

I believe that the commitments that were made in 1993 were the 
kinds of commitments that should have been kept. And I don’t 
think that this government has been able to live up to those 
commitments of keeping a sustainable, effective health care 
system that people could count on, not only for acute care but 
for long-term care. I don’t think the commitments that were 
made have been lived up to for the health care workers who are 
struggling under unbelievable circumstances to deliver services. 
 
Every day in this House we hear stories about people who are 
dramatically and drastically falling through the system, they’re 
falling through the cracks in the system. And this is despite the 
best efforts of countless health care workers across this 
province who are doing their utmost in order to see that service 
delivery is happening and happening in an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commitments that were made are 
commitments that need to be lived up to. And this system and 
this process that we’re going about aimlessly in the dark is 
simply, simply no longer meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Every day it seems that I get calls from people who are feeling 
as if the system is failing them. I get calls from patients, clients, 
who say they can’t access health care in a timely fashion. I get 
calls from medical professionals, from doctors and nurses, who 
feel the frustration of knowing what they need to do for their 
clients and patients, who know what kind of therapy and 
treatment is needed and appropriate but are so frustrated that 
they can’t get it in a timely way, that the waiting times are far 
too long. They’re the longest in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognizing those kinds of realities, the 
Saskatchewan Party, prior to this last election, said something 
needs to be done different. Before we can decide what that is 
specifically, we have to understand what’s going on now. 
 
We have to have a good sense of where the health care system 
is having some successes — as indeed it is — but also 
understand where its shortfalls are, to understand what the 
pluses and minuses of the equation are, to understand if the 
funding mechanisms, and the way funding is occurring, and the 
limitations and strings and the pools and the silos and all the 
types of preconditions that are on health care funding are 
appropriate. 
 
We needed to see is there’s an appropriate mix of spending on 
administration, and not just the administration who is a part of 
an administrative structure — the CEO (Chief Executive 
Officer) and a couple of senior staff — but also all the issues 
surrounding what is required by the Department of Health by 
way of paperwork and statistics, and all the rest of it that 
front-line workers have to spend far too much of their time on 
administrative-type matters instead of providing health care, 
health care delivery at the beds. 
 
What you want if you’re sick is a nurse who’s got the time to 
help you and nurse you back to wellness, not a bean-counter 
that wants a bunch of statistics about what’s going on. 
 
And I know you need to keep statistics. I know there’s basic 
information that’s required. But, Mr. Speaker, the consensus 
across this province clearly has been that the information is not 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

appropriate and is not timely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we proposed that this study of the health care 
system needed to be done. We called it an audit of the health 
care system. And we believed it had to be done in an 
independent way because we saw too far in the past, as this 
government has done, where you talk about an audit of no fault 
where you have a flawed process set up, or you review the 
Crowns and you have a flawed process set up. It had to be set 
up in such a way that it was beyond refute. 
 
And we suggested that it should be done under the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor, not because it was solely going to be an 
exercise in bean-counting, but because it was going to be an 
exercise that had to be done in a way that nobody could 
question the integrity of the author and the way in which this 
thing was done. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we suggested . . . And I was actually quite 
pleased when I heard the minister firstly say that a review of the 
system was appropriate. I was pleased to hear when the Premier 
of the province said that this review should not only be in the 
province of Saskatchewan but should include the federal system 
right across Canada. Because I think the point has to be made 
that the federal government has indeed shirked and failed its 
responsibilities to participate financially and with a leadership 
role in the delivery of health care services in Canada. 
 
You simply cannot pick the destination of the tour if you’re 
only paying 10 or 12 cents on the dollar of the price of it, and 
the federal government is trying to do that without stepping up 
to the plate with appropriate financial support as well. And I do 
support that. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned that we seem to be 
backing away from that. But more importantly, what I’m 
concerned about is we’re engaging in a process of this current 
budget system and following up on past budget systems that 
quite simply have failed us. And they’ve put the district health 
boards in an untenable position. 
 
The Department of Health is now directed, and we’ve 
documented that with copies of the correspondence that was 
signed by the deputy minister of Health, that has said a couple 
of important things to district health boards. They’ve said, you 
will come up with a plan by this date. And we hear from the 
minister that indeed district health boards have complied with 
that specific directive. And the minister is in receipt of their 
plans, and that’s appropriate. 
 
But she’s also said that you will do this, and you will do it 
without comment. You will not be appropriate to disclose or to 
discuss with your communities what’s in that plan. The minister 
has reserved that decision for herself and has said in this House 
that she intends to either approve the plan, to reject the plan, or 
modify the plan. 
 
Well that’s very good, Mr. Speaker, but where does the 
community fit into this? Mr. Speaker, it is very important that if 
you’re going to change what services are given to a community, 
that the community has to be there at the beginning of the 
process, not at the end of it. 
 

The community discussion has to happen with not only the 
community that the district serves, but it has to happen with the 
health care professionals that work in that system. It has to 
happen with the people that need the system. It has to happen 
with the community leaders who have to understand what the 
impacts of this change is going to be on their community and 
given an opportunity to suggest constructive possible 
alternatives. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, or just as importantly, it 
has to be done in a way that has an overall vision. Now the 
minister says, well what we’re going to do when we get all 
these plans together, we’re going to look at them in a provincial 
context to decide what’s going to be approved, modified, or 
rejected. 
 
But what is the vision? Where is the vision? Where is the 
commitment to the principles of health care reform that were 
laid down in 1993? Where is the commitment to provide acute 
care and long-term care health services to people right across 
this province in a logical, planned way? 
 
This is simply a knee-jerk reaction without any long-term plan 
of where we’re going, Mr. Speaker. And it is unfair, it is 
completely unfair for the minister and the department to insist 
that this is going to happen without that plan, and that district 
health boards are going to be forced to make their plans without 
a blueprint and a plan of where we’re heading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the recent SAHO convention, the SAHO 
members clearly gave to the minister what their key concerns 
are. And the first thing they said in a document that they 
submitted to the minister and circulated is that there has to be a 
recommitment to the fundamental principles of health care in 
this province. That’s the first thing. 
 
And they’ve also said that if you believe that we have to have a 
long-term plan as to how those services are delivered. And only 
then do you start dealing with the specifics of facility changes, 
closures, or readjustments. 
 
Only then — after you have, number one, an understanding of 
what’s going on, a complete analysis of the system; number 
two, a clear vision of where you’re going — only then should 
you be talking to the communities about possible changes to 
their communities. And only finally after that whole process is 
completed in an open and honest and transparent way, do you 
consider closing facilities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the government’s got it backwards. Instead of 
having a plan, we have no plan. They still ride on the coattails 
of their legend of Tommy Douglas and health care. That’s not 
good enough in the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. It simply is not 
good enough. 
 
We’ve got to deal with the situation that’s going on in health 
care today and into the future — not 50 or 75 years ago — 
because times have changed, and yes, things are different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our motion today turns that around in at least a 
small way and says clearly that before you’re going to close 
facilities, before you’re going to initiate changes that are 
dramatically going to affect communities, you have to do a 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

couple of simple things firstly. 
 
You have to, number one, remove the gag order that’s on 
district health boards so they can discuss this with their 
communities and their health care professions before it 
happens; and number two, you have to make sure that what you 
do is you reverse the process — that you do the consultation 
and the discussion with communities before you impose a final 
health care plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the full picture. But I’ve tried to outline 
what I think that the Saskatchewan Party believes is going to be 
the direction needed in health care. We need to provide 
leadership. We need to provide direction. We need to make a 
plan. We need to make a commitment to the people of this 
province that is sustainable in the long term. And that’s going to 
mean change — that’s a certainty — but we have to do it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Minister of Health to change 
the budgeting process in Saskatchewan health districts to 
allow for consultation with the public and health care staff 
after the health plans are submitted to the government but 
prior to the final approval of health care budgets by the 
minister, and that all gag orders against health care districts 
during the budget process be lifted. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak on the motion. 
 
This is the government that gave us our current health care 
system. Seven years ago, when Health minister Louise Simard 
brought in the NDP’s wellness plan, she said it would ensure 
the future of health care in the province, that the system would 
continue to give us access to acute and emergency services. 
 
This of course we have failed to see. What we have seen is the 
closure of 52 rural hospitals and the loss of service in many, 
many communities. 
 
The NDP said that the new system would consolidate services 
and save money, yet what do we hear today? We hear that they 
need more money, that they can’t offer the services that they 
were providing at that time. 
 
There was anger, frustration, and concern from many rural 
areas. What little public input was allowed fell on deaf ears. 
The NDP’s ruthless quest to reform health care in the province 
left communities with no time to prepare, and after the closures, 
they were left with limited access to immediate or acute care. 
 
And the health boards. The health boards have had a gag order 
from day one. I have talked to health care board members who 
had to sign forms confirming that they would keep confidential 
what went on in their meetings. 
 
I thought that health boards were to represent the people, not 

the government. The health boards have been the fall guys for 
this government. The government has deflected all the blame 
onto them, and what little credit there has been in the last seven 
years, they have been there to gladly take it. 
 
The health boards, Mr. Speaker, were bought off with a promise 
of being well paid and having power to do what was right in 
their constituencies. But I’d like to ask the health boards today, 
Mr. Speaker: was the pay enough for the heat that they had to 
take for this government? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what power did they really have? Behind the 
scenes we had government bureaucrats telling them and giving 
direction of what should happen in their health districts. 
 
This spring the Regina Health District put into process a budget 
and service consultation process for staff and the general public. 
Meetings were held and questionnaires were handed out. 
 
I’d like to read one portion of the questionnaire given to the 
staff of the Regina Health District which I find rather alarming. 
It has to do with revenue and asking the staff how they can 
generate revenue. 
 
And I quote — it’s from the Regina Health District budget and 
service consultation process staff input questionnaire, and under 
the questions, under (a) they have revenues. The questions are, 
first: 
 

Are there opportunities to generate revenue in your 
department? Please list how. 

 
The second question is: 
 

Do you know (how any opportunities outside your) of any 
opportunities outside your department to generate revenue? 
Please list. 

 
We now have a situation where our health district is asking the 
staff to generate revenue to keep the hospital going. 
 
On the next page, we have a question and it is under service 
delivery. And the question is: 
 

To better balance our budget, what activities or services 
could we stop doing or do differently? 

 
Does this sound like two-tiered health care? I was with the 
understanding that we had medicare in Saskatchewan — 
accessible, affordable health care for all. 
 
Following this consultation and questionnaire, there was a 
further meeting held. At this meeting the results were given that 
laid out what the staff had come up with — good ideas, good 
plans of how they could see things working better in the Regina 
Health District. 
 
There originally was a plan that after this was given out to the 
staff and to the public, that there would be another step where 
the staff and the public would have a chance to further discuss 
before the final implementation and given . . . and before it was 
given to the Minister of Health. However the minister put a gag 
order on this, and this step was eliminated. 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

So the submission process became this: that on Thursday, May 
11 the Regina Health District Board met and finalized their 
strategic plan; and on May 15, that plan and budget was given 
to the minister. Then following approval from the minister in 
June, the board would release an approved strategic plan and 
budget at an annual general meeting. 
 
There is no mention of further consultation with the public or 
the staff by the Regina Health District. 
 
The 32 health districts that have been established to handle 
local health care in their areas were given little direction and 
even less choice as to what they could and could not do. These 
local boards, made up of appointed and elected officials, were 
supposed to be autonomous. At least that’s what Louise Simard 
kept telling them in 1993. 
 
Over the years, we have watched this system deteriorate to the 
point of no return. There is no turning back, and this NDP 
government has no idea how to move forward. Seven years 
after the NDP implemented their wellness plan, we have the 
longest waiting list in the country. Our surgery waiting lists 
have ballooned to one, two, or even three waits. 
 
Our front-line services are suffering. Many doctors have either 
left or retired, and their numbers continue to decrease. The NDP 
were told about an impending nursing shortage a number of 
years ago, and true to form refused to address this very critical 
issue. What was their response? Cut the number of seats in the 
nursing program. That’s a good way to increase the number of 
nurses in this province. 
 
What has really happened is that we have ended up with an 
unhappy workforce. We have ended up with nurses going on 
strike, and even after the strike, what has changed in the 
workforce? Have the conditions improved? We have spoken to 
many nurses, Mr. Speaker, and support staff. The situation is as 
bad or worse than it was before the nurses’ strike. 
 
Operating rooms and intensive care units are under stress and 
some are closing. We have a situation in Regina, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where an operating room has been closed. How is this 
going to alleviate waiting lists? 
 
Equipment is being shut down. The list goes on. Now there is 
the threat of cutting support staff in order to balance the 
budgets. On speaking to staff at the . . . in Regina, they are very 
concerned about this. The RNs (Registered Nurse) are very 
concerned that the support staff is going to be cut because they 
need these people in order to operate on a daily basis. They 
provide functions which enable the nursing staff to continue on 
and do the necessary work that they have to do. Without them, 
they believe that there’d be great jeopardy in keeping all the 
wards open in Regina if the support staff is closed. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, there does not seem to be any recognition of 
how important the unit clerks are, the admitting clerks, the 
porters, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse), the lab techs, and 
security. How important this support staff is to the running of 
the hospitals in Regina, Saskatoon, and all across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes that we need to 
keep the staff and find a way to help them work together to give 

better, accessible health care to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, home care is our next concern. And it is also 
moving now to privatization. We used to have home care which 
was accessible to people all across this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we now find out that people are being told that home 
care is no longer going to be accessible for them. The whole 
plan was that we would take people out of long-term care, give 
them a better quality of life so that they could stay in their own 
homes. They were going to . . . we were going to have the best 
home care system in the world. What do we find, Mr. Speaker? 
We find now that this government is moving to take away this 
much-needed home care and is forcing people to find 
alternative measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there does not seem to be any understanding by 
this government that people cannot afford private care. They 
cannot afford to find their own personal care. And yet in this 
province we have been led to believe for years that we have a 
medicare system that looks after people. There is no problem. 
Everyone will have accessible, affordable health care when they 
need it and for whatever they need. Now today we don’t have 
that. 
 
What good is free medicare if you can’t access it when and how 
you need it? It doesn’t do you any good two years later or when 
you’re dead. That’s the whole issue in this province. We just 
keep on waiting and waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is totally out of touch with the 
people of Saskatchewan and the reality that health care is failing 
many individuals and families. They are suffering daily under a 
mismanaged health care system that is totally controlled by a 
government who has forgotten what health care is all about. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to know where is their 
money and where is their health care dollars going? Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the idea of a gag order is more of the inflated language 
that we’re coming to expect from across the floor. The notion of 
a gag order is no more than a figment of some 
highly-imaginative, questionable imagination that appears to be 
little more than pathetic, partisan attempt to gain a few points. 
 
These cheap shots demean a sensitive and thoughtful process of 
developing an overall health care plan for this province. As the 
Health minister clearly pointed out several times during 
question period, it would be premature to begin talking about 
district health care plans before they are seen and understood in 
their context. And that context is the overall health care plan for 
the province. 
 
The district boards have been encouraged throughout this 
process to become involved. A number of districts were asked 
for public input during the development of their health plans. 
The Regina Health District ran advertisements asking for public 
input. Public meetings were held. Doing the job for which they 
had been elected and appointed, the district boards then put 
their plans together and submitted them to the Health minister. 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

(1515) 
 
As the minister and the department assess each of the district 
plans in the light of an overall plan for this province, some of 
them will be approved, some may need revisions. It would be 
premature, thoughtless, and unwise to put district plans out to 
the public before they were reviewed and assessed in the light 
of the overall plan. It would create unnecessary anxiety. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, imagine that the health 
district of gloom and doom developed a plan based on their 
traditional belief that nothing changes for the better. They said 
two of their five hospitals and one of their nursing homes were 
going to have to close and 90 jobs were going to have to be 
eliminated. 
 
If they put that plan out into the public, people would be very 
frightened and terribly upset. Along with their MLA, one of the 
leading citizens of doom and gloom, they would probably 
attack the district board, the Heath minister, and the 
government. And who would want that? Not only would a 
process like that cause unnecessary fear and chaos, it would be 
destructive. 
 
The wisdom of our current process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
it seeks together all the data and make recommendations before 
finally confirming and approving the plans. You see, in our 
imaginary scenario what the people of gloom and doom health 
district didn’t know was that the district right next door, new 
visions health district, was developing a plan that included 
transforming two of their hospitals into health centres or 
wellness centres and developing a home dialysis program and 
hiring a new specialist in gerontology. 
 
With these new services available so close to home and with 
recommendations of coordination from the Minister of Health, 
gloom and doom would be able to keep their nursing home, 
transform one of their hospitals into a health centre, and they 
would not have to fire all the staff that they had said they were 
going to have to fire in their preliminary plans. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a responsible and thoughtful and caring 
government would never allow the public to face that kind of 
chaos and fear. This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will 
never . . . this government will never engage in that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
will never engage in the Henny Penny, sky-is-falling model of 
strategic planning that is proposed by the hon. member from 
Melfort. 
 
Gag order? I don’t think so. In contrast to the kind of callous, 
uncaring government implied in the motion, our Health minister 
and our government has engaged and will continue to engage in 
a thoughtful, consultative process. A process that involves the 
districts and where the districts involve their citizens. 
 
Once these plans are reviewed and the districts have been given 
approval to go ahead, it will be more productive to have further 
public discussion. In the real world of strategic planning, it is 
more productive to discuss fact than fantasy, especially the 

nightmares that we get coming across the floor. 
 
The fact is that districts have worked with their communities to 
identify the needs of their residents. They have put forward 
plans designed to best meet the needs within the resources 
available. Once these plans have been reviewed within a 
provincial framework, communities will be able to participate 
in planning for health services. This will be productive and 
meaningful consultation to ensure that health needs are looked 
after. 
 
Despite all the very real difficulties in providing the high level 
of health care that Saskatchewan people have come to expect, 
despite the significant cuts in federal support for health care, as 
the hon. member from Melfort mentioned, Saskatchewan 
continues to lead the country in its ability to provide overall 
good health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Working with the districts in a thoughtful, 
consultative manner, we will continue to provide that high level 
of care. The plans and proposals developed by district boards 
must fit into the overall plan for health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our health care budget is the highest ever 
in the history of our province. Despite those federal cutbacks in 
health funding, we have kept our budget up there. At 5.9 per 
cent higher than last year’s budget, it is the second highest per 
capita health budget in this nation — second highest in the 
nation per capita. Only Manitoba spends more per capita, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Our health care system is providing more 
service and more care than it has ever done throughout our 
history. Still we know that with thoughtful, careful planning and 
new vision we will be able to do even more in the months and 
years ahead. 
 
In his speech to the forum on medicare, May 11, our Premier 
talked about that very hopeful new vision. 
 
He said: 
 

With respect to the overall goals of the system, much 
greater emphasis much be placed on improving the health 
of people by taking action on the determinants of health 
care which include the socio-economic environment; the 
physical environment; biology and genetic endowment; 
early childhood development, and personal health 
practices. 

 
In this regard (he said) we need to find the right balance 
between investments in health services and in health 
determinants, between treating illness and preventing 
illness, between responding to the very deeply felt desire 
on the part of citizens to have a responsive and effective 
treatment system, and a much less acute but no less 
important need to think long term and to think about the 
population as a whole as well as about individuals. 

 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Of course this is easier said than done particularly in an 
environment where costs of treating illness alone are rising 
much faster than the growth in government revenues. But 
we must make choices if we are going to attain this vision. 
 

It is in this context, the context of this overall vision for health 
care in Saskatchewan that the district plans must be developed, 
evaluated, and approved. Doing anything less, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, would be a reckless abandonment of the trust we have 
inherited — the trust to continue to develop and make our 
health care system the very best that it could possibly be, a 
model for this nation and for this world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — As we continue to develop this system we 
will continue to implement the concepts of wellness and 
prevention. We have much to do as we develop a sound primary 
health care system. We need to ensure that the entire population 
is served — rural, urban, suburban, inner city, middle class, and 
marginalized. We need to ensure that we are maximizing the 
use of the skills of all members of the health care team 
including highly skilled physicians and nurses who are so often 
the first point of contact within this system. 
 
There is much innovative work that has already been done in 
co-operation with some of the districts and more possibilities 
will be explored. Good ideas and solid plans will be 
implemented. Working together with the districts we will 
develop a sustainable medicare system for the new millennium. 
 
It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that I speak against the motion 
and make the following amendment. I move the following 
amendment: 
 

That we delete all the words after “Minister of Health to” 
and add the words “continue a budgeting system in 
Saskatchewan that will ensure the future of medicare.” 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously, as we’ve witnessed this 
afternoon, medicare is a very hot topic in Saskatchewan. 
 
Governments created medicare, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 
are held responsible for this vision — a vision of the health care 
system that provides universal, accessible health care on the 
basis of need and not income; a vision began in Saskatchewan 
and today strongly held by all Canadians. 
 
The very first proposal for medicare was put forward by 
Tommy Douglas in 1945. A plan to cover the cost of both 
hospital and general medical care was turned down, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because of cost and other provinces were not 
comfortable with it. 
 
This rejection, Mr. Deputy Speaker, forced Saskatchewan in 
1947 to implement a smaller version of hospitalization for the 
province of Saskatchewan. This modest plan, Mr. Speaker, was 
well accepted by other provinces. They looked on it with envy. 
And 10 years later hospitalization was extended throughout 
Canada by the federal government using a cost-shared financing 

as incentive. Provincial innovation and experimentation 
combined with leadership produced a positive outcome for all 
Canadians. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this program was first conceived 
and thought of, Tommy Douglas envisioned it in steps and in 
stages. The initial innovations weren’t it and that’s it, it was 
done in stages. And in 1962, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan took the next step and introduced a more broadly 
based initiative called medicare. 
 
Medicare, Mr. Speaker, was 50/50 cost shared with the federal 
government, and in 1968 medicare became a national program. 
And wouldn’t we love that today, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 50/50 
cost share. 
 
Canadians see this health system publicly funded and publicly 
administered as their right and the right of every Canadian. The 
gaps in health status between rich and poor have been shrunk. 
We no longer have those huge gaps between our health . . . 
between rich and poor people. Universal quality care, accessible 
to all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — The legacy of Canadians — this single-payer 
Canadian system achieving better outcomes for smaller 
percentage share of our country’s wealth. We receive better 
outcomes, lower overall costs, and a fair distribution of benefits 
based on needs rather than dollars. 
 
In the early 1990s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, huge debt was 
throughout Canada, both in Saskatchewan and federally. Health 
costs at this time were also rising and that, Mr. Speaker, put 
pressure on governments to really take a serious look at these 
systems and make them become more efficient. New models of 
health care delivery were looked at and scrutinized. 
 
During this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we asked ourselves 
many questions. Was our system a health care system, 
medicare, or were we purely looking after illness and not really 
progressing any farther? Spending had increased over 50 per 
cent in the previous 20 years, and we realized that we could not 
deal any longer and continue with this system that dealt only 
with sickness and looking after illness. 
 
We needed to provide more infrastructure and financial support 
for illness prevention as well as health protection and 
prevention. Wellness, Mr. Deputy Speaker — an overall 
comprehensive outlook and integrated health care delivery 
within the regions of the province. 
 
And so came our health districts, Mr. Speaker. Districts that 
coordinated services delivering health care along with a 
wellness continuum. Prevention programs, treatment services, 
long-term care, home and community-based services, health 
centres, as well as the traditional hospital services. 
 
Wellness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to deal with wellness, we need 
health policies that not only address the individual but also 
address the larger environment in which we live. 
 
The changes that took place in the early ’90s have been difficult 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

ones, Mr. Speaker. And in any system where we deal with 
human beings and the needs and wants of humans, we will 
make mistakes; we will need to continually adjust and 
re-evaluate the system. 
 
(1530) 
 
And as human beings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re never very 
accepting of change. Any changes need to be proven before 
attitudes and opinions are willing to accept. Before we develop 
acceptance and adopt a new outlook on how we deliver these 
services they have to be proven in many cases. Even with the 
change, our system remains top quality. 
 
Budgeting also in this time had to adjust for these new changes. 
No longer did we have the ability to just throw dollars at 
problems in various areas throughout the province. We had to 
look at the way we manage these systems and the way we 
provide the needs of people of Saskatchewan. Services need to 
be consistent throughout the province and accessible also for 
everyone. 
 
Each health district, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is independent. To 
address the needs of its residents it has to be. But also each 
health district is tied to each other in the whole system that 
provides consistent health care throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the problem and the questions that 
we’ve received over the last week, I keep thinking of at home. I 
can picture sitting at home at the kitchen table and my husband 
says, well I’d like a new truck. And I say, well gee, I’d like to 
renovate the house. And one of the kids says, well I’d like a 
new computer; and the other one says, well I’d like a cell phone 
and a new snowboard. 
 
And you think, now does everyone just run out and do whatever 
they want? No, Mr. Speaker. As a family and as a family unit 
we have an obligation to sit down and decide. Do I want to save 
for retirement? Do I want my children to go to university? Do I 
want to plan the whole situation that my family will be in? 
 
I can’t make promises and make no plans. And we can’t act on 
an individual basis. We must sit down, we must work within the 
resources that we have to provide the best that we can for the 
whole family unit. 
 
We have to weigh the wants and the needs, the priorities and the 
necessities, but we also have to take into consideration our 
resources. Final decisions have to be made on these resources 
and we have to be . . . we have to address the current needs and 
what they are; what we need that’s immediate. But we also have 
to foresee the future and plan for the future and the needs we 
will need and the upcoming emergencies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the health districts and the health services 
within this province have to operate on the same principle. They 
have to find a balance with which to function within: between 
investment in health services and investment in health 
determinants; between treating illness and preventing illness; 
between responding to the very deeply felt desire of citizens to 
have a responsive and effective treatment system and a much 
less acute, but no less important, need to think long-term. And 
to think about the population as a whole as well as about 

individuals. 
 
Many questions have been asked over the last few weeks and 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since many of these changes have 
begun. And, Mr. Speaker, there has been many changes and 
we’re not finished yet. The world is changing, more 
technologies, everything in the health care system changes 
faster than it almost seems like anywhere else in society. 
 
How do we ensure that the entire population is served both rural 
and urban, inner city and suburban, middle class and 
marginalized? And how do we ensure that we are maximizing 
the use of the skills of all members of the health care team? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the way the budgeting has 
changed for the health districts, I truly believe that it works the 
same as a family. Each district has individual needs that they 
must address for their residents and their specific areas. But 
those whole plans must fit into the provincial scheme and the 
provincial family of medical services that are offered to our 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has to be done, it has to be done in a concise 
manner. And I agree with the Minister of Health and the 
Department of Health, and I stand to support the amendment. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to 
enter into the debate on the motion put forward today and to the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Chair, it has been stated over and over again by many 
people in this province, district board members as well as 
community members, that they are expressing some grave 
concern about the way the health reform situation is taking 
place. 
 
Mr. Chair, one of the main concerns of district boards is that 
they have not had a say when it comes to putting forward a plan 
for their district. Even in the past when they have made 
decisions or come to some idea of what they need as a plan, 
oftentimes the Minister of Health and this government, this 
NDP government, has seen to it that hacks from the Department 
of Health enter into meetings at the district board level and 
certainly give some very serious indication that they will do it 
the government’s way or no way. 
 
And so that really does not give autonomy and decision making 
to the people at the local level. 
 
How in the world can this government say that they are 
respecting the views, the thoughts, and the ideas of people in a 
district to direct their own destiny by putting forward a plan 
that’s suitable for them, when in fact the ministry of Health is 
ensuring that there’s someone from the government level, 
basically some of the bureaucrats, coming forward to tell them 
exactly what they must do, not what they need to do. 
 
Mr. Chair, one of the other things that has been brought forward 
through the past seven years is the concern on the part of 
community members and district board members that 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

governments simply get their way to move forward with their 
idea of health reform by cutting funding and squeezing funding 
on different facilities and in different ways, so that again the 
health boards have no way that they can possibly go ahead with 
plans that are necessary for their specific district. 
 
The lack of adequate funding to health districts has left nearly 
two-thirds of them in deficit positions. Deficits that now total 
over $50 million, Mr. Chair. 
 
We now have the taxpayers of Saskatchewan paying one-third 
more into health funding and having many, many more services 
slashed. So of course people are not buying the argument that 
just because there’s more funding going in, that this is a better 
health care system. We obviously have a scenario at hand 
where, whether there’s more money going in or not, services 
are being slashed. 
 
So I ask this government, Mr. Chair, is it this government’s 
intention to move towards privatization — yes, it is. And we 
have seen it in spades. 
 
Mr. Chair, what has happened over the past two or three years 
have been clear, have been very clear, because privatization of 
health services has already taken place in many ways and form. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — For instance, Mr. Chair, we have had constituents 
in my constituency that have come out of hospital, who have 
previously been receiving home care, come out of hospital in 
Saskatoon, and have been told at the district level that there is 
no more room for them in the publicly funded inn. So what they 
must do now is get into a private care home, regardless of 
whether they can afford this or not. 
 
Mr. Chair, this has been going on. I have a number of instances 
were people have been told that their home care services are 
being cut down to a minimum number of hours. And when 
these people that need to have this care and their families point 
out that it’s impossible for these patients to take care of 
themselves, they are simply told, well you are just going to have 
to. Some family members have had to quit jobs in order to take 
care of their family members. 
 
How in goodness . . . how in the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In the world. 
 
Ms. Julé: — I guess how in the world — thank you very much 
— how in the world would can we justify saying then that this 
is a publicly funded system? That this government is moving 
towards home care services that are expanded. In fact that is not 
happening, and it is no use for them to continue to deny this day 
in and day out. 
 
The district health boards that are faced with an increased lack 
of funding have been left with no choice but to make some very 
tough decisions. Whether it was staff programs or services, the 
bottom line, Mr. Chair, was that many rural residents paid the 
ultimate price. 
 
There are health boards throughout the province that have 

expressed their concerns to the NDP government, with the lack 
of funding they’re experiencing. They have repeatedly said that 
they cannot continue to maintain their staffing or service levels 
if funding continues to decrease. 
 
Seven years after the health reform was inducted in this 
province, services are still not being consolidated. We have not 
saved money. And more importantly, rural residents continue to 
bear the brunt of this so-called wellness plan, as more and more 
of our hospitals continue to close or are converted in regional 
health facilities. 
 
Mr. Chair, at this point I would like to make clear to the 
Assembly my concern about what might happen in the Central 
Plains Health District. This district has been given the approval 
to go ahead with the planning of their health facility — a new 
health facility. 
 
And so we have plans being undertaken as far as the 
engineering goes and the plans for . . . the architectural plans for 
this facility. However, it doesn’t seem to make sense for that to 
go ahead without knowing what kind of services we are going 
to end up having in the Central Plains Health District as far as a 
regional hospital in Humboldt. 
 
Certainly, I’m sure that the district health board has put forward 
their plan, as other health boards have put forward theirs, by 
May 15. And I’m certainly hoping that the Health minister will 
acquiesce to giving the credit to these people who have worked 
so very hard to maintain the services that we have at hand. 
 
If in fact the government of the day does not intend to do that, it 
is my sincere hope and wish that they would come forward and 
just simply tell our district as well as the people in Humboldt 
and the surrounding area that, yes, we have had . . . say to you 
clearly that you will not have the same services; that you will be 
having a downgraded facility. 
 
If in fact the same services that are in place are to be ensured by 
this government, I would hope that they’d tell them clearly 
about that because there is a great deal of planning as far as 
revenue coming forward for the funding of this facility. Many 
private donors are putting forward money and would like to 
know just what they are going to end up with here. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would like to touch a little bit on accessibility. The 
Minister of Health has said time and time again that she’s so 
very proud that accessibility is one of the things granted to 
people in this province. Well that is completely without 
founding as far as I’m concerned . . . without any foundation, 
rather. 
 
Accessibility has for a long time been a great problem. People 
in rural areas do not have good accessibility to hospitals, to the 
health care practitioners that they need, and to services that they 
require. 
 
There is another problem with the minister mentioning that 
there is great accessibility. And I think that problem has been 
shown very clearly in this House as the members of the 
opposition have put forward a number of petitions asking for 
reliable cellular service in the rural areas of this province. 
 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

We have inadequate tower systems in this province. Many EMT 
(emergency medical technician) service providers have 
indicated to us that they can’t even relay an emergency message 
as they are trying to transport patients or as they are trying to 
pick up patients from certain centres. How can we say that 
accessibility is in good shape in this province? It certainly is 
not. 
 
This year’s budget, health budget, Mr. Chair, saw a paltry $17 
million allocated for health care. That amount, as everyone 
knows, will not cover very much, let alone the serious deficit 
situation facing our health districts. 
 
True to form the NDP blame all that is wrong with health care 
in Saskatchewan on the federal government. If the NDP don’t 
like what they see when they look at health care in the province, 
they should look in the mirror. This is their wellness plan, not 
anyone else’s. This is their legacy. 
 
This year, Mr. Chair, will see health districts faring no better 
than in previous years. Faced with decreasing funding, they’ve 
been told to make do and to make whatever decisions have to 
be made to ensure that they meet their budget. On top of that, 
the Health minister has ordered all district boards to submit 
their annual budget and subsequent plan for service to her for 
her approval. 
 
We will see how that ends up panning out, Mr. Chair. I am sure 
that there are going to be a great number of modifications in 
some of the plans the health districts put forward, much to their 
dismay. 
 
Thank you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of 
interest I enter into this debate on health care. It started out, Mr. 
Speaker, with the members of the opposition making 
accusations about the Minister of Health putting a gag order on 
health boards, Mr. Speaker. That’s the furthest thing from the 
truth. 
 
The government and the members on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, are the founders of medicare in this country, the 
founders of medicare in this nation, Mr. Speaker. And we are 
the protectors of medicare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate something that should be 
obvious to the members opposite but they have some difficulty 
understanding. And it’s something that’s very simple, Mr. 
Speaker — that in this province with this government in power, 
we will always have a publicly owned, publicly operated, and 
publicly funded health care system. Not like the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. We’ll always have a publicly funded 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as with any system — as with any system — 
it needs to be reviewed periodically. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what’s going on in the health system across this country, not 
just in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at a health 
care system that was developed and put in place in the 1940s, 
Mr. Speaker, and has gradually evolved. 

But even when that first health care system was put in place by 
Tommy Douglas and an NDP administration in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, it was identified then that we would have to move 
to a second stage of medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that would be a model of wellness, one that looked more 
closely at the determinants of health care, that focused on 
dealing with those determinants, and trying to make our society 
and its people more healthy to avoid some of the difficulties or 
interchanges with the health system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they don’t want to talk 
about building a 21st century health care system. They don’t 
want to have a vision for the future, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
have Bill 11 with Alberta. That’s what they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re talking about visions for the future in 
health care, they talk about doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s all we hear about — all this doom, the gloom, all the bad 
things — that they just can’t seem to talk about anything 
positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same as putting Roundup on your lawn 
and expecting it to grow. If you all talk about the negative, you 
don’t want to nourish anything, you don’t want to build 
anything, you don’t have any vision, you put Roundup on your 
lawn and you don’t let it grow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t understand that in order to build something, you 
need to work at it. You need to develop it. You need to nourish 
it. You need to build it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of interest that I saw the 
member from Canora-Pelly stand up the other day and thank the 
doctors, the nurses, and the health care system for providing 
him quality care, Mr. Speaker — the member opposite. He 
stood up in this House and told about the quality care he 
received in the General Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member said the good care he got, and the next day the 
members opposite are criticizing the system time and time 
again, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that they can’t look beyond 
what’s in front of them and look to the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to talk about a vision for the future, and 
our Premier has talked about this vision many, many times 
across the country. 
 
First we have to take on the determinants of health care, Mr. 
Speaker. We need to understand what’s causing the illnesses in 
our society and look at ways to look at dealing with those issues 
in a more preventive mode of way. 
 
Secondly, we need to improve the organization of our health 
care delivery system, not just in Saskatchewan but right across 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thirdly, we need to commit, as a government, to renovating our 
health care system. And we have done that, Mr. Speaker. We in 
this province started in 1995 determining where our health care 
system had to go in the future, Mr. Speaker. We’re not worried 
about living in the past. We’re not living in a world of doom 
and gloom, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking towards the future. 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing that every day, consulting with 
those stakeholders in the health care system. 
 
Now we hear the members opposite tell us what the Living Sky 
Health District was saying about their home care plan, and then 
the next day the minister comes and reads a letter from the CEO 
of the district saying that isn’t so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we hear about this problem, we hear about that 
problem, Mr. Speaker. And then day after day we have to 
correct those facts, Mr. Speaker. There’s obviously some 
difficulty in getting the facts as we need to deal with the real 
problems in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A point in fact, Mr. Speaker, one day in this House we heard 
about a bat infestation in the Regina General Hospital. And the 
next day, Mr. Speaker, we find out that it’s no more than a 
figment of an imagination, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to deal with real problems not bats. 
We need to deal with the health care system for the future, Mr. 
Speaker. And we need to deal with the real issues that face 
health care in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in building a health care system for the future we 
need to look at many, many things. But I want to point out a 
few things that the members opposite may not be aware, or tend 
to ignore, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan spends the second largest 
amount per capita on health care spending of any province in 
this country, Mr. Speaker. The second largest amount. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even during the years that we were dealing 
with the Tory debt of the 1980s at its greatest point, when we 
were dealing with that debt, Mr. Speaker, each and every year 
this government increased health care spending, Mr. Speaker. 
Each and every year we put more money into health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this health care system without doubt, and 
others from outside this province say regularly — it’s the 
number one health care system in the country, and Canada 
provides the best health care system in the entire world, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s done in this country and by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite, we tend to want to 
look to a bright future and we want to build a new and 
innovative health care system for the 21st century that deals 
with wellness, Mr. Speaker, that has a vision for the future and 
isn’t dealing with the negative doom and gloom of the past. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time has elapsed, 
members. We have a 10-minute period for questions, comments 
and presumably answers to questions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Hopefully 
more than presumably answers, we’d like some real answers. 
 
My question is to the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. The 
whole issue is on whether there’s a gag order on the health 
districts. And I have a letter here from the South East Health 
District. We met with them, they’d forwarded a letter to us 
saying that very, very thing. And I just want to quote a couple 

of statements right from the letter that they sent to the Health 
minister. And I quote: 
 

Further to what you have directed, that public and staff 
consultation should not occur until the department has 
approved our plan. No public consultation, no staff 
consultation. 

 
It goes on further in this very letter from the South East Health 
District, quoting what your minister has directed to them. It 
says: 
 

We’re very concerned by the specific instructions that 
changes (what we) that we are incorporating into our 
health plan not to be discussed with our public or our staff 
until these changes . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I just want to 
remind all hon. members the tradition here in this segment is for 
roughly one minute questions, and answers roughly the same 
length of time. The hon. member has been just over a minute 
and I would urge that you go straight to a question. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. How can you 
say that these statements are not a gag order on the health 
districts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — I want to thank the member very much for his 
question. I’m sure the member knows quite well that when 
you’re developing a business plan — and that’s technically 
what this is — and that each health district operates for its own 
members and residents, but also operates within the larger plan 
of the health family within Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the member has always . . . or heard this week the answers 
from the minister to this question. But I would be sure . . . or be 
quite happy to reiterate and repeat them for him. 
 
Now the wording in the letter was “should not occur;” it was 
not “would not occur.” That it is a suggestion and that they 
approve any changes to ensure that they fit into the broad 
provincial strategy. 
 
The hon. member would know that likely the very things that 
the people on this side talked about in their comments during 
the debate was that you cannot make promises until the total 
plan is looked at for the province. Each health district is part 
and parcel of the total plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a 
question for the hon. member for Humboldt. Every day of the 
year the government considers a whole range of policy options, 
a whole range of possibilities, and we announce decisions when 
they are made. 
 
Now are you arguing in this motion that government in all areas 
should make public every suggestion before it, every 
possibility, every alternative. Or do you agree with me that it is 
far more logical, it makes far more sense, for government to 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

announce decisions? Do you agree with me that it would only 
create hysteria and chaos and misinformation to throw out there 
things that are not government policy, are not the plan? But 
when there is a plan that is adopted, then the people of 
Saskatchewan need to know what that plan is. But to throw it 
out when it isn’t policy, when it isn’t the plan, would just cause 
confusion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the member 
opposite, I would just like to say there is already chaos in this 
province over the health care system. 
 
There is extreme chaos and the reason there is chaos, to the 
member from North Battleford, is simply because people have 
been promised that there would be consultation. They haven’t 
been given the guarantee or the ability or right to take part in 
consultation that’s meaningful. 
 
There are numerous instances where boards in this province 
have clearly told us, on this side of the House at least, that they 
have not been able to put forward their agenda within their 
budget simply because the Health department sends someone to 
their district board meetings to kibosh basically all of their 
plans and to cut their funding where they should feel that it’s 
necessary. 
 
Now if the province has a plan, I would suggest that the 
province puts it forward. If you’re planning on amalgamating 
health districts now, let people know so that they know what’s 
happening and they can forward plans that are appropriate. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is to the member from Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
The Health budget has gone from $1.5 billion in 1991 to 1.97 
billion this year. That’s a 33 per cent increase. And the net 
result of that has been 53 hospital closures including the closure 
of the newest hospital in Regina, the Plains. 
 
We have the longest surgery waiting lists in Canada. People 
cannot access long-term care. Home care is being denied to 
needy patients. And the people of Saskatchewan have to go 
outside of this province to get health care. Even Tommy 
Douglas left this province to live elsewhere. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan need more than just NDP rhetoric 
about health care. We need real health care services. When will 
that member support a health care system that includes real 
access to timely medical services that are currently being denied 
to people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Our health care system has . . . we have put more 
money into that health care system every year. That’s right. 
And we have provided and continue to provide a higher level of 
service in so many areas. 
 
There are more visits, more consultations with family 
physicians, more nursing home residents. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we have continued to provide new and better facilities; we have 

continued to provide new and better equipment. We are doing 
more cataract surgeries, more hip replacements, more knee 
replacements. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a model health care 
system for this nation and for this world and we will continue to 
make that even better within the resources that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. I’ve heard her speaking about how they’re going to 
help keep staff and retain staff and improve health care. But I 
have a two-part question. 
 
How does the member intend to retain staff and improve health 
care if the plan on that side of the House was no increase during 
the last election? As well as, the Leader of the Opposition has 
been telling Ottawa to withhold public funding for health care 
for the provinces. That’s the first part. 
 
And the second one I’d like a commitment from that member, 
does she support the principles of the Canada Health Act or 
does she support privatized health care? 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I’d be happy to answer the question. First of 
all, I’ll answer the last question first. Do we support the Canada 
Health Act? Yes, we do. And on this side of the House we 
would endorse it by providing accessibility which is a key point 
in the Canada Health Act, which we do not have in this 
province today. 
 
We do not have accessibility to health care. We have health care 
but what good does it do if it’s not accessible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader never, ever said that we would cut 
health care spending in this province. What we are calling for is 
an audit of the system to find out where the money is and to put 
redirected dollars to add to our health care in this province 
instead of throwing it in the wind and then saying, why don’t 
we have good health care. There is no desire by the government 
opposite to find out where the health care dollars are and to 
improve the service. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like . . . It seems to me that the member from Humboldt 
objects to the approval process of the board’s budget by the 
Department of Health. 
 
I would like to ask the member from Humboldt, how large a 
cheque — in the good old Tory fashion — would she write to a 
district health board without the right to review and approve the 
board’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Health boards have already looked at their needs. 
They have done needs assessments. They have been guaranteed 
in that district by the Minister of Health that they would enjoy 
the same services that they already are enjoying right now. 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

Based on that and that assurance from the minister, if they put 
forward their plan, we would expect then that no conversation 
that has been given to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The time has 
expired, members. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Regionally Based Programming by 
the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to speak today to a motion which I think is both timely 
and extremely important to our province today. The motion 
concerns the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and changes 
that are being made . . . or being considered by the CBC board 
of directors and Mr. Rabinovitch that will I think have a very 
adverse impact on our community and on our province as a 
whole. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me begin by saying, this morning I had 
a chance to review some of the comments Mr. Rabinovitch 
made to the Standing Committee of the House of Commons that 
had invited him to appear and speak to them. I was concerned 
by the approach that Mr. Rabinovitch had made. 
 
The argument that he is putting forward is that CBC in its 
current form cannot continue. CBC in its form, as it is licensed 
by the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission), as its operating and 
broadcasting licence requires it to, cannot continue. And that 
this is . . . that as a result we need to make significant changes, 
and changes in particular in the way regional broadcasting and 
regional programming are made. 
 
Mr. Rabinovitch this morning told the House of Commons, and 
to quote, “Without fundamental change we (we being the CBC) 
will slide into oblivion.” 
 
I agree, and I think all members agree in this Assembly, that 
change within the national broadcasting system can be a 
positive. What we do not agree with is that by neutering the 
CBC’s regional arm, by going forward and removing regional 
programming by diminishing the approach that is currently in 
place that we will not have the same ability, the same ability 
and the same access to national broadcasting that we do today. 
 
CBC is an important part of our culture. It’s an important part 
of Canada. It is part of what reflects back who we are as 
Canadians. And I think that perhaps now, as we have gone 
through a navel-gazing exercise over the last 15 years certainly 
constitutionally to figure out and better define what is in fact 
Canadian, I find it interesting that in the midst of this now, we 
have the CBC entering into the foray with an approach which 
basically centralizes its view of Canada, not only in Ontario, but 
quite frankly in downtown Toronto. 
 
I think many of us who have been to Toronto have certainly 
been awed and impressed by the beauty of the CBC National 
Broadcast Centre sitting down there, I think it’s on John Street, 
right across from the Sky Dome and the convention centre. A 
remarkable, beautiful building. 

But that is not what the CBC is. The CBC is a reflection of who 
we are. It is a reflection of national priority, not simply in 
downtown Toronto which clearly is the corporate centre of this 
nation, but it has to reflect Canadians across this country. 
 
And what we’re starting to see is unfortunately, I think a very 
narrow perspective of what this broadcasting corporation is 
about. It concerns me to a certain extent as we watch how 
Canada defines itself and the sort of national icons that we 
attach ourselves to. 
 
I find it interesting that a couple of weeks ago, as I think 
members of this Assembly will know, Bob Homme died. Mr. 
Homme of course was, as we all know him, the Friendly Giant. 
And I was surprised by the way Canadians, particularly 
Canadians in my generation responded to this. 
 
This was a program, a piece of cultural pabulum to be honest, 
as children that we grew up on. And it somehow very 
profoundly struck people with the death of this gentleman who 
for so many years, nearly 30 years, had been coming into our 
homes as Canadian entertainment. This is something successive 
generations of children grew up on. 
 
Today I wonder whether in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those 
are the same things that . . . if children today growing up reflect 
on these things the same way. Is it the CBC, is it that national 
broadcasting, is it that Canadian image and those Canadian 
values which are coming into their home. Or is it in fact other 
programming? Is it a more American programming? Is it 
programming from other countries that is coming in and 
shaping their views? 
 
I think we need to understand that Canadians are different. We 
are unique and we have a very interesting and I think . . . I think 
it’s a perspective and a cultural heritage that we need to 
celebrate in this nation. And I’m not sure that by going to a 
more nationalized, homogenized approach to broadcasting in 
this nation, that we are going to see this happen. 
 
The member opposite I know is anxious to get into the debate 
and I won’t take long, and I’ll allow him to get to his feet and 
speak on this important issue. 
 
But I do want to say a few things about the approach which is 
being taken. Today there is a very well-known, a very 
well-known advertisement which is playing from one of our 
national breweries. It’s simply known, in the popular culture, as 
the rant. This of course is Molson Canadian’s great “I am a 
Canadian.” You know, Joe, the Canadian, who stands up and 
talks about how he differs from being an American. 
 
And I find it interesting, I find it interesting that in many ways 
this beer commercial has come to define more of what is 
Canadian than much of the programming that we have. And I 
worry about this. And I worry about it that we are losing the 
touchstones that we used to have 20 years ago or 30 years ago 
or 40 years ago that were reflected back to us from our national 
broadcaster that talked about the things that made us Canadian. 
 
Now Molson Canadian makes a fine product but that is not . . . I 
certainly am not going to turn to Molson Canadian’s marketing 
department to find a reflection of what is Canada. 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

And what I fear is that if we are going to lose, if we are going to 
lose the regional diversity and the voices that we have in this 
country that reflect back in terms of politics, in terms of culture, 
in terms of the arts, in terms of community life, if we lose that 
or if it becomes homogenized, then we are losing something 
very important that will weaken our nation. And I think that 
that’s an extremely important thing for us to take note of. 
 
People maybe say that this is not something that would in fact 
happen. But I say simply take a look at what is reflected out of 
Saskatchewan in the national newspapers — in The Globe and 
Mail, in the National Post. Both fine publications, both fine 
publications, but frankly the only things that we see these days 
are stories on court trials, stories on convicted . . . unfortunately 
the convicted senator from here. We see the court case 
involving Jack Ramsay. We see the . . . the last time I saw an 
exposé on Saskatchewan, it involved the notoriety and the 
unfortunate situation of the 1980s and the many criminal trials 
that came out of it. 
 
Certainly that is a part of our history. Certainly that is part of 
Saskatchewan politics. Dark days, dark hours. But that certainly 
does not reflect what goes on in our political life in this 
province. And if we’re relied on the National Post to tell the 
story or we relied on The Globe and Mail to tell the story, then 
frankly if we end up relying on nothing more than the national 
news to tell that story, that is all we’ll hear. 
 
Because unfortunately it’s the conflict that ends up being the 
big splash and the big story. It’s not the nuances, it’s not the 
subtleties, it’s not the celebrations of everyday Saskatchewan 
life which make it onto the national news. 
 
I wish it did. I wish it did; but it doesn’t. And so what we have 
got to talk about and what we have got to take a look at is with 
the CBC plan in particular, is how do we maintain that voice. 
How do we make sure that our stories of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people, ordinary Saskatchewan families, become 
part of the daily record in this nation as well? 
 
Now the CBC currently under its broadcast licence is required 
to carry some seven and a half, eight hours of programming, I 
believe, weekdays, of local programming in our province. The 
proposal is to go to less than eight minutes a day — less than 
eight minutes a day of local programming. 
 
Well how do you tell the story of Saskatchewan people in eight 
minutes a day? I’m not saying that the . . . let me put this right 
up front. It’s not that we don’t have other people out there 
broadcasting and telling the stories. But with the way that the 
national networks have gone, it is increasingly difficult for us to 
have our western voices, and our Saskatchewan voice in 
particular, heard. 
 
We are not Albertans. We are not Manitobans. And the 
argument from Mr. Rabinovitch and others that by having a 
regional broadcast centre in Winnipeg and having a regional 
broadcast centre in Calgary, that the Prairies are covered off, 
leaves a great big gaping hole. Because my story, the story of 
the lives and these people here, aren’t going to make Calgary’s 
newscast. 
 
The arts communities’ stories that come out of Saskatoon or out 

of Regina that we see on Arts Reel on Friday afternoons aren’t 
going to make it onto Manitoba’s broadcast list. So what we’ll 
end up with is those big controversies becoming 
Saskatchewan’s contents and Saskatchewan’s contribution to 
national news. 
 
Not that they shouldn’t be, not that they’re not reflective of a 
certain piece of it. But the fact is that there’s much more to 
Saskatchewan — there’s much more to the Saskatchewan 
community than these high profile stories. 
 
And to lose that, to lose the programming time we will, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, lose a lot of the texture that is part of the 
Canadian social fabric. And this is a very important issue for us. 
We need to work on ways to make sure that Saskatchewan is 
recognized. 
 
As I understood the plan that was being looked at by the CBC, 
there was talk that they would maintain regional broadcast 
centres in Newfoundland, they’d maintain another one in 
Halifax, they would maintain Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg, 
Calgary, and Vancouver as the main regional broadcast centres. 
But by my count the provinces that lose out are PEI (Prince 
Edward Island), New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan. Why is 
that? Why is that? 
 
(1615) 
 
And how is there a benefit to the Canadian story by excluding 
these three provinces or forcing us to tell our story in eight 
minutes of news broadcast time a day. How does that work? 
How do we get out the important issues that are part of 
everyday Saskatchewan life? How do we foster that dialogue? 
And how do we deal with the issues that are not directly news 
related but still part of our community? 
 
There’s an interesting article by Maggie Siggins in the 
December 18, 1997 Globe and Mail. And in that she goes on to 
about the losses that we’ve seen already from CBC 
programming in terms of local broadcast. 
 
There was a time when we had Utopia Café; there was a time 
when we had What on Earth broadcast out of here; we had 
Country Canada; we saw Meeting Place. There were a variety 
of prairie Saskatchewan-oriented type programs that used to 
make it onto the national television waves. We don’t have that 
any more. 
 
Now certainly there are other ways to celebrate this. We’ve had 
great . . . I think all of us took great pride with Gail Bowen’s 
success in having her books made into made-for-television 
movies. This is good to see but we shouldn’t be looking at these 
as the exceptions. It should simply be a part of everyday life in 
this nation. That we can turn on the television set and see the 
stories of Canadian people broadcast back to us. 
 
For some reason, Atlantic Canada seems to be more successful 
at getting that story out than we do. Whether it's because they 
do it in humour through Codco or through . . . what is the Marg 
Delahunty program . . . This Hour Has 22 Minutes, or some of 
these other programs, whether they have more success getting 
their stories into the national psyche than we do, I don’t know. 
 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

But there is a great cultural vacuum which is already occurring 
in this nation frankly, and I am concerned that if we are going 
to see an increase . . . or a greater reduction in the amount of 
programming time allocated, that we are only going to further 
diminish that. 
 
People say, well this may just be fear-mongering. But I say to 
members, take a look at what happened in this province alone. 
It was not many years ago that CBC consolidated its Saskatoon 
and Regina operations into Regina. 
 
Now obviously here in Regina this has been a positive. We’ve 
maintained our broadcasting. But I think any of us that watch 
the programming know that there is . . . there are many fewer 
stories being told that come out of Saskatoon or out of the north 
central part of our province that are equally valuable in terms of 
being told and deserve as much time and recognition. 
 
This is certainly the case in the southern part of the province as 
well. Regina does not solely reflect the view of Saskatchewan. 
We know that with the loss of the Saskatoon broadcast centre 
and the move away from that, with consolidation of it here in 
Regina, that we have seen a deterioration in the programming. 
 
There is at this point no other news organization that broadcasts 
a provincial news broadcast. Saskatoon has its own CTV 
broadcast and its own Global broadcast. P.A. (Prince Albert) I 
think shares Saskatoon’s feed. In Regina we have our own 
Global and our own CTV broadcast. But CBC fills a void of 
providing a national . . . or a provincial broadcast. 
 
Imagine now if we ripped that out. Take that away. Then 
instead what we end up doing is, yes, Mr. Rabinovitch says 
he’ll add in eight more sites for regional broadcast. I doubt very 
much than any of those are going to be in Yorkton or Swift 
Current or P.A. My guess is that you’ll see more voices out of 
central BC (British Columbia), out of central Ontario, and out 
of Quebec. 
 
And I don’t know how that serves Canada. I don’t know how 
that serves the Canadian culture. And I don’t know how that 
meets the national broadcast objectives of the CBC. 
 
This is an important issue not just in terms of the jobs, not just 
in terms of the approach that CBC is taking, but in terms of the 
importance of this issue in terms of making sure Saskatchewan 
people have a role to play in the cultural life of this nation. 
 
We are a great, diverse, interesting people, and by pulling out 
that regional broadcast, by forcing it into eight minutes . . . 
Assuming that we actually get eight minutes. Let’s remember 
it’s going to shared regionally so we may get four and Manitoba 
may get four. Well what stories do you tell out of that? What 
does it become? Is it simply the latest, the top story in the . . . is 
it just the top story in the legislature? Is it some story in one 
community? How do we make sure that we get all of these 
stories reflected? 
 
I hope that CBC, the CBC board will take a look at television 
and look at the benefit of CBC radio and the programming 
initiatives they’ve taken there, where we do, I think, in 
Saskatchewan have a very strong radio program. Whether that’s 
the morning edition . . . I know I listen every morning and hear 

the news out of the North. I listen to the afternoon edition as I 
drive home. And there is, in fact, this — there is a sense that the 
province is larger than simply Regina. And I think that CBC 
television can learn from this. I think that CBC television can 
learn from this. 
 
And I hope that what Mr. Rabinovitch does is not simply dam 
the torpedoes and jam this through. I would hope that he would 
have the opportunity to listen to what we’re saying not simply 
what the Liberal members of the House of Commons 
committees are saying but to actually hear what ordinary 
Saskatchewan people say. Because it’s here that we’re going to 
lose. The rest of Canada will lose too by not having this 
understanding of us. And frankly, I think this is a great, a great 
detriment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know other members want to address 
this issue and so I won’t take up any more time. But I will 
move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government and the 
board of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) to 
recognize the importance to national unity of a strong, 
independent regional broadcasting network, and that they 
provide the necessary direction and material to allow our 
publicly-funded, non-commercial network to continue 
providing regionally based news coverage and program 
development in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this will be seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
very proud and also very humble to follow the last speaker. 
Like him, I’ve seen those beer commercials — the I am Joe, I 
am Canadian. They haven’t quite spoken to me but I have to tell 
you that his speech spoke to me. 
 
I have a passion for CBC and it is so wonderful to hear it so 
articulately laid out as the member who spoke before me has 
just done. And I do congratulate him for his speech. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I came to the legislature 
this morning and was told what the private members’ motion 
would be today, I thought oh no, here we go again, and why do 
we have to continue doing this — standing up and trying to 
save our national institutions. Why is it that yet again we’re still 
having to talk about the importance of CBC radio and television 
to the regions? Why is it that our national institutions seem to 
be so constantly under attack? 
 
Of course, we know why they’re under attack. It’s because they 
are underfunded. Over the last few years the budget to CBC has 
been slashed by 33 per cent. 
 
Now I can understand as a politician if we had a provincial 
network, we might be sometimes tempted to punish the media. 
Because not often as politicians are we pleased with the stories 
that get out. Whether we’re in opposition or government, we 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

always find the nuances that we would like to hear on a story 
don’t quite come out. 
 
And so I suppose as politicians we would often be tempted to 
shoot the messenger. And it is unfortunate that the federal 
Liberals have followed through on that temptation and they are 
attempting not to shoot the messenger but to strangle the 
messenger. Death by a thousand cuts is what’s occurring. 
 
I would appeal first of all to the federal Liberals to reconsider 
what they’re doing. You cannot continue to eviscerate CBC, a 
proud national institution, and expect that we will either have 
the local Saskatchewan stories reflected in the Canadian fabric 
or even the broad Canadian stories reflected. This evisceration 
of CBC by the federal government, I would suggest, simply has 
to stop. 
 
We have a balanced budget now. I commend the federal 
Liberals for what they’ve done in terms of bringing fiscal sanity 
back to the federal scene. Surely now, they can understand that 
it is time to once again restore the funding to CBC so that CBC 
television and radio can continue in that proud tradition of 
public broadcasting that Canadians have come to love, respect, 
and enjoy. 
 
You know, what we see here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
continued dwindling with the local shows having to be pared 
back, cut, done away with, scrapped altogether, and so what has 
been happening is that viewers have started to turn to the other 
two networks to get their local news. 
 
I think I’m a fairly good example of that. I am a 
dyed-in-the-wool CBC Radio fan. I don’t listen to any other 
radio except CBC. And I have to tell you, quite frankly, often 
CBC AM grates on me and I would prefer not to hear it so I 
turn to CBC FM. I think the politically correct terms nowadays 
is CBC Radio One and CBC Radio Two. 
 
I simply do not like commercial radio. But I have to tell you 
I’m probably in a minority of maybe 100 people. Most people 
like commercial radio. 
 
But most people also like choice. And when they get something 
that they don’t like they turn to another station or they turn to 
another television channel. 
 
I found, because I am a CBC Radio fan, that on the rare 
occasions when I’m at home and actually able to watch 
television, I have always felt it is my Canadian patriotic duty to 
watch CBC television. Well, you know, you can only carry it so 
far I have to tell you. And as a Saskatonian, a chauvinistic 
Saskatonian I will admit, I find that while CBC television out of 
Regina does a fairly good job of reflecting the whole of 
province, it’s not quite doing quite a good enough job of 
reflecting my city. 
 
So I watch the first few minutes of CBC TV news, late night 
news, and then I switch over to CFQC. At the same time, I’m 
feeling like I’m committing a heresy because I know that 
what’s happening is CBC’s ratings are dropping. And what is 
happening is this is becoming part of a self-fulfilling prophecy 
— provide a product that isn’t quite what the viewers want, 
they go to someplace else and the ratings drop. 

I don’t know whether this was a deliberate Machiavellian 
strategy by the federal government to allow the private 
broadcasters to flourish by turning off viewers and listeners, 
such as myself, from CBC or whether it’s an accidental 
by-product. But I can tell you it has become a self-fulfilling 
prophecy that CBC television is not quite good enough, so 
therefore we go to another product, another network when we 
want to see our local news. 
 
I don’t think it has to always be that way though, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I firmly believe that if we could stop the cuts, stop the 
bleeding dry of CBC, that we have extremely creative, 
inventive individuals who are still working for CBC who could 
provide the leadership, the talent, so that we would once again 
have the kind of local and regional coverage that we all want 
and demand. 
 
(1630) 
 
We’re here, I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to save CBC. 
That’s CBC — Canadian Broadcasting Corporation — not 
TBC, the Toronto broadcasting corporation. We want our 
stories from Saskatchewan, from Alberta, BC (British 
Columbia), and all the other provinces. We do not want them 
solely coming out of one centre as good as that centre may be. 
We want to hear our own regional and local stories reflected. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to go on too long. I’m 
not going to make the obvious point, save briefly, that I do 
believe that this recent announcement of 4 to 500 layoffs across 
Canada for CBC is probably a violation of the commitment that 
CBC did make to the CRTC when they said that they would 
ensure that there was a minimum of seven and a half hours of 
regional programming. 
 
I’m not going to go on too long about what I think about their 
proposal for local bureaus because I think it is self-evident to 
any of us who have watched bureaucracies and watch what 
happens — I would predict, with these eight local bureaus that 
they’re proposing to have with satellite uplinks that, first of all, 
they’re going to find out that (a) those satellite uplinks are 
incredibly expensive and much more expensive than they are 
anticipating and will likely mean that there will be a net cost 
savings of zero. 
 
I think that what they’re going to find out when these satellites 
turn out to be so expensive that they’re going to then have to 
embark on yet another round of cuts and we’re going to see 
even those kinds of small bureaus — those pocket bureaus — 
being cut. Then we will truly not have a CBC at all; it will be 
only Toronto-centric. 
 
I also don’t want to go on too long about their proposal to 
expand the supper news hour with 10-minute local inserts 
because I would think that when they stop and think about it, 
they’re going to realize that those 10-minute local inserts and an 
hour long news broadcast — that’s supper time — runs contrary 
to the busy lives and lifestyles that most Canadians have. 
 
Most Canadians want to watch their local news for 10 to 15 
minutes and then get on with the rest of their day. They’re not 
going to sit down and say, well I’ve got an hour here and maybe 
my Saskatchewan/Manitoba eight-minute segment is going to 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

be coming at 6:46 or maybe it will be here at 6:23, but I’m sure 
I’ve got the whole hour to watch just in case I find out what’s 
happened locally. This is simply not going to work and what 
they will find is that CBC television will lose even more 
viewers if they follow through on this proposal. 
 
What I want to do instead is to tell you that over the last couple 
of months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have been in correspondence 
with Mr. Robert Rabinovitch, the president of CBC. I wrote him 
on February 6 about a relatively minor matter. And he very 
promptly responded on February 22. I then wrote him back 
again on March 22 — this time thanking him for his very 
courteous response, and also saying to him that I was concerned 
about the funding difficulties for CBC. In this case I referred 
specifically to CBC Radio one and two. 
 
Mr. Rabinovitch, I will say, responded back on April 7, and 
indicated that CBC Radio one and two will receive an annual 
budget increase of some 6 million. He closes his letter off by 
saying: 
 

CBC Radio plays a vital role in binding this wonderfully 
diverse country of ours together. It’s something we do 
well, and it’s something we’re very proud of. 

 
I agree with his sentiment. Unfortunately it doesn’t go quite far 
enough. I would wish that he had mentioned CBC Television as 
well. 
 
So I would like to take advantage of the fact that we have this 
Hansarded right now. And I would like to dictate an open letter 
to Mr. Robert Rabinovitch. And my open letter would go like 
this: 
 
To Robert Rabinovitch 
President, CBC 
250 Lanark Avenue 
Ottawa, Ontario 
K1Z 6R5 

 
Dear Mr. Rabinovitch: 
 
Thank you very much for your prompt, courteous, and efficient 
correspondence of the last couple of months. I have really 
appreciated the efficiency that you have demonstrated in 
handling both minor matters and larger matters of substance. 
 
I would like to write you at this time to point out that there are 
major concerns, not only in Saskatchewan but in all provinces 
in this country, with your proposal to do away essentially with 
regional programming. 
 
Mr. Rabinovitch, you have impressed me as being a creative, 
inventive, and efficient man. I am sure that you can go back to 
the drawing board and find a better proposal for dealing with 
the budget crunch that you are now facing. 
 
I am also sure, Mr. Rabinovitch, as time goes on and as 
Canadians start to realize the impact of the budget of CBC on 
their local and regional programming, that you will have more 
fuel to take to the federal government to convince them that 
they should provide better and more substantial funding for 
CBC television. 

Mr. Rabinovitch, other legislatures in this country have passed 
fairly specific motions calling on CBC to maintain their own 
specific regional programming. In Newfoundland, Mr. 
Rabinovitch, they want to keep the Here and Now program. In 
Manitoba, they want to keep the program they call 24 Hours. In 
Nova Scotia, they want to keep the program they call First 
Edition. 
 
Saskatchewan could take that same position and argue, like a 
dog in the manger, we want only our local programming. But 
we’re not doing that. 
 
Just as we have led the way with medicare, just as we led the 
way by being the first province in all of Canada to have a 
balanced budget, just as we have led the way with our child 
action plan, Mr. Rabinovitch, we want to also lead the way by 
telling you that we would like to see local programming 
maintained all across this country. That’s why, Mr. 
Rabinovitch, we have passed a motion saying: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government and the 
board of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation to 
recognize the importance to national unity of a strong, 
independent regional broadcasting network, and that they 
provide the necessary direction and material to allow our 
publicly funded . . . network to continue providing 
regionally based news coverage and program development 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

We want . . . In closing I would say: Mr. Rabinovitch, we want 
a public broadcaster that reflects our communities, our 
concerns, our hearts. Mr. Rabinovitch, we want a public 
broadcaster that will even reflect our flaws and our wrinkles. 
We are not Detroit, we are not Toronto. We are Saskatchewan. 
We’re proud of it. 
 
Thank you. Yours truly, Pat Lorje, MLA, Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In rising to 
speak to this issue, I want to deal with both the real issue that 
we all want to discuss here with respect to this motion as well 
as the specific motion itself. 
 
Unfortunately this particular motion, the way it has been 
presented by the member for Regina South, I think does a 
disservice to the furtherance of raising the issue of improved 
local and regional news coverage in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say that specifically about the motion, Deputy Speaker. I think 
that the member, that both members have spoke . . . who have 
spoken prior to me, have done a much better job than the 
motion does itself of explaining the importance of this issue of 
local and regional coverage. 
 
But I want to . . . What we’re dealing with, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the motion that has been drafted . . . that has been 
presented rather, and I would like to speak to that if I may. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than simply presenting a resolution founded 
wholly on the mutual desire of all members, and indeed the 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

people of our province, to do our part to protect and further the 
cause of expanded local and provincial media coverage, the 
member in introducing issues into this emotion . . . into this 
motion that he has introduced, I believe, has eroded its potential 
to solicit unanimous or at least broad-based support. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the resolution is not solely a platform from 
which we can all call for the preservation and hopefully the 
improvement of local and provincial coverage from CBC and 
other corporate media outlets in our province, but it is also, 
upon close examination, a platform to espouse the virtues of 
government controlled or owned media being able to further 
various issues. 
 
In this resolution in particular, the issue is national unity and 
possibly the issue of publicly funded commercial ventures 
versus the private sector. It is a platform, Mr. Speaker, from 
which an argument for publicly funded broadcasters versus 
private broadcasters could be made. 
 
And it is the introduction of these concepts and ideas into the 
resolution that weaken it, Mr. Speaker. For many of us, support 
of this motion as it currently reads would be tantamount to 
support for concepts that go far beyond a common sense 
argument for the preservation and improvement of local and 
provincial news in our province, be it from CBC or some other 
outlet. 
 
Indeed, many members on this side of the House could identify 
many other attendant issues to the one we debate today that we 
believe could result in the preservation of this local and 
provincial news outlet that we speak to today. For example, 
many people who feel strongly about the news hour programs 
specifically, and I note that other provinces that have 
entertained a resolution like this have actually referred directly 
and specifically to the program, the supper news or the evening 
news, that they were trying to protect. 
 
But for those who feel strongly about our specific program here, 
CBC News Hour, they might ask — rather than get into these 
issues that have been introduced in this motion — they might 
ask about other services that could be cut at CBC or about 
revenue-generating opportunities in order to preserve this 
particular program. They might ask about the potential for CBC 
Radio to move towards a greater acceptance of commercial 
advertisements. They might ask about the potential for a scaling 
back or cutting of some CBC French radio and television 
services in areas like Saskatchewan, where there simply aren’t 
the numbers to justify these very expensive programs. 
 
I for one, and many people in my constituency, would put a lot 
of credence in that. If they felt they could preserve the 
television newscast and the television coverage in the province 
of Saskatchewan by trading off some of the French services we 
currently have, I believe many people in my constituency and 
many people that we represent on this of the House, and frankly 
on the other side, would be interested in at least discussing that. 
 
And then again, for those who perhaps are not as concerned 
about the . . . this specific program, the News Hour program 
specifically, but would like improved and better provincial 
news coverage, they might want to ask questions about CBC 
moving to more affiliate organizations where privately owned 

television stations, independent television stations are CBC 
affiliates and carry their own local news. 
 
I could tell you that there is a lot of merit in the argument, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It has proven to be a successful arrangement in 
my constituency, in the city of Swift Current for decades. 
 
In Swift Current, there is a local television station that has been 
there since I . . . well, since I’ve been around and arguably 
that’s not that long of a time, but I’m told that it was there well 
before that. It’s CJFB Television. They are an independently, 
privately owned television station that are a CBC affiliate, so 
they provide CBC programming to the community and to the 
entire southwest. 
 
We can get the national news, of course, as everyone does on 
CBC, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also do their own local 
news. So even perhaps better from our perspective then, CBC 
news final or News Hour here in Regina, we get a local 
newscast provided by this independent, privately owned station 
that is a CBC affiliate. 
 
So many people across the province who would share the 
concerns that we’ve heard by the member for Regina South and 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast might want to know about 
this alternative. Might want to know about the opportunities for 
independent stations to be CBC affiliates and carry all of the 
programming — not the least of which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are things like Hockey Night in Canada— in our community 
that people want access to as well as some of the public affairs 
programming, but then have a time for local news, for local 
television news and community affairs, and the TV station in 
Swift Current has been doing that for some time. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now it is a competitive business and so if you come to the CBC 
affiliate in Swift Current and have a look around, it won’t be 
nearly as opulent as what you’ll see here at the facilities in the 
government-owned and operated station. There you will . . . in 
Swift Current you will see reporters being their own 
cameraman, being their own editors, and indeed being their own 
anchors. But they get around to the community, and they do the 
best job that they can of carrying local issues and local news on 
television. 
 
And so many of these people wonder when they look at that 
station, they wonder is CBC running perhaps as lean as it could 
on a province-wide or a national basis? And I think some of 
them have come to the conclusion that the answer is no. And I 
think that on this side of the House, we would like to see CBC 
doing that to a greater extent. We think they could preserve 
things like News Hour if they were to be able to do that. 
 
But the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that if we introduced a 
similar resolution today that was predicated on some of the 
areas that I’ve just touched on in my speech, that too would be 
unfair and unnecessarily complicating, just as the motion now 
appears before us is those things. 
 
What we need today is a resolution that is clear on the issue for 
which we can all find some agreement. We need a resolution 
that speaks to the specific situation, but also to the general issue 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2000 

of the corporate media giants and their perspective treatment of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the 
following motion which clarifies this resolution in my opinion 
and the issues that I have outlined, and it is seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone and it reads as follows, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefore: 
 
expresses its concern regarding the continued erosion of 
provincial media outlets and reporters in Saskatchewan 
who can provide the people of our province in Canada the 
vital information regarding events in our communities and 
our province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a great 
privilege to second the motion put forth by the member from 
Swift Current regarding this very issue. And I think of the 
couple of words that I really want to key in on the motion or the 
amendment is the continual erosion of public media outlets. 
 
And when I look at the original motion put forward, it talks 
about independent regional broadcast network, and I think 
that’s where the rub really comes in. I don’t know if we want to 
be going to regional broadcast networks as is mentioned in this 
motion. And I really, as I mentioned, a privilege to second the 
motion. 
 
When we talk about the erosion of provincial media outlets — 
and I think that is the most important part — and I think every 
member of the legislature would agree that more news coverage 
of events in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan reporters is better 
than no coverage at all. 
 
And I think we’ve been seeing over the last number of years, 
the coverage that is put forward to the political sphere in our 
province has been dwindling. There’s not as many people 
covering it through the papers, through the radio, or through the 
electronic news service, the TV, and it reflects then on the 
stories that are covered. 
 
It seems that many times when you watch the evening news that 
because of the limited resources of media outlets in our 
province, is that they can cover one story, maybe one or two 
stories. 
 
And so what that puts a government and especially opposition 
up against is priorizing which are the one or maybe two stories 
that are the most important when we may have a whole host of 
different issues that we’d like to cover. And I think we certainly 
get in danger when we start limiting and eroding the provincial 
service such has it been over the last number of years. 
 
It’s an interesting relationship between politics, politicians, and 
the media. And it can be very tenuous at some points. I 
remember listening to the late Eric Malling speaking at — a 
member of Swift Current, I believe — and speaking at a forum 
here in the city and talking about how the media, he was talking 

from a media perspective, on how it works. And then the media 
is so important to all of us to get our message out. 
 
And he says so often that the media, you know, it can take a 
small, small special interest group dealing with one specific 
interest and they make enough noise that the media picks it up. 
The media picks up that issue and broadcasts it throughout the 
province and people watch that. Then we as politicians 
sometime talk, what is the important issue in your world today. 
Well it was what they had just happened to have seen on TV, 
which may be just a very small special interest group but it’s 
got national or provincial recognition. 
 
And we always have to worry about that. And what happens I 
feel as we see the broadcast, the network, or the media eroding, 
is that we have a greater chance of that happening, where small 
special interest groups get the eye of the media and get their 
point out across the province, but it maybe isn’t reflective of the 
whole population. So you know, we have to watch that we don’t 
get into the situation where it’s so eroded that we have that 
problem. 
 
And, as mentioned by the member from Swift Current, he spoke 
regarding affiliate stations, privately owned stations that are 
affiliates of CBC and it’s not just in Swift Current that that is 
the case. There’s also affiliates in Yorkton and Prince Albert, 
and another three or four cities in the province which work 
quite nicely. They offer their own local news service and they 
cover the local issues and they are able to use some of the 
national broadcast services as well. 
 
And, you know . . . so I don’t know if we have to throw the 
whole thing out. If we don’t support CBC totally, we lose it 
completely and I think that’s probably missing the mark. And 
that’s why I really support the amendment to the motion that we 
don’t want to see it erode any more and we need to take steps 
and look at all the possible options to keep as many news 
services working in the province, whether it is print again, 
radio, or TV, to cover the message that’s being put out. 
 
We must recognize that a local television level, as far as news 
goes, the private broadcaster far outstrips the CBC in terms of 
viewers. 
 
And, you know, I question that. I wonder why that is. In my 
previous life before I got into politics, I spent a lot of time . . . I 
was working with the Saskatchewan Safety Council and was 
doing most of the media work with them. And it really . . . I had 
to question when we would do a press release and have the 
media come and cover a press release, whether it was Safe 
Driving Week, whether it was an issue on cellphones in 
vehicles, we would have one fellow come from, for example 
CK TV and he would cover the story. 
 
I remember a specific issue on school bus safety we were 
dealing with. We had one person from CTV, we had a couple of 
people from the radio stations, and there was four people from 
CBC to cover that one issue. There was two cameraman and a 
reporter from the English and a reporter from the French. And 
when I watched the stories after, I questioned, was the CBC 
story four times better than the CTV story? And I’m sorry, it 
wasn’t. 
 



May 16, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

You know, and you would think that when you look at the 
ratings, that they should have so much higher ratings because of 
all the number of people they have covering the story. But 
that’s not necessarily the case. 
 
And I think that really we have to question the amount of 
money that is put into CBC and whether there couldn’t be a 
whole lot of cost cutting with . . . at the same time maintaining 
local coverage. I think there is a lot of areas that could be cut 
and also maintain local coverage. 
 
So I am pleased to second the motion put forward by the 
member of Swift Current and not agree with the motion put 
forward by the member from Regina South. And at this time I’d 
like to adjourn debate on this subject. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Peters .................................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Eagles.................................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Wall....................................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  McMorris ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Wiberg ...............................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Hart....................................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Allchurch...........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Wartman ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hermanson........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Wall....................................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Junior Debating Championship 
  Wakefield ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 Paragon Awards 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 Big River Regional Health Care Centre Opens 
  Allchurch...........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Weekes...............................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 By-election in Newfoundland 
  Yates ..................................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Letters of Concern about Pornography 
  Wiberg ...............................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Straw Bale House 
  Harper ...............................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Construction Industry 
  Weekes...............................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 Home Care in Living Sky Health District 
  Harpauer ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Long-term Care in Esterhazy 
  Bakken...............................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
  Junor..................................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 Budgets of District Health Boards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
PRIVATE BILLS 
 Bill No. 301  The Mennonite Central Committee Saskatchewan Act 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1238 



 

 Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of the Regina Golf Club Act 
  Wartman ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 
 Bill No. 303 – The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic Dioceses Reorganization Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Mennonite Central Committee Saskatchewan Act 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
 Bill No. 302 — The Renaming of The Regina Golf Club Act 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Roman Catholic Dioceses Reorganization Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 District Health Care Budgets 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Bakken.....................................................................................................................................................................................1243, 1251 
  Wartman .................................................................................................................................................................................1244, 1251 
  Higgins.....................................................................................................................................................................................1246, 1250 
  Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1247, 1251 
  Yates ..................................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1251 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 7 — Regionally Based Programming by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1252 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 


