





























































Hansard: June 05, 2000


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1549 
 June 5, 2000 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present petitions on behalf of citizens 
throughout my area of the Humboldt constituency who are 
eager to receive improved cellular telephone coverage. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Prud’homme, Bruno, Vonda, and Cudworth. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Prud’homme, Vonda, and Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to retain Lanigan and Watrous hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Lockwood 
and Lanigan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned, as many in the province are, about 
the future of hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Lanigan, Drake, Jansen, and Leroy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have people of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the future of health care. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from 
Lanigan, Viscount, Drake, and Guernsey. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the future of the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Lanigan, Jansen, and 
Guernsey. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and area concerned about the high price 
of fuel. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce the fuel 
taxes by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by people from Swift Current and 
another from Regina. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring a 
petition on behalf of people who are very concerned about the 
health care in this province. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
And this signed by citizens from Strasbourg, Lanigan, and 
Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present with people concerned about the future of 
health care in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Lanigan and 
Jansen. 
 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding health care in this province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from people in the Lanigan area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about closures of rural hospitals. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the people from Lanigan and Guernsey. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to reduce fuel tax by 10 cents a litre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the federal and 
provincial governments to immediately reduce fuel taxes 
by 10 cents a litre, cost shared by both levels of 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners are from Vanscoy, Kerrobert, Elbow, Davidson, 
Hawarden, and Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 
citizens concerned about hospital closures. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 

 
The concerned petitioners are from the communities of Lanigan 
and Guernsey, and there’s one petitioner from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
concerning the closure of hospitals. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

Concerned citizens from Lanigan, Drake, and Viscount. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. It deals with 
concerns of dealing with possible confiscation of municipal 
reserve accounts. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon permanently and rule out any plans it has to 
confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

And the petitioners come from the communities of Dysart, 
Lipton, Fort Qu’Appelle, Cupar, Leross, and several other 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the closure 
of hospitals: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 

And the signatures on this petition come from Jansen, Drake, 
Guernsey, and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of citizens concerned with forced municipal amalgamation, and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to halt 
any plans it has to proceed with enforced amalgamation of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Chaplin and Morse. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
responsibility I rise to present a petition to retain Lanigan and 
Watrous hospitals. Their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will ever pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
Lanigan and Watrous hospitals remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Lanigan and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on a number of matters including: 
 

To ensure that the Cupar Health Centre and the Lanigan 
and Watrous hospitals remain open; 
 
To halt the amalgamation of municipalities; 
 
To reduce fuel taxes; and 
 
To not confiscate municipal reserve accounts. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 58 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: how many 
Saskatchewan farmers have been granted monies through 
the employment supplement program since this program 
began? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day. no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the cost to the 
government for each of the Saskatchewan residents treated 
for nephrotic syndrome outside of the province in 1999, 
year 2000; and what was the reason each of these cases 
were treated outside of Saskatchewan? 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 58 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: how many 
provincial government regulations were in place when the 
government made a promise to reduce regulations by 25 
per cent over 10 years; how many regulations have been 
eliminated since then; and how many regulations have 
been added? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery seated today are 15, approximately, 
former members of the Legislative Assembly. I will not give 
them introduction by name in the interests of time. 
 
But I should say, Mr. Speaker, that it has been my practice over 
the last several years to invite former members of the 

Legislative Assembly who have served in the government side 
to exchange views and ideas and discuss the current events of 
the day. This is the day in which we have some of the alumnus 
from 1991 seated in your gallery. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome former colleagues to this 
House; and I want to thank them for taking the time off to come 
and to meet with me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) alumni here to the Assembly this afternoon. Some of the 
members, as you know, Mr. Speaker, have served very well the 
people of Saskatchewan for a good length of time. 
 
Some were members for one term and in addition to that I think 
there are perhaps seven ministers, maybe more, that had served 
the people of Saskatchewan, and a number of other members. I 
noticed one of the members from Lloydminster who I 
understand in your party has been charged with the process of 
renewal. It looks like it still needs a little work, Mr. Premier, 
given the alumni up there this afternoon. 
 
And I couldn’t help but notice you look very longingly at the 
group up there this afternoon. And considering the fact that they 
. . . considering the fact that you have the B team on the floor 
and the A team in the gallery, I can see why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to all members of the Assembly and 
certainly the members in the gallery that I count many of them 
as my . . . as close friends . . . close friends . . . close colleagues 
at least, Mr. Speaker, and I would want to welcome and join 
with the Premier in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, 47 grade 4 students 
from St. Josephat School in my constituency of Regina 
Sherwood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Elaine Pack and 
RoseMarie Gauthier, and a chaperon, Mrs. Gusway, who is with 
us. I will . . . they’re here to watch the proceedings this 
afternoon, at which point they’ll be taking a tour. And I look 
forward to meeting with them at about 2:30 after question 
period to handle questions from them which I hope are equally 
. . . which may be even tougher than the questions we get from 
across the way. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, please join me in welcoming my 
students from St Josephat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the hon. members of the House, 
seated in your west gallery 24 grade 4 students from the Ruth 
Pawson School in my constituency. 
 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

They’re accompanied here today by their teacher, Mrs. Malley, 
and assistant, Mrs. Killback, and 9 chaperones. And I 
understand that I’ll be meeting with them after question period, 
and I think a uniqueness for them to have the opportunity to 
tour a minister’s office, the Minister of Labour, which she’ll 
join us there for a few minutes. 
 
So I ask all of my colleagues to welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Rafferty Dam 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the House today to inform all members about the Rafferty dam 
in the southeast corner of the province. Skeptics said this dam 
would never be more than a huge mud hole. Skeptics include 
one of the members opposite — the Deputy Premier. 
 
We now know that the Rafferty dam has been full and is now 
almost full. And I would challenge the Deputy Premier to walk 
across it as he has committed to doing. We also know that he 
has the snorkelling equipment to accomplish this as he was 
presented with this equipment in the House by Grant Devine a 
number of years ago. 
 
I would welcome the opportunity to witness this event should 
the Deputy Premier see fit to accept my challenge. Grant 
Devine had the vision to build Rafferty and Alameda. Do you 
have the right stuff to admit that he was right? 
 
Come on down to Rafferty and take your dunking. I invite 
everyone to come boating and fishing at the Rafferty reservoir. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Economy Reaches $1 Trillion 
 
Hon. Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I normally 
stand to speak about the great people in the constituency of 
North Battleford, but I think that might be creating a bit of 
jealousy opposite so today I’m going to give everyone a break. 
 
I rise to congratulate the entire country. As economist, Andrew 
Spence put it — Canada has reached the Holy Grail. 
 
Last Thursday Statistics Canada reported that our gross 
domestic product exceeded $1 trillion for the first time. That 
means that the value of all goods and services produced in 
Canada is now over $1 trillion. 
 
Canada is booming. We now have the 11th largest economy in 
the world. We outperformed the US (United States) in each of 
the last two years and have kept pace for the last four. In 1999, 
our economy expanded by 4.5 per cent making this country’s 
the fastest growing economy among the G-7 nations. 
 
Economists have attributed our recent good fortune to 
continuing export demands and strong growth in the domestic 
economy. 

Mr. Speaker, we too often dwell on the negatives and ignore our 
successes. The fact is Canada is on a roll. This country works. I 
ask all members to take a moment to recognize the 
accomplishments of their former Canadians under the capable 
leadership of the federal Liberal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Residents Receive Recognition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend Southwest 
Booster newspaper once again highlighted the accomplishments 
of a number of my constituents that I am honoured to draw the 
Assembly’s attention to this afternoon. 
 
Students Against Drinking and Driving have recently presented 
Stacy Rabik of Swift Current with one of two provincial builder 
awards. Stacy first got involved in SADD (Students Against 
Drinking and Driving) at the comp high school and continued 
her involvement in her university career. 
 
Recognition is also in order for Swift Current Comprehensive 
High School student Ryan Medforth who’s just been confirmed 
as an understudy for the very important 2000 anniversary tour 
of Saskatchewan Express. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on Friday of last week, the WHL (Western 
Hockey League) confirmed what we in Swift Current have 
known for a long time — by naming Todd McLellan as the 
league’s Coach of the Year. Bryce Wandler, the Bronco 
goaltender also received the Del Wilson Trophy for the top 
netminder in the WHL. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Ben Wiebe, a 
partner with Stark & Marsh Chartered Accountants in Swift 
Current. Last week the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan awarded Mr. Wiebe with the high honour of the 
Distinguished Community Service Award. The award 
recognizes Ben’s selfless dedication to minor hockey in Swift 
Current and the integral role he has played in insuring that Swift 
Current remains a strong and healthy WHL franchise city — the 
smallest such city on the continent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Congratulations to Ben and all of the Swift Current and area 
people who continue to demonstrate that the best resource of 
Swift Current and area are our people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Best Wishes for the Saskatchewan Roughriders 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, June is here and the 
Saskatchewan crops are seeded, the children are anxious for the 
end of school, and the most unique summer sign of all, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Roughriders are yet to lose a single game 
this season. 
 
For all of those of us who bleed green, and that includes just 
about everybody in this Assembly I’m sure, hope springs 
eternal. We are certain that this year will be better than the last 
five. It’s a proven historical fact that the phrase “next year 
country” was invented for Saskatchewan farmers and the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, as the Roughriders prepare to open 
their camp this coming Sunday, we wish them all a very 
successful season, both on the field and off. Because they are a 
professional team, a team which defies the odds year after year 
by surviving in a league where other teams in much larger 
centres don’t, we believe that the Roughriders are an integral 
part of our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because cheering for a contender is a luxury we 
haven’t had lately, we hope that the Roughriders do very much 
better this year, and we know that they will. 
 
Mainly, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Roughriders 
because we want them to do well, because the team is a part of 
our community, and a vital part at that. We take care of our 
team, they take care of our kids, they are models for our 
children. 
 
And I’m sure all members join with me in wishing the Riders 
the very, very best in the season to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Guy Kerbrat Wins Prime Minister’s Award 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the Prime 
Minister of Canada presented the Prime Minister’s Award to 
Mr. Guy Kerbrat for advances in technological literacy. Guy is 
a teacher at the Rouleau School in Rouleau, Saskatchewan 
where he carries a heavy workload in the school teaching 
computer-related subjects, as well as French, mathematics and 
phys ed. 
 
Guy was nominated for the Prime Minister’s Award by his 
colleagues and his much respected presence in the classroom, 
and in the school as a teacher and a coach, and in the Rouleau 
community. 
 
Guy has the ability to write computer programs quickly and 
tailor them towards problem solving for his students in the math 
and French subject areas. 
 
One of his notable achievements includes the Fast Track 
program which is used throughout Saskatchewan and in other 
provinces to speed up the recording process at track meets. He 
is the only teacher in Saskatchewan this year to receive this 
prestigious award for his efforts. 
 
He received a pin, a certificate signed by the Prime Minister, 
and $1,000 which he has designated towards volleyball 
equipment at the Rouleau School. 
 
I’m sure all members of this Assembly will congratulate you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Official Opening of Westview School 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning was a very happy morning for the 
children and their families of the West Flat community located 
in my constituency, Prince Albert Northcote. This morning I 
was very pleased to attend, along with the Premier and the 

member from Prince Albert Carleton, the official opening of the 
Westview School. 
 
Originally a satellite school with Queen Mary, Westview is 
officially designated as a new community school. These schools 
play a very important role in Prince Albert. They provide not 
only a solid academic education to the students but they act as a 
focal point for our community, the place for both students and 
their families to gather, a place to get a good start in order that 
these children have the opportunity to reach their goals in life. 
 
This school will hold over a hundred West Flat children from 
kindergarten to grade 4. It also is the house of the police liaison 
program, an office and a computer and teaching materials for 
Constable Brenda McGregor who will be made available by the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Division. 
 
I would like to congratulate the staff and the students for all 
their hard work in putting together a wonderful opening 
ceremony. I would also like to wish them the best as Westview 
School becomes an integral part of the West Flat community in 
Prince Albert and provides for an education for the future 
leaders of Prince Albert and of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community of Lampman Pays Off Swimming Pool 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
members opposite like to bring good news to the legislature. So 
do I. The people of Lampman paid off their swimming pool this 
weekend. They did this through their own efforts with no help 
from the government. They did this with a supper, an auction, 
and a sports day. 
 
People of the area donated services and supplies. One family 
donated five live chickens, and the lucky purchaser paid $650 
but he only wanted one chicken. The remaining four were sold 
for $500. So that’s $1,150 for this farm produce. 
 
But as every farmer knows, as farm produce goes up in price, so 
do farm inputs, particularly the heavy iron such as tractors and 
combines. They had two toy tractors donated for this sale. The 
winning bidder paid $1,200 and got his choice of either the 
John Deere or the Case. I’m not going to enter the argument of 
which one was chosen. 
 
But again, this clearly shows that the price of heavy iron is 
always more than the value of the farm produce. 
 
Overall the community raised $44,000 and completely paid for 
their swimming pool debt. Congratulations to the community of 
Lampman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Maintenance of Highway 4 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you want 
something done right, do it yourself. I guess that’s what the 
people of Val Marie are thinking. They are sick and tired of 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

waiting for the government to fix the potholes on Highway 4, so 
they’ve decided to do it themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks volumes about the NDP’s 
neglect of highways in this province when citizens have to get 
together and start fixing the highways themselves. 
 
To the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, the people of Val 
Marie pay taxes like everyone else. They pay income taxes, 
they pay gas tax, they pay your expanded PST (provincial sales 
tax). And it’s not like you’re spending the money on health care 
in that part of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, given all the taxes the people of Val Marie pay, 
why do they have to fix their own highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
for the question. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’ve instructed my 
deputy to contact the mayor of Val Marie. He has done so, and 
in fact as we speak he’s on his way down to Val Marie to meet 
with the mayor to discuss this problem. 
 
I certainly, Mr. Speaker, understand the concerns of the 
community. We too are concerned about the safety of the 
public. 
 
And I find it though passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that day after 
day, day after day, and even today we hear and receive petitions 
from the members opposite asking us to reduce the price of gas 
tax and at the same time repair our roads in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I would ask them to make some sense in their 
arguments and assist us in trying to get federal dollars for the 
maintenance of roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well perhaps 
the minister will tell us and the people of Val Marie that he’s 
collecting the money but not spending it on the highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The people of Val Marie may 
actually be breaking the law in going out and fixing their own 
highway. I think that says a lot about the people of 
Saskatchewan. In other places, people commit civil 
disobedience by vandalizing government property. In 
Saskatchewan they commit civil disobedience by fixing 
government property. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s the NDP government that has been 
vandalizing the roads through nine years of neglect. 
 
Mr. Minister, the mayor of Val Marie acknowledges that they 
may actually be breaking the law by taking the government’s 
coal patch and gravel to fix the highway. I hope the Premier 
isn’t planning on using any pepper spray down there. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you are not going to do anything to fix this 
highway, will you allow the people of Val Marie to use your 
material to fix their highway? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, he talks about us and the 
tax that we’ve collected for repairing roads. Mr. Speaker, for 
four years they didn’t even collect tax — and that’s why we 
have the debt that we have today, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
there isn’t enough money for roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote if I can, if I can, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to quote from an article out of The Leader-Post on April 
15, 2000. And the quote is as follows: 
 

However, there is only so much construction the province 
can complete each year as long as the federal government 
refuses to contribute its share of twinning costs, Elhard 
said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, even the opposition acknowledges, and I note, Mr. 
Speaker, even the opposition acknowledges that there should be 
assistance from the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nine years in 
government and they still can’t take any responsibility and they 
still don’t fix the roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the government is missing a tourism 
opportunity here. In the Okanagan Valley they allow tourists to 
pick fruit, maybe the NDP should get tourists to patch their own 
stretch of highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Val Marie should be commended 
for taking this initiative but you should be embarrassed for 
having let it get this bad. 
 
For nine years your government has allowed Saskatchewan 
highways to fall apart to the point that many are unsafe to 
travel. You can’t drive a school bus down No. 18. You can’t 
haul food or produce down No. 4 because it gets bruised. 
 
Why did you allow this to happen? Why did you allow 
Saskatchewan highways to fall apart? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely 
concerned about public safety. That’s why we have the highest 
budget in Saskatchewan’s history at $250 million this year, Mr. 
Speaker — an increase of 6.6 per cent over last year. 
 
We acknowledge that’s not enough. And that’s why we’ve 
called on the federal government to assist us with road repairs 
as well, pumping more money into Saskatchewan’s economy. 
And that’s why I find it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that day 
after day the opposition stands in the House with petitions 
asking us to do more and at the same time reduce the gas tax on 
fuel. It makes absolutely no sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Finally this 
government has matched the commitment they made four years 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

ago. But unfortunately while the budget has increased, the amount 
of money going into road construction has decreased. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going out to Shaunavon tonight to the first 
Saskatchewan Party nomination meeting. I’m going to stay 
overnight and go to Val Marie at 8 a.m. in the morning to help 
with the patching. 
 
Some of my colleagues think I’m taking a bit of a risk doing that 
kind of heavy shovelling that far from a decent health care facility. 
But I think I’m up to it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’d like you to 
join me. It would be far more productive than the kind of 
shovelling you’ve been doing in here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you come out and get a first-hand look at 
one of the highways that you have helped destroy? Will you come 
out to Val Marie in the morning and help the people fix the 
highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I’ve 
instructed my deputy minister to communicate with the 
community and with the mayor of Val Marie. He’s done that and 
he’s on his way down to discuss with him to see what can be done 
right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that at the level of debt that these 
opposition members racked up — $2 million a day interest is 
accumulated, Mr. Speaker — can you imagine how many 
Highway No. 4’s could be repaired each and every day with that 
amount of interest that those folks racked up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Personal Income Tax Rates 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Just over two months 
ago, the Finance minister stood in this House and he read his 
much heralded budget speech. He went on and on about the 
changes he was making to personal income tax. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, he went so far as to say, and I quote: “. . . 
70 per cent of (all) Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay income tax 
at a rate equal to residents of Alberta.” 
 
Just two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, Alberta passed Bill 18 which 
allowed greater exemptions at a lower single tax rate for their 
residents. So now, Mr. Minister, no one in Saskatchewan will 
pay income tax at a rate equal to residents of Alberta — all 
taxpayers will pay more. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question. Will you live up to your budget 
speech commitment? Will you reduce personal income tax 
levels in Saskatchewan so that people here will pay no more 
than their Alberta neighbours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well here we go again, Mr. Speaker, with 
the Leader of the Opposition getting up and telling people in 
this House and the people of the province we should cut taxes 

on one hand, more than we are, and spend more, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know what? It doesn’t add up. 
 
But what I want to say the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is that in the last budget delivered in this House a few 
months ago, as the member said, we proposed, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will lower personal income tax. We will cut the flat tax 
in half on July 1 — less than a month away. And do you know 
what the Leader of the Opposition said to that, Mr. Speaker? He 
said no. 
 
And then we said we’re going to eliminate the flat tax and the 
high income surtax and the debt reduction surtax on January 1 
— that’s half a year away — and you know what he said to that, 
Mr. Speaker? He said no. 
 
And today the Leader of the Opposition gets up and says he’s in 
favour of tax cuts. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t add up in the 1980s 
and it doesn’t add up today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance has a short memory. Didn’t he say that we 
were going to have the taxes on par with Alberta? Isn’t that 
what he said? Didn’t he say that 70 per cent of Saskatchewan 
people would be paying the same income tax rate as Albertans? 
Is that what he said? Yes, he did. 
 
Well what he’s doing is he’s bringing in a three-tier income tax 
rate ranging from 11 to 15 per cent. 
 
But in one fell swoop, Alberta set a single rate of ten and a half 
per cent taxable income for everybody; 190,000 people won’t 
pay any income tax at all. The basic and spousal exemptions 
were both increased to $12,900, almost $5,000 more than here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan residents are tired of seeing more 
and more of their paycheque disappear into the black hole of 
government taxation. My question: will you go back to the 
drawing board and give Saskatchewan people the serious tax 
break that they deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition has since this legislature opened, along with his 
colleagues, got up in this House and promised the people of 
Saskatchewan $1.2 billion in new spending. New, Mr. Speaker 
— that’s what he says. 
 
And now he says, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to cut taxes more 
than we’re cutting taxes, which is a $260 million tax cut in the 
recent budget. And the question really is, Mr. Speaker, does 
anybody find that believable? I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is we’re taking 55,000 
people off of the income tax rolls as a result of the recent 
budget. We’re cutting the flat tax, the most regressive tax we 
had, brought in by Grant Devine when he was premier with the 
support of those members over there; we’re cutting the flat tax 
in half on July 1. We’re eliminating the flat tax, Mr. Speaker, 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

on January 1. We’re eliminating the high-income surtax and 
we’re eliminating the debt-reduction surtax and taxes in 
Saskatchewan are only going in one direction, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of 
Finance would have to admit that a year ago he was sitting on a 
small slush fund called the liquor and gaming fund, of a couple 
hundred million dollars. Suddenly that ballooned to $700 
million and he doesn’t seem to think that that plays a part in tax 
reduction for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while they were offering some limited income tax 
relief in one hand, then they picked our pocket with a massive 
expansion of PST on the other hand. Mr. Speaker, people 
wouldn’t even mind paying these taxes in the province if they 
felt they were getting something for it. But now they’ve had to 
even resort to fixing their own roads. They’ve seen at least $10 
million on the botched potato venture. They’re just sick and 
tired of NDP talk with no action. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you just live up to your own budget speech, 
your own words. Give the people of Saskatchewan some 
meaningful tax reduction. Will you at least keep your promise 
and put 70 per cent of Saskatchewan residents on the same tax 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very . . . it’s very 
interesting that the Leader of the Opposition would be critical 
of the tax cuts, which he’s finally acknowledged in this House 
today, that we brought in in the budget because, Mr. Speaker, as 
I indicated, we’re going to be cutting income taxes in 
Saskatchewan by a net of $260 million. We’re cutting income 
taxes all together by about one-third, Mr. Speaker, and it’s . . . 
 
I’d like to say to the House, Mr. Speaker, that that exceeds what 
the Leader of the Opposition promised in the last general 
election because what he promised, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
remind him, was a 20 per cent income tax cut. That was the 
platform of the Saskatchewan Party. But you know who that 
was going to go to, Mr. Speaker? That was going to go to the 
rich. 
 
And the difference between us on this side of the House and 
them on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to 
cut the flat tax and eliminate the flat tax which is a regressive 
tax and not reward a bunch of rich friends as the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Impact of Expanded Provincial Sales Tax in Lloydminster 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the Lloydminster 
Chamber of Commerce just recently sent you a letter, as you 
well know, on May 16 and they were expressing their very 

grave concerns about the expanded provincial sales tax. 
 
I noticed in part of their logo letterhead that they use the words, 
make a break for the border. This letter goes on to say that the 
implication of this increased tax tipped the scales of 
competition in favour of businesses and development within the 
city but on the Alberta side. Why would any one set up business 
and develop property on the Saskatchewan side when 
everything is much, much cheaper on the . . . just a few blocks 
away? 
 
The letter states and I quote, Mr. Minister: 
 

The life and death of Saskatchewan-based businesses in 
Lloydminster is in your hands . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order please. I would ask the 
hon. member kindly go directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I will. What is your response 
to these concerns, Mr. Minister, expressed by the Lloydminster 
Chamber of Commerce? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member from 
Lloydminster knows, because he’s discussed this with me 
personally on more than one occasion, I have agreed to go to 
Lloydminster and meet with representatives of the city of 
Lloydminster and the chamber of commerce. And the member 
from Lloydminster knows, as he’s asked me to do, Mr. Speaker, 
that I intend to meet with the people up there personally. 
 
So when he says what is my response? He’s already asked me 
to meet with them; I’ve said I would. And I’m not going to give 
my response before I meet with them as I’ve agreed to do at his 
request, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the response, and 
in fact we have been consulting. But I wanted to bring another 
example to the, to the attention of the minister. 
 
The retail sector has taken a large hit, of course, in 
Saskatchewan’s side because of this PST. Lloydminster city 
hall as a matter of fact is moving to its new home located now 
on the Alberta side of the border because the tax savings 
dictated that it be located there. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Lloydminster Chamber of Commerce, as you 
know, asked for a consideration for this expanded PST in light 
of this problem. Now will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot 
of respect for the member from Lloydminster. But first he gets 
up and he asks me a question about what my response is to 
some individuals in Lloydminster when we’ve already agreed 
I’m going to meet with them personally. 
 
Then he gets up and talks about the PST in the city of 
Lloydminster when, Mr. Speaker, the PST in retail isn’t charged 
in the city of Lloydminster. 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

So I don’t know how to make sense of the questions from the 
member from Lloydminster other than to say I’ve said I’m 
going to meet with the individuals from Lloydminster — that’s 
what I’m going to do — and I’m sure they’ll have some 
sensible questions to ask, unlike the questions the member from 
Lloydminster is presently asking. And I’ll be pleased to sit 
down and have a very sensible and civil discussion with them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
PST of course, is exempt in Lloydminster for personal use, but 
not for commercial properties or commercial expansion. 
 
One other example that I think should be brought to the 
attention, and this is one of the Saskatchewan flagship stores in 
Lloydminster, and represented throughout the province, and that 
is the Co-op store. Well in Lloydminster, Mr. Minister, even the 
Co-op now is considering moving to the Alberta side of the 
border. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems like business after business is moving to 
that side. What more do you need to convince that this 
progressive tax change to stimulate the Saskatchewan economy 
is needed in all of these border communities like Lloydminster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated 
to the member from Lloydminster that I’m going to be 
discussing with people in Lloydminster the issues he raises. 
And I can’t add anything to that, other than the member from 
Lloydminster apparently thinks everything in Saskatchewan 
should be the same as it is in Alberta. 
 
And I’ll just say this to the member from Lloydminster in the 
House. One thing we’re not going to emulate in the province of 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to privatize health care. 
That’s what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure 
there are people on the Alberta side that think Bill 11 and the 
privatization of medicare is a good idea too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know it was just reported, Mr. Speaker that the leading 
cause of personal bankruptcy in the United States is health care 
costs, Mr. Speaker. And if we go down the road they’re talking 
about in Alberta, that’s where we’ll end up too. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Lloydminster, Alberta is 
a very fine place, but we shouldn’t try to emulate everything 
they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Personal Injury Protection Plan 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). Last day the minister wouldn’t answer any 
questions — that was Friday — about SaskEnergy or their plans 
for a plush new office. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t want to 

talk about SaskEnergy; he had only one answer ready and that 
was about no-fault insurance. So today I’ll be delighted to go 
ahead and pose a few questions to that minister about no-fault. 
Hopefully he’ll be ready for it. 
 
The minister introduced his new review chairman on Friday, 
and within minutes said the mandate for his committee was 
only relatively open. When he was asked what was meant by 
relatively open, Mr. Speaker, he told the media he couldn’t 
comment. Then he called the media later and gave several 
different answers as to why he used the word relatively. One 
can only guess — this may be another socialist version of the 
operative word. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you really tell the public today: is this 
mandate of this review committee fully open to study all angles 
or isn’t it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’m disappointed 
because today I was ready to talk about SaskEnergy and their 
building but we’ll save that for another day. 
 
This particular committee is up and ready to go. And, as has 
been said last year and has been said this year on many 
occasions, the mandate is open. They're going to look at the 
legislation; they’re going to compare what we had before with 
what we have now; they’re going to look at what’s done in 
other provinces and other states and other countries and make 
sure that we have the best system that there is in this country. 
 
And so we want to know that we will have all of these people 
working well together. I encourage that member to finally pick 
up the telephone, call the committee, give them your ideas, 
encourage all of your friends to do that. We know that all of 
your friends at the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities have already done that. Why don’t you join 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said 
he’d like to answer a question about SaskEnergy and their 
building. Just the other day he told us they didn’t have a 
building; they were looking for something. So he’s probably 
hiding something else. But we’ll get at that one tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, comments by your chairman on Friday have done 
nothing to help your review. One minute the chairman is saying 
he wants them — the victims of no-fault and the Law Society 
— to come back to the table. 
 
The next minute he says the mandate of the committee is only 
relatively open. He described his use of the word relative as 
meaning, Mr. Speaker, relative compared to other social 
democratic societies. I guess like Cuba. So being relatively 
open, Mr. Speaker, you’re only slightly more open than Cuba in 
this review. 
 
Members of the victims’ coalition against no-fault, Mr. 
Speaker, have no more faith in this process than they did before 
your new committee was unveiled. Mr. Minister, why would 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

you not at least consider their advice and seek their input to 
ensure that all parties would be comfortable in your new 
committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all people in Saskatchewan 
are very welcome to provide their advice, their information for 
this review. And that has been a consistent point; we’ve been 
there. 
 
We encourage that member opposite, all of his friends, anybody 
else to make sure that they get their information into this review 
so that we can have a full review, a wide-open review, just as 
the Chair said. 
 
We encourage that you, the member opposite, sit down with 
your members, put together maybe a three-page brief — it 
could be even one of your questions because they’re so long. 
But go ahead and make sure you get your information into this 
committee, because we want all information so that the review 
can be done properly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve attended every single one of the meetings that his 
committee has held so far. I have attended none. 
 
Also I’ve attended every single committee meeting that’s been 
held by the victims of no-fault and he has been at none of those 
particular meetings. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Hopefully at the next set of meetings that’s 
held by the victims of no-fault, he’ll show up at least one of 
those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you introduced the members of your newly 
expanded no-fault review committee, you said it would be done 
within the same budget, which was originally approximately 
three-quarters of a million dollars. At this point, you’ve spent 
about $80,000 and you haven’t held a meeting. 
 
So I’d like to know how this is going to work. You have a 
committee that now consists of eight members and they are 
starting over from brand new. They haven’t done anything yet. 
How will they be expected to do the same wide-ranging review 
that the original five were supposed to do — would they now 
have a budget of under $700,000? 
 
Mr. Minister, is it true that the committee will be limited in the 
number of public consultation meetings it will hold throughout 
the province, given the trouble you had getting the process 
underway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question 
is no. They are going to go ahead and do the work that they 
need to do. Now what I encourage that member to do — and I 
think you should get your leader to sit down with you — is set 
up your position on this whole thing and get it into the 
committee. 

Tell us where you stand so that they can use the information 
that you’ve got to provide for them. It’s very curious to listen to 
the information that’s there, because we know that some of their 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. Minister of CIC to complete your 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our object in working with 
the personal injury protection plan is to create the best 
automobile insurance plan in Canada, in North America, and in 
the world. 
 
The only way we can do that is if we work with the people of 
Saskatchewan to get all of the information so that we can 
continue to develop and set up a system that will provide all of 
the things that are needed for our Saskatchewan people. We’re 
going to do that in the best way that we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our open 
and accountable government we are very, very happy to table 
the answer to question 155. 
 
The Speaker: — Question to no. 155 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, on behalf 
of the government being both very open and accountable, we’d 
like to table the answer to question no. 156. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 156 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I’d like to 
stand up on behalf of the government and table the answer to 
question no. 157. Being open and accountable, we definitely 
like to give them the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 157 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I’d like to 
stand up on behalf of the government and table the answer to 
question 158. Being open and accountable, we have an answer 
for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 158 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, on behalf 
of this government, which has been both open and accountable 
in all its questions, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to table the answer to 
no. 159. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 159 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to once again 
stand up and answer question no. 160 and table it with this 
Assembly. Continuing in our practice of being open and 
accountable, we have the answer. It’s very detailed. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

The Speaker: — The answer to question 160 is tabled. 
 
Order. I would ask the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and the 
member from Regina South to kindly curtail their debate until 
the appropriate time. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 74  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to describe for all members the amendments 
contained in Bill No. 74, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act sets out the statutory 
basis for the powers of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority in regulating the distribution and consumption of 
beverage alcohol. The amendments will clarify and streamline 
certain provisions of the Act dealing with permits to sell 
beverage alcohol. 
 
Specifically they deal with extensions to liquor permits known 
as endorsements which allow the sale of beer and wine for 
consumption off premises, commonly known as off-sale. 
Amendments in this Bill will also clarify the processes followed 
by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Licensing 
Commission, the independent body that hears appeals of 
decisions made by the Authority. 
 
These legislative amendments have been prompted by this 
government’s decision to implement the recommendations 
made as part of the independent review of the off-sale and brew 
pub industries in our four largest cities. Conducted by a Regina 
lawyer, Myron Gulka-Tiechko, in 1999, this review examined 
the regulations, the policies, and procedures related to granting 
endorsements for the off-sale of beer and wine in hotels and 
brew pubs, and made recommendations to modernize, 
streamline, and simplify the process. Mr. Gulka-Tiechko 
conducted extensive consultations with representatives of the 
hospitality industry as part of this review. 
 
Presently hotels with a tavern permit or a brew pub are eligible 
to obtain off-sale endorsements. However, the granting of an 
off-sale endorsement is limited by a population restriction as 
well as a distance criteria or restriction. Mr. Speaker, concerns 
with the current off-sale system were the impetus for this 
review. 
 
The current system limits the number of the off-sale 
endorsements granted in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and 
Moose Jaw. The limited number of endorsements has led to 
intense competition, and costly, unproductive, and ongoing 
legal challenges in both the Liquor and Gaming Licensing 
Commission and the courts. 
 
This same situation does not exist in smaller urban centres or in 
rural Saskatchewan; consequently the amendments will apply 
only to the province’s four largest cities. The problems are 
summarized by Mr. Gulka-Tiechko in his report when he says 

and I quote: 
 

Over the past decade, there has been no single liquor 
licensing issue to ignite as much controversy as the off-sale 
endorsement. 

 
The . . . regulatory regime which evolved (for off-sale 
endorsements) . . . has proven to be frustrating to new 
applicants, some existing permittees, Authority staff and 
the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. 
 
Because of the limitations placed on numbers of outlets 
allowed, competitors in particular have used the system 
both to protect their own existing off-sale privileges and to 
block expansion by others. The result has been a 
considerable increase in Licensing Commission hearings, 
often prompted by objections from competitors, followed 
by Court challenges to both the Court of Queen’s Bench, 
and the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

 
Those critical of the system see it as unpredictable (one) 
with respect to outcomes and unsustainable in the long run. 
 
They see regulatory tools being used for the purpose of 
economic rationing rather than enforcing existing social 
responsibilities. 

 
To address this situation, Mr. Speaker, the review 
recommended removing the population and distance 
requirements that currently limit the number of off-sale 
endorsements in the four largest cities, and implementing 
criteria for brew pubs to ensure that only brew pubs viable in 
their own right are eligible for off sale. These restrictions are 
found in regulations. 
 
The review also recommended clarifying and streamlining the 
powers of the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission in 
hearing appeals found in the Act. These changes will simplify 
the rules governing involvement in the off-sale industry. They 
will create a level playing field for the hotel and brew pub 
taverns that off-sale beer, allowing market demand to determine 
the number of off-sale outlets in our largest urban centres. 
 
(1430) 
 
They also ensure the authority maintains its regulatory role of 
protecting the public by enforcing age restrictions and 
promoting the socially responsible distribution and use of 
beverage alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the review recommendations will be dealt 
with through changes to regulations. However certain important 
changes need to be made to the legislation through this Bill to 
ensure a solid framework for implementation of the review’s 
recommendations. 
 
The most significant are the changes to the powers and 
processes of the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. 
Under the current process for commission hearings, applicants 
seeking a liquor permit or off-sale endorsement are required to 
advertise their intentions in the newspaper, and any member of 
the public is allowed to file an objection to the granting of the 
permit or the endorsement. 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

The commission is required to deal with each objection filed by 
conducting a mandatory hearing process. This requirement for 
mandatory hearings has often proven to be unproductive and 
costly. It has delayed decisions regarding the granting of 
off-sale endorsements at significant expense to all parties — the 
people applying for endorsements, individuals filing objections, 
and the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
This Bill will give the commission the discretion to determine 
whether a hearing is required when an objection is found to be 
frivolous or vexatious. This responds directly to the 
recommendation in the Myron Gulka-Tiechko report. These 
recommendations will complement changes to regulations 
intended to support this recommendation. 
 
The elimination of mandatory hearings will reduce delays in the 
application process in turn reducing costs and frustrations for all 
parties. At the same time it will ensure the resources of the 
commission are available to perform its role of protecting the 
public interest in a timely manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the remaining amendments contained in 
this Bill provide a solid foundation for the recommended 
changes to the regulatory regime governing off-sale by 
clarifying and streamlining the legislative basis upon which 
endorsements are granted. 
 
First of all, this Bill will define the term, endorsement; an 
endorsement is an addition or extension to a liquor permit 
which provides an additional privilege with respect to the sale 
of liquor. For an example, an endorsement is granted . . . is used 
to grant a hotel or a liquor permit an additional privilege such as 
selling beer off-sale. 
 
Endorsement is not a new concept. Endorsements are currently 
granted under regulation. However, the current Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act only refers to permits. The amendments 
in this Bill simply bring the term endorsement officially within 
the scope of the Act and clarify the legislative rights and 
obligations that pertain to endorsements. This change is 
intended to accord them the same processes currently given to 
permits. 
 
The legislation also defines the term reviewable endorsement. 
Creating this subset of the category of endorsement enables 
different processes to apply to different endorsements, 
depending upon their specific nature. 
 
A reviewable endorsement will be recognized as an addition to 
a liquor permit that substantially impacts a liquor establishment 
or the public. An off-sale endorsement is a prime example. 
Because of this impact, decisions made by the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority with respect to these endorsements will be 
reviewable by the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. 
 
Regulations will set out which types of endorsements are 
reviewable endorsements. Examples of non-reviewable 
endorsements would be room service or catering. 
 
The commission and the courts have already been interpreting 
our legislation in this way. These changes merely clarify and 
formalize an already existing framework. 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains a housekeeping 
provision unrelated to the issues of endorsement or the powers 
of the commission. The current legislation refers to outcomes 
and consequences of authority decisions to suspend or cancel a 
gaming licence, liquor permit, or certificate of registration 
granted to a gaming supplier or employee, thereby implying the 
authority’s power in this regard. 
 
An amendment contained in the Bill simply, specifically sets 
out the authority’s power with respect to suspension and 
cancellation of gaming licences, liquor permits and 
endorsements, and certificates of registration. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, in keeping with this government’s 
commitment to regulatory reform, the provisions contained in 
these amendments clarify the statutory basis for the granting of 
endorsements for liquor permits. 
 
The amendments in this Bill also set the stage for the changes to 
the liquor regulations related to implementing changes to 
off-sale restrictions and regulations called for by Mr. 
Gulka-Tiechko’s report. 
 
These changes will result in a clearer set of simpler rules for the 
businesses who seek and who obtain endorsements related to 
liquor permits. They will allow the marketplace to determine 
the appropriate level of activity. 
 
They will also streamline and reduce the workload of the 
Liquor Licensing Commission and the expense incurred by all 
parties in relation to objections to the endorsement applications 
that are frivolous in nature. 
 
Freed of its role as the economic gatekeeper, the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority will be able to concentrate its efforts, as the 
report recommends, on using regulatory tools to enforce social 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 74, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 74. And as I was listening to the 
minister, it appears that what Bill No. 74 is, it’s doing two 
things. Number one, it’s reacting to a study done in regards to 
liquor . . . or alcohol and gaming regulations. And it’s also 
addressing, as I hear, a number of concerns raised by the 
industry, especially when it comes to the off-sale and the 
opportunity to have off-sale available at your establishment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think just from listening to the minister and 
some of the comments she was making, I can appreciate where 
— when you get into larger centres with larger population 
bases, more liquor establishments — where some would feel 
that they are not being treated as equally if they do not have 
access to the ability to sell off-sale in their establishment. 
Whereas the smaller centres, certainly the off-sale is something 
that is, for smaller communities, something certainly 
worthwhile for the individuals who would like to have the 
opportunity to purchase alcoholic products. 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

But as the minister was commenting, she mentioned the fact 
that there were a number of issues that have been raised over 
the past number of years — issues in regards to regulations, and 
regulations sort of setting the guidelines for some of the . . . the 
guidelines that establishments would operate under. Some of it 
was set under legislation; owners were challenging the 
guidelines at different times where they found themselves in 
many occasions entering an appeal process. 
 
And if, as the minister indicated, what we’re trying to do here is 
simplify the whole process and establish clear and cut rules and 
guidelines so everyone knows what the rules are in legislation, I 
can certainly agree with the minister in that and we can 
certainly go along with the minister. 
 
But I think we need to take the time to review this somewhat a 
little more in depth. I think a number of my colleagues have had 
questions raised as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be 
appropriate for us to just get a clearer understanding of where 
this Bill is going — Bill No. 74, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2000 — before we would proceed 
even further in the debate in regards to this legislation. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2000 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 75, 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2000 
(No. 2) is the French language version of Bill No. 74, which I 
have just spoken to. It contains the same amendments and the 
same regulatory provisions and has the same intent. Therefore: 
 
M. le Président, je déplace par ceci cette facture le numéro 
soixante-dix cinq, l’alcool et la Loi réglementaire 2000 numéro 
deux d’amendement de jeu, soit maintenant lue une deuxième 
fois. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move that Bill No. 75, The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2000, numéro deux, (No. 
2) be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
suspected, this piece of legislation just follows up on Bill No. 
74. And unfortunately my français is not very good so I’m 
going to have to bypass that. 
 
But I would have to say until we have a chance to really review 
Bill No. 74, it would be inappropriate for us to actually allow 
for passage or the movement of one piece of legislation into 
committee. And I think if I could add one other point, it would 
seem that one would have to ask why we need two separate 
Bills. Why could we not have just taken Bill No. 74 and then 
brought in the French translation to the same Bill when it’s 
basically dealing with the same information? 

But I think it’s something we need to look at. Maybe down the 
road we can get some clarification on that matter as well and 
simplify the process and just deal with one piece of legislation. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, at this time I will move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Research Council 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased today to move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Research Council Act, 2000. 
 
The purposes of these amendments are, one, to provide the 
Research Council with a mandate and the ability to assist in the 
commercialization of new technology; secondly, to enable the 
SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) to obtain the same level 
of audit services as other similar Crown corporations; and 
thirdly, to ensure that The Research Council Act coincides with 
The Tabling of Documents Act of 1991. 
 
These are very important to the Research Council. Firstly, 
because the SRC is an organization that works with 
leading-edge technologies that must expand and adapt to suit 
the market demands that arise from these technologies. 
 
When the Research Council was created in 1947, 
commercializing technology was not an important 
consideration. This is because research was initially conducted 
by university professors before the SRC had its own facilities. 
Over time, the Research Council’s focus has moved from 
mostly government-related research to applied industry contract 
research with commercial application. 
 
As a result, commercialization has become a more important 
issue. Now at the beginning of the new century, it is clear that 
research and development and innovation are only able to make 
a difference in society when the fruits of these efforts are 
commercialized and put into practical use. 
 
Today the SRC works very closely with about 1,500 industry 
clients each year. During the fiscal year 1999-2000, SRC earned 
about 11 million or 70 per cent of its program revenue from 
contract work. This accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, has helped 
the SRC become recognized by its peers as one of the premier 
applied research and development organizations in Canada. 
 
But the Research Council cannot rest on its laurels. It must be a 
changing and moving entity. The SRC’s customers need 
technology to solve problems, make improvements, stay ahead 
of the competition, and develop new markets. The SRC can 
help its customers be more competitive. 
 
This can be done by taking research results — their own or 
anyone else’s — and through a design, a demonstration, or a 
pilot plan, or any combination of these, they can turn research 
into usable technology that can be commercialized for the 
user’s benefit. 
 
With the help of the SRC, a new product, a new process, or a 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

new system is developed. For example, the Research Council 
contributed to the development of horizontal well technology. 
This new technology led directly to a doubling of oil production 
in Saskatchewan between 1987 and when the first well was 
drilled; and in 1997 when production topped 140 million 
barrels, an increase worth well over $1 billion annually. 
 
Commercialization of horizontal wells has created 4,350 jobs, 
increased oil production by 36 per cent, and has generated over 
$400 million to the province in revenue in the past six years. 
 
The SRC with industry partners has developed other promising 
oil recovering technologies. The changes to this Act will ensure 
that the SRC is better able to see these new technologies 
through to field practice. As well, it will allow our . . . the SRC 
to receive appropriate return for its contribution. 
 
Energy efficiency is another area where the Research Council is 
working to make the most of our provinces resources. The 
building energy management program provides energy audits 
and information to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
save energy. After this knowledge is put into practice, most 
buildings in this province have savings from 20 to 30 per cent 
of their total energy consumption. 
 
The SRC’s alternative energy team has developed technology to 
convert gasoline engines to run on natural gas. This technology 
is important because it addresses environmental concerns to 
reduce emissions by using a cleaner burning fuel. Several 
manufacturers plan to commercialize products developed and 
tested through this research. 
 
Through a partnership with Canodev Research and Canadian 
agriculture, the SRC designed and built a computer control 
system for an instrument used in grain elevators to analyze 
oilseed content for accurate grading. Partnerships are now being 
sought for this commercialization of the technology so that 
more units can be manufactured. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are only a few examples of the work and 
assistance the SRC provides to Saskatchewan, Canadian, and 
international clients by dedicating itself to bringing investment 
dollars and technology into Saskatchewan to enhance our 
quality of life. 
 
The value of the SRC’s work and benefits for our province have 
not been unrecognized. The late Ian Wahn, a lawyer and a 
Member of Parliament, believed in the Research Council’s 
ability to foster innovation. He believed so much that he created 
a special $500,000 fund called Technology in Action. 
 
Mr. Wahn’s parents were pioneers in Saskatchewan and he felt 
it was important to develop the people of Saskatchewan . . . to 
help the people of Saskatchewan develop this province as a 
highly skilled, fair, desirable, and compassionate society. 
 
He saw the Research Council as credible, reliable, and an 
organization that could help achieve these goals by assisting the 
commercialization of technology and scientific solutions. These 
commercialization efforts will improve the competitiveness of 
Saskatchewan enterprises, create new jobs, and help protect the 
environment especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

It is with the same drive and dedication that Mr. Wahn had for 
Saskatchewan that the Research Council is moving ahead in the 
area of commercialization of technology. As the SRC’s role 
expands beyond research and development, it requires new 
tools to help move inventions and ideas to their practical 
application. This change to The Research Council Act is 
another step in the road to assisting Saskatchewan residents 
with their innovations. 
 
Secondly, the Research Council has identified a need to obtain 
more value-added audit services to complement the Provincial 
Auditor. Currently the Provincial Auditor provides a regulatory 
compliance review on an annual basis. This amendment will 
enable the Research Council to use, in addition to the Provincial 
Auditor, other auditors with extensive business experience in 
the areas of analysis of strategic direction, improvement of 
processes, program value for money, etc. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the third purpose of these amendments is 
to ensure The Research Council Act, with respect to reporting, 
is updated to be consistent with The Tabling of Documents Act, 
1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that all members of the 
House endorse these amendments to The Research Council Act, 
so that the SRC can continue to enhance its role in assisting 
Saskatchewan in the commercialization of technology and 
enhancing its audit options in order to meet both regulatory 
compliance as well as business excellence. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about research in the province . . . and the minister alluded 
to some of the technological changes that we have seen take 
place and the fact that Saskatchewan has such a lot to offer the 
people not only of this province, but even as a partner in 
Confederation with the resources that we have. 
 
Certainly whether it’s the natural resources — the oil or the coal 
or even the uranium and other minerals that we’re beginning to 
explore and find within the province of Saskatchewan — Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about these resources . . . 
 
And the agricultural sector certainly has expanded in many 
areas and a lot of that is due to research. Research of the 
technology that is used in the planting of crops and certainly in 
the marketing of crops. When you think of, for example, canola, 
for example, Mr. Speaker, and we look at the research that has 
taken place in regards to how we use the oil or the product from 
canola such as the oils, whether it’s for human consumption or 
whether it’s for other uses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we can appreciate what the minister 
is talking about when he talks about Bill No. 76, The Research 
Council Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for 
us to understand how important it is to have research, to 
research new products, new ideas, new technologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about the horizontal drilling 
and the impact it has had in this province. And certainly it’s 
been an important component in the expansion of the oil sector; 
whether it’s the oil or natural gas, Mr. Speaker, horizontal 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

drilling has added a new dimension to the enhancement of oil 
exploration in the province of Saskatchewan. And that 
exploration, Mr. Speaker, results in a real added boost to the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan not only in the 
finances that are contributed, but as well as job creation and job 
growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about environmental issues and 
some of the research that is going on in that regard. And most 
recently, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . for the past number of 
months we’ve been all reminded of the fact of some of the costs 
we as individual consumers face just by going to the gas pumps. 
And we see the prices have been bouncing — they’ve been up 
one day and down the next And one has to begin to wonder if 
. . . As we continue to hear that we’re not going to see lower 
fuel prices, and one of the arguments companies give for 
bumping the prices is the added cost that they face, the 
environmental issues and concerns. 
 
You must begin to wonder with all the technology we have and 
the research we’ve done over the years, while the price of fuel 
may be high, you begin to ask yourselves how come we’re still 
driving vehicles that are only getting the equivalent of the 
mileage that we were getting say 10, 15 years ago if we’ve been 
able to do such good research? 
 
One would think that we should be able to build a more 
efficient, fuel efficient motor. A motor that would, Mr. Speaker, 
be environmentally friendly and yet could still consume a lot of 
the natural resource that we use except in a more efficient 
manner. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons we need to 
continue research And we need to continue to allow the 
Research Council to do its job. And those are some of the issues 
that we need to be very cognizant of when we’re talking about 
research. 
 
We need to look at ways in which we can better use and 
promote the agricultural products that we have in this province. 
And here again, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask ourselves: will we 
continue to move the raw product from this province for 
manufacturing and processing rather than doing more of that in 
the province? And I guess some of that again comes to the 
research of finding ways in which we can use or add value to 
our product and move it out of the province as a more 
value-added product that actually brings more in, adds more to 
our economy. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, while this is a good piece of 
legislation, it’s a piece of legislation that needs to be reviewed a 
little more in-depth so that we can indeed see and determine 
whether or not what the minister is telling us of the goals of the 
Research Council, whether they’re being met and whether or 
not we’re doing as much as we can or whether there are ways in 
which we can expand the Research Council and their role in our 
society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be important that we take 
a more in-depth and broader view of this piece of legislation 
before we get into further debate on the issue. And at this time, 
I therefore move to adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2000 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2000. 
 
In July 1996, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission released its report on human rights in 
Saskatchewan. This report, Renewing the Vision, Human Rights 
in Saskatchewan, was the result of several years of extensive 
consultation and research by the commission. 
 
In this report, Mr. Speaker, the commission summarized the 
context of its review in the following way, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s tradition of protecting human rights began 
with The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act in 1947, the first 
general human rights statute in North America. In 1972 
Saskatchewan established the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission, and in 1979 it amalgamated and improved all 
previous human rights legislation by enacting The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. The Code outlines the 
structure and duties of the commission, establishes a 
complaint process and contains programs for equity 
programs and exemptions.  

 
Mr. Speaker, the commission went on to state that: “Over the 
previous 17 years, the Code (had) become outdated.” 
Specifically the commission indicated that its “structure 
(required) improvement, and the complaint system had proven 
unable to deal with the volume and complexity of human rights 
complaints.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government agrees with the commission’s 
assessment of the current state of affairs. 
 
Saskatchewan can claim a proud history in the protection of 
human rights. However, the time has come to make changes to 
the structures and procedures in our Code to ensure that we 
continue to respond to current concerns and help the 
commission in its objective of advancing the cause of human 
rights. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be proposing a 
number of amendments that are intended to recognize the 
importance this government places on human rights and the 
prevention of discrimination against our citizens. 
 
First the statutory position of director of human rights is being 
removed from the code. The administrative and operational 
responsibilities formerly performed by the director will become 
the responsibilities of the Chief Commissioner. 
 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission members should 
be responsible for policy rather than day-to-day operational 
decisions, Mr. Speaker. As a consequence, amendments provide 
that operational decisions now made by all of the commission 
members will be made in future by the Chief Commissioner. 
This will allow the commission to focus on policy decisions to 
forward the principle that every person is free and equal in 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

dignity and rights. 
 
The proposed amendments also streamline and add flexibility to 
the complaint process, create a human rights tribunal, make 
changes respecting some of the grounds of discrimination, and 
enhance the remedy and enforcement provisions. 
 
As well as provisions to make the administration of the 
commission more efficient, the Bill proposes significant 
changes to the process by which complaints are administered. 
The commission will now be able to tailor its procedure to 
different types of complaints and appropriate procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commission has already started to adapt its 
procedures by implementing an early resolution process in an 
effort to settle complaints sooner and in a non-adversarial 
manner. The amendments specifically recognize resolution by 
mediation between the parties as a desirable approach to 
resolving a human rights complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current code doesn’t include a limitation 
period. As a result, actions that may have occurred many years 
ago could be the subject of a complaint to the commission and 
respondents could be called upon to respond to complaints 
based on events that occurred several years previously. 
 
(1500) 
 
With the passage of time, records may no longer be available, 
witnesses may be difficult to find, and their memories of the 
specifics of the relevant event may be unclear. 
 
The Bill provides that the commission shall refuse to accept a 
complaint if the person doesn't bring the complaint to the 
commission within two years of becoming aware of the alleged 
discriminatory conduct. 
 
As well, a new provision will allow the commission to defer 
dealing with a complaint where another proceeding is capable 
of appropriately dealing with the substance of the complaint. 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the collective bargaining agreement 
applicable to the employment relationship or the occupational 
health and safety regulations may have procedures that are 
available to address the situation in a satisfactory manner. 
 
The Bill also permits the commission to dismiss a complaint 
where it determines another proceeding has dealt with the 
subject matter appropriately. 
 
Another change, Mr. Speaker, gives the commission the 
authority to dismiss a complaint in a number of situations. The 
current code provides that the commission may only dismiss a 
complaint where it’s without merit. The code is being amended 
to provide that the Chief Commissioner can dismiss a complaint 
where the complaint raises no significant issue of 
discrimination, is made in bad faith, or for improper motives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the code will provide that 
where the Chief Commissioner dismisses a complaint, the 
complainant may apply to a human rights tribunal for a hearing, 
and if the tribunal agrees to hear the complaint, the complainant 
will be responsible for the carriage of his or her own complaint 
in these cases. 

The creation of the human rights tribunal panel, Mr. Speaker, 
constitutes another significant change to how human rights 
complaints are currently administered. The code currently 
provides for the Minister of Justice to appoint a board of inquiry 
after a direction to do so from the commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments provide for an appointed 
adjudicative body, the human rights tribunal panel. The panel 
will consist of at least three people — one of whom will be the 
chairperson. We believe these changes will provide for an 
adjudicative body with expertise in human rights issues and, 
Mr. Speaker, the accompanying consistency in decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tribunal can order compensation for specific 
damages such as wage loss, reinstatement and other rights lost 
because of discrimination, remedial or preventative measures, 
anti-discrimination policies and educational sessions, as well as 
damages for injury to feelings and self-respect. 
 
The only change respecting the remedies the tribunal may order 
is raising the maximum amount the tribunal can order in 
damages for injury to feelings, dignity, or self-respect from 
5,000 to $10,000. Increasing the maximum amount, Mr. 
Speaker, recognizes that persons who’ve been denied basic 
human rights are not less worthy of having their feelings and 
dignity compensated than other persons protected by our laws. 
 
We’re also amending the code to update the grounds of 
discrimination. Thus, Mr. Speaker, an amendment to the 
definition of disability removes the necessity of determining the 
cause of a disability. It may not be possible to determine 
whether a person’s physical disability has been caused by an 
injury, birth defect, or illness, and this inability to determine the 
cause should not prevent the person with the disability from 
being protected by the code. These persons will now receive the 
protection of the Human Rights Code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition the current definition includes reliance 
on a guard dog . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, on a guide dog. This 
has changed . . . Some guide dogs are guard dogs too, I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker. This has changed to refer to service animal, 
recognizing all animals that assist persons with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another amendment will add perceived race as a 
ground in the code. Academics and multicultural community 
groups are currently of the opinion that the concept of separate 
races is no longer supported by science. Rather, they say, 
distinctions are made on the basis of what is perceived as 
someone’s race. We’re including a change to make the code 
more user friendly by adding a definition of prohibited ground. 
This will mean that the grounds will no longer be listed in all of 
the provisions where discrimination may occur such as in 
employment, accommodation, and services. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we’re making several other amendments 
that don’t come within the categories that I’ve described. For 
instance, a new provision will allow complaints against 
co-workers where one employee harasses a fellow employee. 
Apparently the complaint must be made against the employer 
who may not have even known about the harassment. Allowing 
complaints against employees will mean that in some situations 
where it’s appropriate, a co-worker will have to bear the 
consequences of his or her own discriminatory behaviour. 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

Mr. Speaker, the government believes that these changes will 
assist the commission in its efforts to improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of procedures for dealing with human rights 
complaints. We believe that these changes also reflect the fact 
that the government is responsive to the need to ensure that 
persons who require the benefit of the protection offered by 
human rights legislation will, in fact, receive that protection. 
 
We believe also, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments continue 
this province’s strong and proud tradition of recognizing that 
persons subject to stigma and stereotyping because of 
characteristics that are irrelevant to their abilities will have 
access to the opportunities available to everyone in our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand and talk on the Human Rights Code Amendment Act, Bill 
No. 77, and a number of the things that the minister had 
mentioned, including guide or guard dogs, whichever the case 
may be. 
 
I think when we deal in the issue of human rights and Human 
Rights Code, it’s a very . . . an interesting area, and there’s a lot 
of questions that come into play and a lot of personalities and 
sides when you start dealing with human rights and one 
person’s belief compared to another person’s belief. 
 
And so when we start making changes in the code, we want to 
make sure those changes are done right. Because if we don’t get 
it right this time, there can be some people that are really kind 
of left out of the loop and can be some real problems. 
 
I applaud the minister when he talks about trying to gear it so 
that the complaints can be heard sooner. Definitely the longer it 
waits, sometimes the issues get a little muddied and it’s 
probably not as clear. Although they do talk about a limitation 
period as far as how soon a hearing can be brought back: if it 
hadn’t been heard, hadn’t been brought to the human rights 
tribunal, after two years it would not be able to. 
 
And I think there . . . you know, we want to talk to as many 
people as we can on this very issue to see how that’s going to 
affect them. We ourselves are a little leery of that in a way in 
that when you hear of some of the different cases that have gone 
on in — and I mean it’s a little different — but in through the 
court system and how wrongful decisions have been made 
many years, and it takes many, many years for that to come 
back and be corrected. 
 
And so I think we have some concern after the two-year period 
that nothing can be done. We want to talk to the people that it’s 
going to involve the most though and see what they have to say. 
 
The tribunal body, and the minister talked about appointing 
three members to look after this tribunal body that would make 
the decisions on any cases that are being heard. And any time 
when we hear members opposite in government appointing 

members to hear cases, it does draw up some red flags. 
 
And we’d be very interested to see the process of appointment 
and how these people will be appointed, who they will be. 
Because the responsibility these people are going to have are 
great, and they’ll be making decisions on all sorts of things 
within the human rights area. And so we’d want to make sure 
that the people that are appointed for this tribunal are the people 
that are most qualified, to hear them and be as fair as they 
possibly can be. 
 
Another issue raised is he had talked about the maximum 
remuneration, I guess, or payback for people that have been 
wrongly done by, raising from 5,000 to 10,000. And I think, 
you know, we look at that with . . . I don’t see anything else that 
has gone down; everything else has gone up. And if this hasn’t 
been addressed for a number of years, we could agree with that 
I would think. 
 
The area of co-workers he talks about, that won’t be falling 
under this because there could be a dispute between co-workers. 
And that is also a problem. When you get into human rights and 
human rights issues, as I mentioned earlier at the start, it 
becomes very . . . it can be a very controversial, I guess, area. 
 
And so when you’re dealing with co-workers, I guess just to 
label it, if it’s a co-worker it does not apply. But if there are 
some issues that are truly human rights issues in that area, we 
would want to make sure that that would be covered properly. 
 
So those are a couple of the areas that I just wanted to respond 
to, to the ministerial speech, second reading. And until we can 
talk to the stakeholders and the people that are going to be 
involved directly with these amendments, we would like to 
adjourn debate on this until we are able to. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2000 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 
2000. The Highway Traffic Act is the law governing roads and 
their use in Saskatchewan. These amendments will clarify some 
of the existing laws while continuing to make roads safer for 
Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
The first amendment involves driver licensing and vehicle 
registration. The changes will eliminate unfairness, red tape, 
and confusion. Currently contractors working on road 
construction do not have to register trailers that they use as 
living quarters for their workers. 
 
The exemption was originally intended to save the provincial 
government money when it was the main road builder in the 
province. However, now most provincial and municipal road 
construction is handled by private contractors. The proposed 
amendment will eliminate the exemption and require 
contractors to register trailers they use as living quarters for 
their workers. This will place all contractors, government and 
private, on equal footing. 
 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

Mr. Speaker, the next amendment will create more consistency 
in the vehicle registration process. Currently when you sell your 
vehicle, the certificate of registration expires immediately. 
However, when purchasing a car, you have insurance coverage 
for 14 days after the sale. This discrepancy between the 
certificate of registration and insurance coverage has caused 
much confusion for auto dealers and customers. 
 
The proposed amendment would establish a consistent 
seven-day grace period for both registration and insurance. The 
result will eliminate confusion and make the Act consistent with 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act regarding the transfer 
of licence plates and insurance coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed change should facilitate the sale and 
purchase of vehicles in Saskatchewan. 
 
The next amendment also concerns vehicle registration, Mr. 
Speaker. Current legislation prohibits Saskatchewan residents 
from operating a vehicle in Saskatchewan unless that vehicle is 
properly registered in this province. This means that a 
Saskatchewan resident cannot operate the vehicle of a friend or 
relative visiting from another province. 
 
This is an oversight in our legislation, and the amendment will 
align our legislation with common practice and belief. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan residents will be able to operate 
vehicles that are properly registered in another jurisdiction. 
 
The next amendment will make it easier for foreign visitors to 
drive in Saskatchewan. Current legislation requires foreign 
visitors to hold an international driving permit if their driver’s 
licence is not written in English or French. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, some people who hold a valid driver’s 
licence from their country of origin, but not an international 
driving permit, are unable to legally drive or rent a vehicle in 
Saskatchewan. Quebec and Saskatchewan are the only 
provinces that require non-resident drivers to obtain an 
international driving permit. 
 
The proposed amendment brings us into line with our 
neighbouring provinces and removes a possible barrier to 
tourism in Saskatchewan. 
 
The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, will create consistency 
between existing licensing restrictions and driver-training 
restrictions. 
 
Saskatchewan does not currently have a minimum age for in-car 
driver training. This means the driver instructors can legally 
provide in-car training to people under the age of 15. Existing 
licensing restrictions, however, do not permit a person to obtain 
a learner’s licence until one is 15 years old and registered in a 
high school driver training program. The proposed amendment 
would require an individual to be at least 15 or older before 
taking in-car driver training. Mr. Speaker, this will make in-car 
driver training restrictions consistent with current licensing 
restrictions. 
 
(1515) 
 
The next amendment concerns the rules of the road and the use 

of flashing lights on vehicles on highways. Provisions under 
The Vehicle Equipment Regulations, 1987 require the 
regulation of the use of white, amber, blue, and red lights on 
vehicles. 
 
Concern has been raised over the use of blue lights on snow 
removal vehicles. Prior to the present equipment regulations, 
blue flashing lights were permitted on snow removal vehicles 
such as snowploughs. Blue lights are no longer used on these 
types of vehicles because they are reserved exclusively for law 
enforcement vehicles. 
 
The proposed amendment would establish rules for the use of 
flashing amber lights on snow removal vehicles. This will allow 
road users to better identify types of emergency vehicles by 
creating a common standard. Mr. Speaker, this will improve 
traffic safety for all motorists. 
 
The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, concerns emergency 
vehicles. Current legislation requires drivers to slow down 
when passing highway workers but does not require drivers to 
slow down when passing emergency personnel on the highway. 
Mr. Speaker, emergency personnel often work on or near 
highway lanes where they are at risk. The proposed amendment 
would require motorists to slow down to 60 kilometres per hour 
when passing emergency vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the request for this amendment comes from the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs. This change would 
greatly improve the safety on Saskatchewan roads and 
highways. It would also help protect emergency workers when 
they are on or near the travelled portion of the highway. 
 
The next amendment aims to clarify the rules for seat belt use. 
Proper seat belt and restraint device use is the best way to 
protect people, especially children, from collision-related 
injuries. Under current legislation, learner drivers under the age 
of 16 are exempt from the requirement to wear a seat belt. 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the legislation does not require that young 
children and infants be placed in a proper child or infant 
restraint system if they wear a seat belt. 
 
The amendment requires that all drivers and passengers must be 
properly restrained. It also requires that all children and infants 
be in a proper restraint system. The amendment is based on 
model legislation developed by the Canadian Council of Motor 
Transport Administrators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) continues to support programs to lend 
appropriate child restraints to low-income families as required. 
 
The next amendment addresses medical exemptions for seat 
belt use. Current legislation allows for individuals to be 
exempted from the requirement to wear a seat belt if they have a 
certificate from a medical practitioner stating that they are 
unable to wear a seat belt for medical reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the 
Canadian Medical Association advocate the use of restraint 
systems in all vehicles and state that medical exemptions from 
seat belt use are not justified. As such, the proposed changes 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

would allow SGI to provide seat belt exemptions at their 
discretion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next two amendments concern red lights. 
Currently left turns on red lights are not permitted under the 
Act. The first proposed amendment would permit left turns 
from one one-way street to another one-way street, improving 
urban traffic flow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 40 per cent of accidents in this province 
occur at intersections. Furthermore, many of these accidents 
result from red light violations. The second proposed 
amendment allows for red light cameras at intersections. The 
installation of these cameras can be expected to reduce the 
number of automobile accidents in the province, thus saving 
lives and reducing property damage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next amendment clarifies provisions 
respecting funeral processions. The amendment encourages the 
tradition of showing respect for funeral processions. While the 
current legislation states that a funeral procession must obey all 
rules of the road and must obey traffic control signals, this 
amendment clarifies the right-of-way at controlled intersections. 
 
The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, concerns the carrier audit 
and the carrier profile and compliance program. These 
programs are being implemented in an effort to improve safety 
for those in the trucking industry as well as all other road users. 
 
Proposed changes would enable SGI and the Highway Traffic 
Board to share the responsibility for administering these 
programs. 
 
The final amendment deals specifically with better meeting the 
needs of individual SGI customers and expanding coverage in 
certain circumstances. SGI and the provincial government 
understand that there are instances where applying the strict 
application of legislation would create a hardship for 
Saskatchewan residents. In the past, SGI has encountered 
situations where the legislation has prohibited certain actions 
but concern for customer service or undue hardships to 
individuals have required SGI to act contrary to legislation. 
 
The proposed amendment will permit SGI to exempt an 
individual from meeting the strict requirements of the 
legislation if it is determined that it would create an undue 
hardship and would not be contrary to public interest to allow 
the exemption. 
 
That concludes the list of proposed amendments found in The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2000. These amendments 
work to make our roads safer for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege, a 
real privilege to talk on this Bill, The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2000, Bill No. 78. It’s an area that I’ve 
probably dealt with for about 20 years. And some of these very 
issues really strike close to home because it’s stuff that I’ve 

really lived and breathed for a number of years, whether it was 
with my own business in the driver training area or whether it 
was many years with the traffic safety . . . the Saskatchewan 
Safety Council dealing in traffic issues. 
 
So a lot of these issues I’ve had some experience with and am 
quite interested to hear them being addressed today. Because 
for years and years we lobbied and pushed for certain changes. 
And there’s a couple of Bills that are coming up, this being one 
of them, and another one dealing with a number of issues on 
rules of the road through SGI, and I’m going to be very 
interested. 
 
I was going to adjourn debate or second reading on that, and I 
decided I wanted to wait until I could get more into it as 
opposed to just hearing it once and then responding. So I’m 
really looking forward to that one also. 
 
It started with the road construction. And it was very interesting 
that you’d bring up road construction today after the discussion 
in the House on contractors and things like that, doing more and 
more of the road construction all the time. Unfortunately not 
maybe quite enough but certainly doing more and more, and 
evening the playing field there. 
 
The seven-day grace period for when you buy and sell vehicles 
and purchasing. There was some grey area there and I know I 
had some questions too at times on how that whole system 
worked and whether you’re insured, whether you weren’t 
insured and to even the playing field with this seven days will 
certainly help. 
 
More into the area that I was involved in, when you deal with 
foreign visitors coming into Canada and they had to have an 
international driver’s licence, that is a very interesting one. I 
know I’ve talked to different people that were travelling in 
Canada and they would seem to get in touch with us at the 
Safety Council quite often to see whether they could drive 
legally in our province. And quite often, unless they had an 
international licence, of course they couldn’t. We and Quebec, 
as was mentioned, are the only provinces that didn’t have this in 
place and we’re looking at, through this Bill, as addressing that 
problem. 
 
There are a couple of concerns however with that whole issue. I 
know for years between provinces, you know, we had a 
reciprocity agreement to have certain standards. And if you met 
certain standards in one province it was okay in the next 
province. And there is some concern when dealing with people 
coming from out of nation, off the continent to drive in 
Saskatchewan. Are they indeed able to and equipped to? 
 
I had the experience often with different exchange students that 
would come to Canada — it was an agriculture exchange where 
students would come from all over the world to spend the 
summer in Saskatchewan and deal in agriculture issues — and I 
did some driver training, I guess; first of all some in-classroom 
and then also some in-vehicle. And I do know that their rules of 
the road and their knowledge base and everything else will vary 
quite a bit, especially when you deal within Saskatchewan with 
the number of grid roads. 
 
We had some exchange students coming from other countries 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

that had a valid driver’s licence that had never driven on a grid 
road. And they’re going to be driving on a lot of grid roads here 
in Saskatchewan — on some of them, whether they are able to. 
And there’s certainly some problems there. 
 
So you know, I don’t know all the background on this but, you 
know, if people are coming from other countries, and I realize 
the international licence is more of just a written process and 
certainly not in the driving, but I would be very concerned that 
we do keep the standard as high as possible. 
 
I used to know the numbers off by heart where we have one 
person injured every day in . . . every hour in Saskatchewan due 
to traffic collisions. And when we start bringing a number of 
more people in that perhaps aren’t as competent or capable, 
there could be some problems. So you know, I’d want to get a 
little more information on that before we go too much further. 
 
The driver training area, that they have to be 15 years of age 
before they can do any in-vehicle training. And that’s a very 
interesting issue because I dealt with it for 10 years when I had 
my own company of teaching high school students. 
 
And one of the problems that comes with this is that in my 
situation I was travelling from school to school to school and I 
had a routine every year. But sometimes you get to the school a 
little bit earlier, the person would be 14, he would be 15 by the 
time I was done and I wouldn’t be back there for another year. 
You know, so if you didn’t get in this section of driver training 
in rural Saskatchewan — it’s not quite so bad in the cities 
where there’s more and more classes going through — but in a 
lot of schools and rural schools the driver trainer will come 
there once a year, and so if he just misses it by a few days or a 
few weeks he’ll be 16 by the time the driver educator gets back. 
 
So you know the whole benefit of getting that year’s — I don’t 
want to say probation although we do have a probationary 
licence — but that whole year of driving under supervision is 
lost for certain people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So you know with this they have to be at least 15 before they 
take the in-vehicle. You know I could maybe live with that, if 
they can start the driver training program even though they are 
14 but not take any of the in-vehicle. So they can go through the 
written portion but not the driving portion and the instructor 
could come back later at the very end of his term there and pick 
up on the driver . . . the in-vehicle portion, would be acceptable. 
 
But I just don’t know how, you know, if it has to be an exact 15 
and there are going to be some situations where I know when 
I’ve dealt with it where kids fall through the cracks and you get 
parents mad because they can’t wait until their son or daughter 
gets that learner’s licence to start helping on the farm as soon as 
possible even though they can only drive with parents and the 
driver instructor. 
 
I found more importantly than that specific age limit of 15 is 
when they have to be 15 when they’re enrolled in a . . . to get 
their learner’s, to enrol in a driver training course in order to get 
their licence. 
 
And I’ve had situations where the person decided not to, not 
very often, come to the classes and they would be out of the 

program and it took forever for SGI or anybody else, any other 
regulating body, to go to that person and say you’re no longer in 
the program, you no longer have a valid driver’s licence. 
 
That was probably the bigger problem is they’d come to the 
course, they’d take one or two in-class sessions, they’d get their 
learner’s licence, and then they’d never go back and they had 
their learner’s licence and by the time SGI was able to get to 
that situation, the person had been driving for six months 
practically and now he’s 16 and there’s nothing that can be 
done about it. 
 
So that whole driver training issue . . . this is only one of many, 
many things that I wouldn’t mind talking about. But I’m going 
to move on. 
 
You talked about the blue lights on snow removal and for years 
and years and years blue lights were reserved for snow removal. 
And then of course a number of years ago when police started 
using flashing red and blue is when you saw blue lights taken 
off of snow removal. And really I can honestly say there’s not 
very often that I see a vehicle with a flashing blue light unless 
it’s RCMP. 
 
And it was only restricted for snow removal and I really thought 
that was a good method because it distinguished snow removal 
on the highways. It was the only vehicle that had a flashing blue 
light and we’ve taken that away so now snow removal has 
flashing amber which there are a lot of different vehicles that 
can carry flashing amber, that display flashing amber. 
 
This legislation removes snow removal from the flashing blue 
light area, and I do have some concerns with that. Because I 
know again when I was involved, directly involved, it was one 
way that you could know exactly what was snow removal and 
what wasn’t. And so there is some concern with that. 
 
But I realize this is probably so far down the path that it’s never 
going to be turned around and brought back that the RCMP 
won’t be using flashing blue lights. 
 
Emergency vehicles. In slowing to 60 kilometres when you’re 
passing emergency vehicles when they’re stopped on the 
highway — of course we have the orange zone where they have 
to be down to 60 kilometres per hour — this is going to be a 
little bit different and it’s going to be a little more difficult to 
control and enforce I would think. 
 
When you’re on, for example, a divided highway and there’s an 
RCMP stopped on the side of the road, well off on the side of 
the road doing whatever they’re doing with the driver, and if 
you’re in the left lane and go by over 60 kilometres per hour, is 
that an offence? And by the looks of it that will be an offence. 
 
Certainly on some of our secondary highways when there’s not 
enough room for people to get off to the side of the road, when 
the emergency vehicle doesn’t have enough room to get off to 
the side of the road, I would think it would be common safe 
driving practices to have slowed to that much anyway. 
 
As a matter of fact on most of the highways in Saskatchewan, 
secondary highways, I think you could put a 60 kilometre per 
hour speed limit on them and it would be no problem. Because 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

the secondary highways I’ve been travelling on lately, I can’t go 
any faster than 60 kilometres per hour. Especially Highway 35. 
I can’t believe the shape that was in. You’d be hard pressed to 
get much over 60 kilometres per hour and maintain any sort of 
control of your vehicle. 
 
But certainly you know when you deal with . . . and you had 
mentioned, the minister had mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that it was 
the RCMP and the firefighters that were in favour of this. And 
certainly it is for their safety. 
 
There has been a couple of situations in our province in the 
recent time frame where there has been some fatalities on the 
side of the road, and that’s where this is all driven from. And I 
couldn’t agree more. 
 
But I think if you looked at those situations, quite often where 
there was some problems, there is usually a lot of other side 
factors involved and including alcohol. And the one that I can 
think of not very far out of Regina, you know, it was a major 
issue, was the alcohol. It wasn’t necessarily the speed limit of 
being 60 kilometres when you’re passing them; it was other 
issues. 
 
So there are some concerns with that. But I mean I think the 
whole point of it all is to try and increase the safety on the 
highways for the emergency vehicles. I would personally 
myself, just under my own situation, any time I get passing 
flashing red and blues, or flashing reds of an ambulance, I’m 
going to be down to 60. I’m slowing down from a hundred, 
exactly a hundred, down to 60 normally. 
 
So it probably won’t affect me quite as much as some of the 
others I think, probably opposite, that have to probably cut their 
speed in half to get down to the 60 kilometre per hour side. 
 
Seat belts is another issue. And all children must be properly 
restrained — it goes into that area. It goes into medical 
exemptions that I want to touch on. But the issue on seat belts 
and child restraints, I think — and if you have been following 
any of the media from SGI — is it’s not the fact that people 
don’t know that their children should be in restraints, it’s the 
fact that probably 90 per cent of the restraints are installed 
incorrectly. 
 
And I think that’s an area that probably needs a whole lot more 
time and effort than . . . I mean this is probably more of a 
housecleaning issue that all children have to be in restraints 
depending on weight and size. But I think the bigger issue is 
just the fact that the restraints are just . . . are not installed 
correctly. And it just takes away from the whole benefit of a 
child restraint. 
 
Medical exemptions — CMA and Canadian Medical 
Association have been dealing with this and I’ve been in many, 
many meetings with the SMA — I should say, the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association — where they were saying 
that the exemptions, there was no need for a seat belt 
exemption. 
 
And we echoed that thought. And we pushed hard for that. I 
think if — and I don’t have the number right in front of me or 
on the tip of my tongue any more — but it was something like 

90 per cent of the exemptions were granted by about 2 or 3 per 
cent of the doctors. And some doctors truly believe that the 
exemption was necessary. They were medical doctors; we took 
their word for it. But when you have the whole association 
saying, from what they could see there is nothing that would 
cause an exemption on seat belt use. 
 
Now I know there is some members in our caucus that may not 
agree with me totally, but I think with a bit of convincing and 
lobbying within my own caucus that they would say that was 
probably not a bad idea. You know I guess to wipe it out, that’s 
there’s absolutely no medical situation that would cause an 
exemption — and I think what we’d want to do is talk to a few 
more doctors that are granting these and see what is the point.  
 
Because like I said, there are so many of them that are granting 
all the exemptions and I think it was more of a fact that perhaps 
that physician didn’t agree with seat belts more than the fact 
that that person didn’t . . . shouldn’t be wearing a seat belt. So I 
think from our side of it I’d like to talk to them a little bit more 
and see what . . . just make sure but when I was dealing with it 
that that was certainly the case. 
 
The red light — no right turn on . . . or no left turn on red light. 
We are the only province . . . I know in most every other 
province in Canada, you can make a left turn from a red light, 
on a red light from a one-way street onto a one-way street. And 
in Saskatchewan here we needed a solid green arrow before you 
could do it. Isn’t that amazing that we’re changing that? You 
guys are just hanging on every word and I’m sure glad you are. 
 
But I think if you were to poll most of the drivers out there, they 
said you could turn left from one-way to one-way on a red light 
and nobody even knew whether there was a green light there or 
not. As far as a driver examiner and a driver educator, it was 
great to catch people on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
that’s . . . I don’t know if we should make it any easier for people 
to turn left because that’s a little scary. 
 
One of the last things I wanted to touch on, and you mentioned it 
too, is funeral processions — that they must follow the rules of the 
road. There was some area of grey in there and we used to have 
lots and lots of questions. 
 
It used to be that if they had their headlights on, they were part of a 
funeral procession and they could . . . all drivers were to yield to a 
funeral procession, regardless of controlled or uncontrolled and 
things like that, I think is how it was written at one point. 
 
But now, since 1990, that all manufactured vehicles have to have 
daytime running lights in Canada, it really made it a little difficult 
. . . Like, were you supposed to drive with your lights on bright so 
you really had your lights on as opposed to daylight running 
lights? 
 
And so changing it that they have to follow the rules of the road, I 
think, really is probably a good idea. It clears up any of that grey 
area where you get a whole band of vehicles going through. And I 
know it probably was not uncommon, especially in the cities 
where somebody wanted to get through the intersection, they 
flipped on their lights and they went through with the funeral 
procession and then turned off. 
 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

So this way they are going to have to follow the rules of the road, 
which we think is probably a good idea. 
 
I think those are the main areas. There are a few areas, like I said, 
that we want to make some calls and make sure it follows along 
with the way people want to see this legislation move and the way 
the minister wants to see the legislation move, so I would like to 
adjourn debate right now on this Highway Traffic Amendment 
Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 64 — The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding that this Bill establishes a new fund that removes 
some of the money from the liquor and gaming fund and places 
it in this Fiscal Stabilization Fund or a fancy slush fund as we 
like to call it. And since Mr. Speaker has already warned me 
about some of the names that I gave it in my reply to the 
budget, I won’t pursue that any farther. 
 
It’s the government’s contention, Mr. Speaker, that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund will be more visible than the liquor and 
gaming fund. Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to imagine the government 
reportedly balancing the budget and let’s say by $8 million and 
refusing to free up funds for education or health care or roads 
because they claim to be taking the fiscal high road and not 
wanting to risk running into a deficit situation, while at the 
same time there may be let’s say three or four hundred million 
dollars in the liquor and gaming fund, outside of the General 
Revenue Fund where it is impossible to find out how much 
money is really there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has been commenting on 
this type of budgetary hocus-pocus for many years and has been 
calling on this government to present one set of books at budget 
time that accurately reflects all of the government’s revenue and 
expenses. The government says that this is what this new fund 
accomplishes. They maintain that it will be accounted for in the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
But what about the liquor and gaming fund, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? What will become of it? Will the liquor and gaming 
fund disappear as it should? Or will it still be around and still be 
available to the government as a tool that will continue to 
enable them to use the fund to fix the books and show almost 
any bottom line that they want to see in the budget? 
 
I’m very skeptical when I see this government that has a 
reputation for being very secretive suddenly, after being 
pummelled at the polls into a very thin minority position and 
then cutting a deal with the third party in this Assembly to form 

a coalition government, Mr. Speaker, I’m very skeptical when I 
see this government suddenly appear to be open and 
accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their near death experience in September didn’t 
teach them anything about health, or education, or highways, or 
agriculture. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I doubt that it taught 
them anything about openness and accountability either. 
 
This government has had nine years to follow the 
recommendations of the Provincial Auditor and now I see them 
as sadly lacking in credibility when they pretend to be more 
open and accountable now that they realize their days in 
government are numbered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the Crowns . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
beg your pardon. The Crowns currently account for about 40 
per cent of all government activity. But what with all of this 
activity and all of this revenue generated from the Crowns, all 
that is reported on the year . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But with all 
of this activity and all of this revenue generated from the 
Crowns, all that is reported on a year-to-year basis is the 
amount of the dividend, which is a number decided by the 
government arbitrarily. 
 
I agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the Provincial Auditor when 
he says that all of the Crown numbers and the liquor and 
gaming fund should be reported on budget day. Then, and only 
then, Mr. Speaker, will the people of Saskatchewan get an 
accurate reflection of the real financial picture of the 
government of this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party proposed The Government 
Accountability Act, which would bring all of these numbers 
together in the bottom line of the budget. Of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the government refuses to let this Bill come up for 
debate year after year. 
 
There’s nothing radical in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
just a law like the laws that exist in most other provinces. 
However, still they block it at every turn. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this clearly shows their interest in openness and accountability. 
 
There’s also the matter of unfunded pension liabilities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Since the NDP came to office, unfunded 
pension liabilities which will eventually come due, have grown 
in this province by over $1 billion. 
 
This is a very complicated and somewhat boring issue, and one 
that the media has shown little interest in to date. However, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the issue of unfunded pension liabilities is of 
great importance vis-a-vis the long-term financial stability of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is reliant upon federal 
equalization payments as never before. And as long as 
Saskatchewan is a have-not province, I’m pleased that these 
funds are in place and available to us. 
 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

But, Mr. Speaker, no government slush fund and no number of 
government slush funds are going to make us a have province. 
Only diligence and business acumen will ever accomplish that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 41 — The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
pleasure that I rise to participate in the second reading debate on 
Bill No. 41, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2000. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill has some very important 
implications and ramifications for the medical profession and 
particularly the doctors of this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been some time now that there 
have been some real concerns the way the conduct of medical 
practice in this province has been occurring, and particularly — 
it’s true across the province — but also in much greater 
importance in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you go over the list of communities that 
have the services of only one physician in this province, it’s a 
fairly extensive list. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a list that causes 
some concern for myself and for the official opposition because 
in meetings that we’ve had not only with physicians across this 
province, but more telling in a meeting that we had with 
medical students, learning and studying to become medical 
practitioners in this province, they indicated real concern about 
the future of medical practice in single and even double 
physician centres in the province. 
 
And part of the reason that they expressed their concern is of 
course economic. But many of the issues that they raise have 
nothing to do with economics at all, but have to do with issues 
surrounding training and advancement and updates and courses, 
and more importantly, the actual quality of life that a medical 
practitioner is going to experience in that circumstance. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about the future of 
medical professionals in this province, it’s extremely important 
that we use a great deal of wisdom and a great deal of insight 
into how any changes are going to occur in regard to the 
practice of medicine in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there simply has been far too much 
short-sightedness occurring in this province, and really across 
the nation. It is of an absolute amazement to myself to have 
learned in our discussions with medical professionals that it was 
a very short few years ago that the actual number of training 
seats in Saskatchewan and in Canada were reduced with the 
mistaken feeling that there would not be the requirement for the 

number of medical trained people across this province. Right 
across this country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were reductions 
in the number of training seats provided for medical 
professionals. 
 
And I’m heckled from across the way about who did that. Well 
everybody did it. Because I think when the decisions were 
made, there were in power in this province governments of 
every philosophical stripe. And so it isn’t something that is 
inherently short-sighted by one political individual or not, it 
was across the piece — there was a short-sightedness in terms 
of what was going to be required. 
 
And in meeting with people at the University of Saskatchewan, 
the College of Medicine, they said that the reverse is now 
beginning to happen and there is a recognition that more needs 
to be done in order to attract and train medical professionals in 
our own country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past there’s been far too much reliant on 
meeting crisis of shortage of medical professionals by 
importing people from other countries. And so we’ve seen in 
the past where there was a fairly major number of people 
coming to us from Great Britain and Ireland — quality people 
that had very, very quality training and knowledge that were of 
tremendous service to this province. 
 
And more recently we’ve seen a similar wave happening again 
in a recurring way where we’ve seen a great many people 
coming from South Africa to our province that have provided 
tremendous service, not only in rural Saskatchewan but in urban 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
But too often what we’ve done is failed to really address and 
identify the issues that were pertinent to our own people and 
why they weren’t coming into the profession, why we weren’t 
training enough of them, and when we did train them, why they 
were not staying in the province that they were raised in and 
trained in and practising medicine there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of reasons why they 
didn’t do that. And certainly in single-practice communities and 
things of that nature, the issues surrounding support, and 
collegial support and professional associations and things of 
that nature are important — family life and personal life 
preferences. 
 
But as well as that there was always the issue of the lure of 
other jurisdictions who provided a more attractive setting for 
one reason or another. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of those issues, 
unfortunately or fortunately but realistically, had to do with not 
just the remuneration for services rendered. It’s not all the time 
how much you make that counts; it’s how much you get to 
keep. 
 
And the issue surrounding medical incorporation, where one of 
the issues that were raised to us time and time again that was 
indicated that this is one of the main reasons why people were 
looking at other jurisdictions more favourably, because there 
were a number of them that allowed for professional 
incorporation of medical professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that was a concern. And the 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

Saskatchewan Party in the previous or in the past election had 
as a platform plank the recognition that professional 
incorporation, not restricted to medical incorporation but 
professional incorporation, was going to be something that was 
going to be very important to the province if we were not only 
going to train and retain people, but make it in their financial 
interest and in a competitive way to practise their profession in 
this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation, Bill 41, envisages 
the ability of medical professionals to incorporate under the 
statutes of the province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we of 
course support that very much. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to that though we do have 
some concerns, not in terms of who is included in this, but who 
is excluded. Across this province we have met with other 
medical professionals — chiropractors, dentists, radiologists — 
people that as well as the general practitioners and medical 
professionals, who also contribute a great deal to the health care 
delivery system in this province and who are excluded from the 
same opportunities that have been availed to the medical 
professionals under this legislation. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we certainly would like to raise that as an issue of concern as 
well. 
 
Too often where this government goes wrong in their approach 
to issues that are facing it is they pick winners and losers. They 
take sides. They look in a very narrow, unfocused way at what 
they’re going to do to just get the current problem off their plate 
and off their agenda. And too often what we have is 
short-sighted and incomplete legislation, all being that it is well 
intentioned, and we believe that this Bill falls into that category. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go on record in principle 
as saying we certainly do support the ability for the medical 
professions in this province — professionals — to incorporate; 
however, I have to say that we’re very concerned that it is a 
very select list and it excludes many more people than it does 
include. And we think other professionals should be considered 
for the same consideration as well. 
 
The second major part of this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
addresses the issue of medical liability and insurability. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I won’t go through the issue and the specific 
issue that brought this shortcoming to light, but in brief, as 
you’re aware, there was an individual who suffered some 
significant damages at the hands of an incompetent general 
practitioner and that upon review of her circumstances through 
the courts of this province, she was awarded a settlement in 
excess of $2 million for the malpractice that was clearly evident 
by this medical professional. 
 
And the unfortunate, sad part of this story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that this woman clearly had a claim, clearly was aggrieved by 
the medical professional who was liable and negligent and who, 
because this individual fled the country, is now unable to fulfill 
the requirements of standing good for the claim that was 
awarded to her by the courts. And because this individual did 
not carry medical liability insurance, there is no one to hold 
responsible for this circumstance. 
 
And so we have a situation where one of our citizens has clearly 

been aggrieved, was clearly awarded damages because of 
medical malpractice, who is now without recourse because of 
the fact that this government did not provide for proper 
direction and a legislative framework to require the college of 
physicians and surgeons to see to it that this was indeed in 
place. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really unfortunate that it takes 
this kind of tragic circumstance and situation to bring it to light 
to government, that they should have been on top of this 
beforehand. 
 
And so it goes without saying that we support this legislation as 
well. It’s extremely necessary, it’s unfortunate it is as late 
coming as it is. This government’s been in place for nine or ten 
years and to wait until something tragic like this happened is 
unfortunate. 
 
However we as well, in principle, certainly very much support 
that it’s an absolute necessity for anybody practising medicine 
in this province to be covered by professional liability 
insurance. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in principle we also 
support this component of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are issues surrounding this 
legislation; it is important. However I think that I’ve indicated 
to this House and to the people of the province that the position 
of the official opposition in principle to this legislation is 
supportive. The issues that we have in detail to discuss about 
the specific wording of clauses and the specific way the 
legislation is going to be addressed certainly can be addressed 
in committee. And I have no problem letting this legislation 
proceed to that course now. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 13 — The 
Education Amendment Act,/Loi de 2000 modifiant la Loi de 
1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before 
addressing the aspects of this Bill, I’d like to say that there are 
some concerns over the move to place post-secondary education 
to a separate Act. 
 
Given the various and numerous issues facing post-secondary 
education right now, I’m confident that this action will make it 
more accessible and that it will save money or that it will 
provide more benefits for the students. Of course we’re all 
aware that it will provide the opportunity for most ministers and 
their NDP or Liberal assistants to be hired. 
 
The amendments as laid out in this Bill cover a number of 
areas, and I feel it’s important that those areas be addressed on 
an individual basis. 
 
The section that deals with the setting up a separate school 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

division based on minority faith and the rules and regulations 
surrounding this require added input. There’s also a section that 
deals with providing education for students with disabilities, as 
well as a section that deals with tendering process for school 
divisions. 
 
It is our understanding that a number of consultations were held 
in the drafting of this Bill — among them the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors, and Superintendents, and the Saskatchewan 
Association of School Business Officials. 
 
We hope that the recommendations and suggestions as set out 
by these organizations would be taken into consideration and, 
where possible, included in the proposed legislation. 
 
After all, these organizations are the ones who represent and 
work very closely with teachers, administrators, school boards. 
And they know first-hand how well the current legislation is or 
is not working and how the process might be changed that we 
see a positive effect in all those involved. Whether it be public 
or separate, there can be no doubt that schools across the 
province are facing very difficult times. There are many issues 
that must be addressed, issues that will very likely be impacted 
by proposed legislation. 
 
As we’re all aware the teachers in this province rejected, 
recently rejected a proposed contract that would give them a 7.2 
increase in wages and benefits. The rejection of this contract 
has left everyone very concerned. A strike vote will be taken 
within the next week or so and the outcome of that could see the 
end of the school year disruption for students. 
 
Since wage parity with other provinces is an issue, school 
boards are worried, once again, they will be held responsible for 
raising taxes to cover this. It’s no secret that education in many 
school divisions is already funded by local tax base. Education 
funding is an increasingly important issue in this province. 
 
(1600) 
 
The amount of money allocated to education in Saskatchewan 
has dropped substantially over the last eight years — nearly 
$380 million in total. That’s a big hit for school boards. The 
ones who suffer the most are of course our children. This gives 
you a clear indication of the priority that this government has 
placed on education. 
 
Education fared little better in this year’s budget. The amount of 
money available for K to 12 education this year is just slightly 
than half of what the Minister of Education says it is. He says 
funding for education was 29 million. In actual fact, the amount 
was 18.5 million. When you subtract the designated 
expenditures amount, you’re left with around 14 million. 
 
This will not even come close to covering off the raise in 
teachers’ salaries let alone any other requirements of programs 
or services. Bill 13 most certainly does not address funding 
shortfalls nor the impact that this will have on access to 
programs or services. For the past few years capital funding for 
education has been essentially frozen. Just how far that $5 
million coming from the Centenary Capital Fund will go is 

anybody’s guess, given the number of school divisions waiting 
for capital approval. 
 
In fact some of our province’s schools will be waiting for quite 
some time before they actually see any funding for their own 
capital projects. Disappointed with the lack of capital funding 
available, a number of schools have in fact doubled their own 
capital projects. That number will no doubt increase as capital 
funding shows no signs of increasing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has left school boards to 
take the hit for the lack of education funding. The optimum 
grant formula is widely accepted to be 60/40, where the 
government is supposed to provide 60 per cent of the money 
and the local tax base is to provide the rest. 
 
Of course this government will just say that this is just a 
formula, something to use as a guideline. It’s a sad fact that in 
Saskatchewan, numerous school divisions, the local tax base 
provides over 70 per cent of the funding. In some school 
divisions the operating fund for education has been completely 
eliminated. Taxpayers in those school divisions are completely 
funding education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, school boards have little choice. With the 
lack of funding with the province, they have to turn to the local 
tax base for help in topping up their education money. The 
taxpayers have seen their property taxes increase to the point 
that tax revolt meetings are now not so much a rarity as a 
general occurrence. Taxpayers are maxed out. They’ve reached 
their limit. They cannot afford to pay more. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, in the Redberry Lake 
constituency I attended more than . . . nearly 20 tax revolt 
meetings, and in each one the taxpayers in those RMs (rural 
municipality) voted to withhold their taxes. And they’re very 
concerned about the future of their school divisions, and 
concerned for their education of their students and their children 
in the constituency of Redberry Lake. 
 
And the proposal put forward by the government in the budget 
is very much lacking. And as we now see that the government 
has off-loaded more of the costs onto the local school board, 
and the local school board’s going to have to increase their mill 
rate to take this into account. And thus again the taxes go up at 
the expense of our children and our taxpayer. 
 
This Bill most certainly does not address the current lack of 
operating grant funding or the freeze on capital funding from 
the government. The bottom line is that the follow-up from this 
budget has not been good. And the president of the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) has in fact been 
very blunt about what has occurred so far. 
 
He goes on to say teaching, administrative, and support staff are 
being cut. About 10 schools are being closed or the grades 
discontinued, and others are being monitored. He also says at 
least half the province’s school boards have been forced to raise 
mill rates ranging from 1 to 3 per cent, and some may be forced 
to double this amount. Drastic measures to curb spending have 
been implemented, including delaying facility maintenance, bus 
purchases, technological upgrades. 
 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

Also as a result of lack of funding, we’ve seen teachers either 
leave their profession or left the province altogether like so 
many of our skilled and trained people have done in the past. 
Who can blame them? Who would want to work in these 
conditions when they can find better working conditions, better 
pay in other provinces in this country? 
 
The teacher/student ratio has increased dramatically. It’s a 
well-known fact that many teachers now find their classrooms 
so large that they are concerned about providing quality 
education to all students. I ask that the Minister of Education 
bear in mind that the ratio in his office may be 1:10. In many 
classrooms, the ratio is 1:25 or 30 or sometimes higher. 
 
With cuts in funding, many teachers have begun to buy their 
own materials for use in classrooms. This is not referring to 
those items that might be considered extras. We’re talking 
about books and videos — those things that a teacher thinks are 
important learning aids. It’s incredible that we find teachers 
having to buy these materials for their students out of their own 
pocket. In fact, a recent released task force report on special 
education says that the province needs to spend more money to 
adequately meet the needs of all students. 
 
We’d also like to point out that in February of this year, the 
Minister of Education sent a letter to school divisions across the 
province urging them not to sign on with the Youth News 
Network. The Youth News Network, or YNN, is a controversial 
network based out of Eastern Canada that provides monitors, 
computers, lab equipment, and other necessary items to those 
schools that agree to broadcast a commercially sponsored 
youth-oriented news program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the real issue is not that school children 
would be exposed to commercial content during school time — 
a total of two and a half minutes which, when you compare that 
to what the average student might watch at home, seems not at 
all that high. No, the more important issue here is that if there is 
no money for capital purchases, then there’s no money for 
special programs. And if there is no indication that any money 
will be available in the future, what choice do schools have? 
Left on their own they have to make some hard and fast 
decisions. 
 
It should come as no surprise that seven schools in the province 
have already signed up with YNN. With the lack of available 
funding, no doubt there will be more to come. 
 
It concerns me to hear the Minister of Education say that if 
school boards are unhappy with their current fiscal situation, 
they should just raise the mill rate. Easy for him to say. He 
should remember that he, too, was funded by taxpayer dollars; 
in fact there are two ministers of Education to be funded by 
taxpayer dollars, one of them K to 12 and the other is, of 
course, post-secondary. 
 
In addressing the section dealing with setting up separate school 
divisions based on minority faith, I’d like to point out that we 
recognize and respect that many religions are practised within 
the province. Those residents practising the Catholic or 
Protestant religion are recognized being a minority faith. 
Current legislation allows residents of a minority faith to set up 
a separate school division. However, this is based on old 

boundaries set out a number of decades ago. 
 
The proposed amendment will change the boundaries that 
currently exist to effect a more modern approach, although 
given the members’ opposite recent project regarding changing 
boundaries in rural areas and the public’s widespread 
immediate rejection of that, I can only hope that changing 
school division boundaries would have a more favourable 
outcome. 
 
I think the government needs to really address this because 
they’ve lost credibility with the people of Saskatchewan with 
their forced amalgamation, forced unionization, force, force, 
force. And I don’t believe they should take that approach when 
they’re dealing with changing these school boundaries. And it’s 
very important that the change, when it does come, must be 
voluntary and should have the complete agreement of 
communities affected. 
 
That’s something this government hasn’t learned, and I hope 
they will have learned that talking to the people closest to 
communities will give them a better understanding what is the 
right thing to do. And in keeping with the fact that school 
divisions are allowed to set their own assessment rates, I must 
reiterate again that assessment rates as set out by current board 
officials hardly go far enough to cover all funding in those 
districts. 
 
Obviously these rates are already high, but school boards are 
being left with no choice but to keep raising them to maintain 
the education status quo. Whether it is a separate school or a 
public school to meet education demands, the assessment rate 
will no doubt be ever increasing. 
 
There is also a section in this Bill that deals with providing 
education for students with disabilities. And it’s become quite 
common now to find in our schools many children with 
disabilities. And that’s an added cost onto the school board to 
integrate these children into the school system. And it is why 
they recognize that today’s practice see individualized programs 
and integrate to regular classroom settings the students with 
disabilities, a practice that was acknowledged in the recent task 
force report on special education. 
 
Again our major concern here is that the student-teacher ratio is 
very high, no matter how the student numbers break down. 
While student aides are available for those teachers with special 
needs students, the fact remains that teachers today are very 
worried about providing a solid, quality level of education for 
all students in their classroom. Again, while this Bill recognizes 
the importance of special education integration into the 
classroom, it does nothing to address the high teacher-student 
ratio. 
 
Regarding school division tendering, I see that previous 
amounts have been replaced with new figures that should reflect 
a more modern, workable set of numbers. I understand that in 
the past the amounts allowed before tendering was to be done 
were so low that the schools found themselves tendering on 
everything, no matter how small the transaction. 
 
I also understand that the school boards would have preferred to 
see these numbers even higher, such as those numbers that are 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

used in interprovincial trade agreements. These interprovincial 
trade agreements allow for more flexibility and simplifies the 
provinces and offers a wide variety of options in getting 
something done. 
 
We’re concerned that tendering in rural areas may not be 
necessarily the best way to do things. With the tendering 
regulations that must be followed, it does not allow a lot of 
leeway. School boards recognize that public accountability is an 
important factor too, but it’s not always easy to accomplish, 
given some of the regulations that must be adhered to. 
 
It’s very important that we allow businesses and individuals in 
the rural areas to do as much of this work as possible in their 
home communities. It supplements their income. They likely 
have secondary jobs as farmers or doing other work and we 
must allow them to be as flexible as possible. 
 
School boards know that the local labour markets must be 
utilized. And again, the best people that know the right thing to 
do are the local people that can handle these decisions. It has 
been suggested perhaps calls for proposals be considered. This 
would simplify the process and allow for some local business to 
be included. 
 
A local base of supplies and contractors would be easily 
accessible and would in the long-run save time and money for 
many school boards — two very important issues that must 
constantly be kept in mind. 
 
Some of the areas that this Bill does not cover are private 
schools, home schooling — these are areas that are growing 
widely in popularity — and also post-secondary training in 
farming, which is the backbone of our economy. And you only 
need to look at Ontario to see that it has a broader base to 
handle some of these areas. 
 
Hands-on training are very important for the students. And also 
should be included in this program is teaching young people 
how to run a business, do a budget, a business plan. And as we 
know that small businesses are the job creator in this province, 
we should take a more active role in promoting and teaching 
our children how to run a business and excel in that area. 
 
But given the various education issues that still need to be 
addressed by this government, and not including this Bill, at 
this time I therefore move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Amendments Act, 
2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
I’m pleased to be able to address the amendments to The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, today. 
 
As I go through the explanation of the needs for these 
amendments, I note that the one provision will allow the 

children between the age of 18 and 21, who are receiving 
services pursuant to The Child and Family Services Act, to 
receive services also in addition to those receiving services 
pursuant to the Young Offenders Act. And I understand clearly 
why this is a very valuable amendment to this Act. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Chair, there are some parts of this Bill that do 
concern me. And I’d like to say, before I mention those 
concerns, that I have certainly a great admiration and respect for 
the work done by the Child Advocate as well as the 
Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is certainly due to the good work of the Child Advocate that 
we have been presented with a document that she has tabled in 
this legislature and made members and the entire province 
aware of as far as the children in foster care and some of the 
problems resulting from the policies and the lack of following 
procedures that the minister has set forward and how that has 
affected many of the children in the province. 
 
(1615) 
 
It was a scathing report and I think all members of the 
legislature will recognize that. However, I’m hoping that some 
of the amendments that are put forward here in this Act are not 
going to be inhibiting either the Child Advocate or the 
Ombudsman from doing their work entirely. And I also am 
sincerely hoping that the Child Advocate and the Ombudsman 
can continue to work as independent officers of the Legislative 
Assembly rather than — as they would be I’m sure really 
worried about — rather than them working for the government 
or the cabinet of the day in any way or form. 
 
What has been placed in this Act that makes me believe that 
might be the case or there certainly will be some allowance for 
that is that there is a statement of removing a provision allowing 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council to assign duties or functions 
to the Children’s Advocate. The fact is, Mr. Deputy Chair, that 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council, meaning the Premier and 
his cabinet, should not be the people that are assigning duties or 
functions to the Children’s Advocate. Those functions or duties 
should be assigned by the entire Legislative Assembly. 
 
And if there is some dispute on whether or not the Children’s 
Advocate should be indulging in different duties, I think then 
it’s up to the minister responsible to enter into debate in the 
House or to have a committee of the Legislative Assembly 
discuss whether or not those duties are necessary or not for the 
public that are concerned about children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I sort of, in a sense, almost take offence with 
one of the amendments that speaks about the Children’s 
Advocate, the likelihood or the fact that she may be able to be 
removed from her office for matters of misconduct or 
incompetence. 
 
I mean we have to ask who judges the Ombudsman and the 
Child Advocate? I don’t believe it’s up to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, who is the cabinet, and the Premier, to be 
determining whether or not the Child Advocate is competent or 
not. Is it going to be the Assembly who is going to determine 
that? Who is it going to be that’s going to determine that? 
That’s what’s important. Those are the questions that we would 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

like to ask in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Another concern that my colleagues and I have, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, regarding these amendments is whether or not they’re 
going to lead to the government of the day directing the Child 
Advocate or the Ombudsman on what kind of matters they can 
report and to what extent they can report to the Assembly. And 
we would certainly need assurance for all the members of the 
Assembly that any report put forth by the Child Advocate or the 
Ombudsman be presented in its entirety to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, and that the members here be assured 
that there is no deletions or additions to any said reports by the 
minister or his cabinet. 
 
One other notation that I made, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that it 
appears to me that . . . or it states here actually that presently the 
Child Advocate’s salary is set at 85 per cent of the 
Ombudsman’s salary. And I just found that quite interesting. I 
wasn’t aware of that prior to this and I’m wondering why 85 per 
cent of the Ombudsman’s salary is what the Child Advocate 
gets. I’m wondering how that decision was made and just why 
that was made. It seems to me that those salaries should be on 
par. And so that’s one of the questions that I certainly think that 
would be important in putting forward. 
 
I have some other concerns and so do my colleagues regarding 
quite a few of the issues that are pertinent to the amendments in 
this Act and so I would adjourn debate at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 27 — The 
Certified Management Accountants Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to respond to this adjourned debate on The 
Certified Management Accountants Act. One of the fortunate 
things in our procedure is that adjourned debates allows us an 
opportunity to be able to confer with some of the professionals 
in their association . . . confer with a lot of people. 
 
And this time has been well spent because we find that there’s a 
lot of things in this Act that I think is both commendable and 
certainly we can support. There’s a couple of things that I 
would like to add in terms of caution, or a red flag as I see it. 
And then I think we’ll get to more detail once we get to 
committee. 
 
But from what I see in this Act and from the responses we’ve 
had from some professional organizations, this is particularly a 
rewriting of this whole governance of management accountants. 
The first rewriting was a way back in 1978. So things have 
changed, and we’re pleased that some of these amendments 
came forward. 
 
Some of these professional Bills that have come forward in the 
past have often maybe not been researched far enough, have not 
been . . . we’ve not have the opportunity to discuss them with 

some of the professional organizations. And I think they came 
up lacking and there was some problems that had to be solved 
later. And I think that that is an important aspect and we’ve had 
this opportunity to do that. 
 
Since we’ve contacted many of the professional organizations 
with regards to accounting, we’ve found that there has been a 
great deal of support. And I have with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
some letters from the certified . . . regarding certified 
management accounting Act, the one we’re talking about here. 
And this is a letter of support from the CMA association and 
that is Betty Hoffart, president of that association, has given 
support. And I think that that’s important as well. 
 
The chartered accountants of Saskatchewan have responded 
likewise saying that the provisions in this amendment are 
substantively the right direction. And this is from the chief 
executive officer, Nola Joorisity. I think that’s an important 
letter that we have. 
 
I also have a letter in response from a chartered accountant 
corporation from my hometown that I asked to review this too. 
And the response from this accountant is that they have no 
objections to the kind of things in this particular . . . the 
amendments, and so I think that’s really important. 
 
One of the things that I feel really strongly about is we get this 
concurrence from these professional colleagues reviewing their 
own Act. And I guess reading some of the debate and points 
that went on forward, I wanted to reiterate a bit some of the 
concerns that my colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
expressed about certainly the earlier legislation that seemed to 
have come up a bit short in the professional engineering field 
for instance. That was one problem. 
 
The other problem is the membership of this particular 
association. It’s not clear in here what the conditions are for 
membership into the professional council. I’m sure that that will 
be elaborated with the regulations, and certainly when we get 
into Committee of the Whole we’ll be able to discuss that a wee 
bit further. Who is going to set these conditions for 
membership? 
 
And I also noticed, and I think very positively, that there will be 
a public member selected to be part of the professional council. 
And I commend the amendment to allow that. It doesn’t say . . . 
it’s not very explicit as to who is going to select that member, 
that public member. Who is going to do it? How it will be 
selected? And I’m just wondering — and this is a caution — is 
this going to be just another opportunity for the government to 
make another appointment into these organizations? 
 
However, those kind of questions we’ll get into, I’m sure, when 
we get into the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The other caution that I would have before we move this along, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the immunity aspect of the legislation 
that is put forward. I notice that there is immunity legislation 
included and, of course, that will certainly apply to the council 
and the people that are involved in administering this 
professional Act. 
 
I think that’s an important concern. It’s very much of a concern 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

in today’s world when we’re talking about immunity allowed 
for certain members of boards of directors, and immunity in 
other aspects such as Crown corporations and so on. 
 
I wanted to just make a comparison to the immunity that I think 
is so necessary. We requested some debate, and in fact a motion 
on immunity for community firefighters, particularly focusing 
on some of the problems that might be perceived in the Swift 
Current area. And we haven’t been allowed to get that 
legislation forward. But the immunity principle is very critical 
in all areas, this being one of them. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say that because we’ve had 
the opportunity now to confer with some of the professionals, 
we’ve had opportunity to confer with people that we know 
personally, and having a chance to review this, I think we can 
now move on into second reading and I would have no trouble 
in allowing this to move on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 31 — The 
Police Amendment Act, 2000 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to rise 
today to speak on Bill 31, An Act to amend The Police Act, 
1990. As members of our society, probably next to health, the 
policing, the safety is the most . . . our most concerns. I would 
imagine everybody’s constituency office, mine included, 
especially urban ones, have been getting a lot of calls on 
policing issues, on crime issues. Crime rates unfortunately seem 
to be on the rise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll just talk even on the policing in my constituency. I was in 
Davidson on the weekend attending a function and there I was 
talking to a sergeant of the Craik detachment. And he said the 
following week before that, before this weekend, there was 
seven break-ins in the town of Davidson — seven break-ins. 
There was three one night, a few days later another four. That’s 
almost half the businesses in that town were broken into . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And it is. It is a huge problem. It’s 
everywhere. Just think in the cities if half the businesses were 
broken into in a week in the cities — imagine the calls you’d be 
getting to your office over there. 
 
But like I say, it’s a huge concern out there and I hope this Bill 
will address it because the policing issue needs to be addressed 
out there. It needs to be addressed everywhere in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the issues he raised with the detachments out there 
is they’re understaffed. You know, they’re understaffed in every 
detachment. And I’ll say under, understaffed for the simple 
reason is that the Craik detachment is supposed to have four 
members there. Right now through the summer months, which 
are the busiest months, they only have three, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — only three. They can’t even . . . 
 
Outlook is the same way I believe. And I think most of the 

detachments that are spread out through the province of 
Saskatchewan are understaffed to begin with. Even with their 
full requirement, they’re understaffed; but now most of them 
can’t even fill their full requirements on there, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why the crime is rising out there. 
 
There’s huge frustrations on the people and on the policing end 
of it. But they can’t, they can’t even address that problem. You 
know, they can’t even . . . that they’re having . . . that they just 
don’t have the manpower to fill it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some of the members are saying I’m wrong. You don’t think 
crime rate is rising over there? There’s just a piece in the paper 
here today that says in Saskatoon that 1 in 25 households were 
broken into last year — 1 in 25. You haven’t had any calls on 
that in your constituency in Saskatoon? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order, order. I’m 
having difficulty hearing the member for Arm River. And I 
want to ensure that the member for Arm River has the 
opportunity to express his views without undue interruption. 
 
So I’d appreciate it if members, especially members on the 
government side of the House, would try to give the member 
for Arm River the opportunity to have the full attention of the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I totally agree 
with you that maybe they should just listen for a change — it’s 
something they don’t seem to do very much — instead of just 
talking. 
 
But this piece of legislation I believe deals with special 
constables, which is, if it helps out there, which is good. But 
there’s also concerns out there with the appointment of special 
constables. There’s the training of them, of that, if they can 
handle the jobs because in the situations out there things can 
change very fast. I mean you can get in a situation, then in a 
snap of the finger it can turn dangerous or deadly. And that’s 
something that I don’t know if this Bill addresses. 
 
Another thing is there’s concern out there . . . that I’ve talked to 
the police forces that maybe . . . that they’re going to phase out 
or put some of the policing costs to the RMs. That’s another 
burden that’s put on them. And also, would that mean that they 
would be looking at closing RCMP detachments? 
 
I know towns out there already, Mr. Speaker, have special 
police forces or have their own police force. But there is usually 
a RCMP member that’s stationed in that town or detachment 
that’s very, very close so that if there is trouble, he usually has 
backup. But if things change, where his backup is maybe 50 
miles away, he has to handle that situation himself. 
 
And I don’t know. I’m hoping that with this Bill and if they 
bring this in, that that will address the concerns, that the people 
that are putting out there will have the ability and the training to 
handle any situation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, well 
that’s . . . The member’s saying that they do. Well this is what 
we like to check. And also would like to check with my local 
RCMP officers and the towns to see what the trainings are. 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2000 

Because in this Bill, all it says is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all this 
Bill says is that they will be appointed. It doesn’t mention 
training in it — what they’ve got, what they will have. The real 
concern is that they will have their training, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they will be able to handle any situation out there. 
And their concern is that maybe that this government over here 
isn’t introducing privatization of the police force, which this 
government always says it’s against anything privatization. 
 
It’s some concerns that we’d just like to address, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’d like to look at in this Bill. And also I would like to 
take time to send it out to my local detachments and my local 
mayors to see what they think of it, see if they agree with it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because like you say, policing out there is a huge, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a huge concern out there. 
 
You know what is the exact definition of a special constable? 
My understanding is that, is someone who has not gone under 
police training can be deemed a special constable. And I’m not 
sure on that; maybe afterwards the member opposite will clue 
me in on it. 
 
But I have some major concerns with this, particularly in times 
of trouble when things happen very fast out there. Because in a 
split second, something can turn very, very deadly out there. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a couple instances just 
recently where the police stopped a couple of vans that were 
carrying huge amounts of drugs. Now if the RCMP hadn’t been 
around, maybe there would have been gunfire possibly, maybe 
even death over it. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Well we hope that with this Bill 
that they’re not planning on closing any detachments out there 
in the constituency . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member opposite is saying, we’re not, and I hope he’s not. I 
really hope he’s not. 
 
I’m just raising concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that have been 
relayed to me. I’m relaying them to this House, and I hope he 
will take them into consideration. That is our job over here — 
to raise concerns here. 
 
Because like I say, we’re stretched very thin, especially in my 
constituency. No. 11 Highway, through the summer months, 
there is a lot of break-ins. You take with Elbow, with parks and 
the boating there on weekends, there’s a lot of people come to 
the parks. And there’s a lot of drinking and there is . . . they are 
very busy. 
 
In fact, what Dave said to us is that we need more money. This 
government has to put more money into policing. And that’s 
something that we’ve agreed on here on this side of the House 
constantly, that say there has to be more money put into 
policing. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill addresses it. 
 
But like I say, there is other concerns that I would like to raise. 
And my colleagues, I believe, will have other concerns they 
would like to talk about. So I move at this time to adjourn 
debate on Bill 31. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 32 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2000 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It won’t 
take long, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve had a number of 
occasions to speak on this Bill. I should say though, that right 
off the get-go, that we’re very happy to actually see that there is 
one pension plan in this province that is actually funded — in 
fact, even has a surplus. 
 
I would think we’d have many more questions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if it happened to be say the teachers’ superannuation 
plan or the public service superannuation plan. 
 
I’d like to just take a minute and read a quote out of The 
Leader-Post, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it was at the end of 
May talking about these pension plans. And I quote: 
 

According to the report, the government will need (and this 
is the Provincial Auditor talking) to spend $10 billion from 
2000 to 2025 to provide pensions promised under several 
public-sector plans. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

(And) Among the pension plans with unfunded liabilities 
are the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, (the one I talked 
about before), the Public Service Superannuation Plan, and 
the Liquor Board Superannuation Plan. 
 
The report states that the government will require $400 
million to pay for the teachers’ and public service pensions 
by 2011 and $500 million by (the year) 2020. 

 
I guess where my concern is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that within 
the next short time, possibly the next two or three years, we 
know and they know on the other side that the government will 
be changing, and it will be people on this side that will have to 
be honouring these pension plans where the shortfall has arisen 
while these people were in power. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what will be happening at 
that time, take the highways we’ll have to fix that have been ran 
in the ground to this point by this government. All the things — 
health care, education. We have teachers voting on a strike right 
now. Probably I’m sure many of them are very aware about this 
unfunded pension plan for teachers, but if they aren’t I thought 
it was my duty to bring it to their attention. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this municipal pension plan that we have 
talked about that is adequately funded, and the employees that 
I’ve talked to out there are very pleased to see the contents of 
this Bill. A number of cases where it’ll bring early retirement 
into a lower age down the road. There’s a number of things. 
 
I know that RM administrators out there and town 
administrators that I’ve talked to because of the forced 



June 5, 2000 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

amalgamation that the Minister of Municipal Government was 
running around with trying to promote, they were very 
concerned about their pension plan. Because I know a number 
of them thought they were probably going to be out of work and 
were going to have to take advantage of their pension plan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being that I think we have 
had ample time to speak on this Bill and have other questions 
that we feel can be answered in committee, that at this time I 
would let it pass on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 38 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
pleasure that I engage in second reading debate on Bill No. 38, 
The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, few in this House or across the province 
would argue that the whole electronic explosion that’s 
happened across the province — the advent of the Internet in 
particular — has had dramatic implications on the people of the 
province and government itself. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that we talk about some of these issues in some detail 
because I think it’s important to understand the implications of 
what they have. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important to understand that the whole 
Internet and the whole way that the Internet and e-commerce is 
exploding around the world has major implications for the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the most fundamental issues that 
come to mind in regard to this whole explosion of electronic 
information is the issue surrounding privacy. And of course 
what is also happening in an increased way is that commerce is 
conducted in much more of a dramatic way across the Internet, 
and things like the confidentiality of credit card numbers, PIC 
(personal identification code) numbers, and things of that nature 
are extremely important that this be done appropriately. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is always of great concern that this 
whole Internet transaction and Internet commerce raises issues 
over and above what might seem obvious. 
 
There are issues in regard to taxation and the ability for any 
jurisdiction to impose their tax regime on someone who is 
shopping on the Internet countries and continents away and can 
that be something that a local jurisdiction has authority over. 
 
There are issues surrounding pornography and the 
appropriateness of people to have access actually to certain 
Web sites and things of that nature. They’re all very important 
issues. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe in reading what the 

minister said when this was introduced that there is some work 
happening at the international level through the United Nations 
to try to establish some protocol that governments are 
challenged to live up to. And I believe that the minister 
indicated that the intent of this legislation is to respond from 
Saskatchewan’s point of view and perspective to the challenges 
and issues that are surrounding this from the international level. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well there is the issue surrounding the 
appropriateness of legal documents once they are transmitted 
electronically. The past practice has always been to use, you 
know, manual documents that are either transferred in person or 
by courier, but a physical transfer of an exact document. Now 
faxes and electronic messaging are very commonplace and so 
there has to be a protocol to surround that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are certainly a number of issues 
surrounding these issues that have been raised in regard to this 
whole technical type of universe that we’re in. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the official opposition has no problem and objection to 
the general thrust of this legislation, and we believe that there 
are many technical questions that need answering. And 
certainly it’s my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
that those questions can be appropriately dealt with when we 
have more of the technical support and experts that are available 
to assist the minister in providing a lot of that kind of 
information. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that, in general, we’re 
supportive of this legislation. We’re very much concerned that 
it respects the issues of privacy and confidentiality. And we are 
expecting that the government has those issues in mind as well, 
and we look forward to asking some very technical questions 
when this legislation comes to committee. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:46 p.m. 
 
 
 


